* 1606911
* Directed Self Assembly of Triblock Terpolymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Block copolymers are a class of polymeric materials whose molecules can come
together when cast from solution to form intricate, regular three-dimensional
internal structures called microdomains. These microdomains can have dimensions
of a few nanometers (billionths of a meter) and above, and their geometry and
chemistry can be controlled through the design of the block copolymer. Most work
has focused on block copolymers with two types of microdomains, but this project
examines the behavior of block copolymers in which three different types of
microdomain are simultaneously present, producing a wide range of complex
geometries. It investigates the conditions under which different arrangements of
microdomains are formed in thin films of these materials, and it demonstrates
their technological usefulness, in particular for semiconductor device
manufacturing, where the microdomain patterns can be used to define features
smaller than those available from conventional manufacturing processes. This may
allow future scaling of devices to higher densities, producing cheaper and
faster memories or microprocessors. Other applications include catalysis or
filtration where surfaces are required with particular chemistry or porosity.
The work will involve graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment combining experiment and theory. Outreach will
include the creation of online learning materials, summer projects for teachers
and community college students, and public activities at the Cambridge Science
Festival.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Block copolymers microphase separate into periodic nanoscale structures, making
them candidates for a range of applications including nanolithography and
filtration. The great majority of work on thin film block copolymers has focused
on diblock copolymers, but triblock terpolymers, which include three different
blocks in a linear or star architecture, enable a much wider range of thin film
morphologies including tiling patterns, square symmetry patterns, and structures
with 90 degree bends. The proposed work will show how the morphologies of
triblock terpolymer films can be controlled via interplay between the polymer
composition and the processing conditions, and how specific morphologies can be
templated using topographical substrate features, using coordinated experiments
and theoretical investigations using self consistent field theory. The
combination of triblock terpolymer volume fractions, molecular architecture,
interaction parameters, film thickness, and solvent annealing with template
geometry and substrate surface chemistry provides a rich parameter space within
which an understanding of the kinetics and thermodynamics of microphase
separation as well as the formation of technologically useful structures can be
accomplished. The broader impacts of this work originate from the transformative
potential of triblock terpolymers to produce nanoscale patterns relevant to
nanolithography and nanomanufacturing, both in the microelectronics industry and
in fields where a chemically heterogeneous surface with specific geometry is
required. The work will involve graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment combining experiment and theory. Outreach will
include the creation of online learning materials, summer projects for teachers
and community college students, and public activities at the Cambridge Science
Festival.