* 1606979
* Exploring the Motivation and Learning Systems in the Adolescent Brain
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Adriana Galvan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 221,760.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar at the
intersection of neuroscience, developmental sciences and education. As children
enter their teenage years and progress through middle school, they often show
decreased motivation to learn. How to motivate these students and engage them in
learning is a crucial but often-neglected problem facing educators. This problem
is especially crucial as teens must increasingly learn to make their own
decisions. Positive and negative feedback, such as praise and criticism, can
serve as a powerful tool for educators, clinicians, and parents to promote
learning; however, its effectiveness can be highly dependent upon how motivated
the child is to learn. There are many changes in the teen brain to support
learning during this crucial developmental period, including the maturation of
different brain regions involved in motivation, reward processing, and self-
control. These changes may make teens uniquely sensitive to positive and
negative feedback during learning. Furthermore, these brain changes may also
increase teens' sensitivity to motivating or demotivating aspects of their
learning environment; for example, teens may be more sensitive than adults to
whether a learning task is presented as a measure of their abilities versus an
opportunity to practice new skills. The goal of this project is to bridge brain
science, education, and psychology to uncover how interactions between the
developing brain, the learning environment, and individual differences influence
motivation and learning. Research in the burgeoning field of educational
neuroscience has begun to investigate how learning new skills or information
influences the brain; this project will take the reverse approach, by
investigating how changes in the developing brain influence the ability to
learn, both in the lab and in school. This project will advance the field of
adolescent neurobiology and will illuminate opportunities to improve educational
practice by tapping into the unique sensitivities of the developing teen brain.
The findings will also pave the way for a new approach to educational
neuroscience, in which neurobiological changes in the developing brain can help
to inform pedagogical approaches.

This project will bridge disparate literatures to investigate the
neurobiological mechanisms underlying adolescent learning, and will set the
stage for future investigations of educational strategies to enhance adolescent
learning. Because the striatum plays a critical role in reinforcement learning,
its peaking sensitivity during adolescence may help to scaffold learning from
performance-related feedback. Feedback is an important tool educators use to
guide learning, so it is important to understand how ontogenetic changes in the
adolescent brain influence the ability to learn from feedback. For this project,
we will utilize complementary methodologies (fMRI and physiological measurements
of skin conductance), and cutting-edge effective connectivity analyses (dynamic
causal modeling) to understand how interactive networks contribute to learning
across different developmental stages. Using these tools, in conjunction with
contextual manipulations of motivation, measurement of individual achievement
goals, and teacher reports of academic performance, the proposed study will aim
to (1) characterize behavioral and neural responses to feedback during learning
in early to mid-adolescence relative to adults, (2) investigate contextual
effects on the motivational salience and learning efficacy of positive and
negative feedback during adolescence, and (3) examine the link between neural
responses during learning in the laboratory and educational outcomes in school.
In this study, a sample of ethnically diverse teens and adults will undergo
brain scans while performing a task that assesses their behavioral and neural
responses to positive and negative feedback. The proposed research will address
a gap in the literature by elucidating the role of the corticostriatal reward
system in facilitating learning during this important developmental stage.
Through this project, we will determine how the dynamics of the developing
adolescent corticostriatal system mediate contextual motivational effects on
feedback-based learning and help to illuminate the relevance of developmental
neuroscience for academic achievement and educational practices outside of the
laboratory.