* 1606670
* Scaling limits of random and deterministic diffusion processes on the integer lattice
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Charles Smart, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 102,110.00

The principal investigator will study mathematical models of microscopic
interactions in solid materials. More specifically, the PI will study the
scaling limits of such models, which capture macroscopic effects of microscopic
structure. The PI is interested in three important classes of models arising
from statistical physics. First, there are cluster growth models for corrosion
of metals and crystal formation. Second, there are models of electrical
properties of randomly composited materials. Third, there are models which lie
in the intersection of the previous two categories, such as those for fluid flow
in porous media. Many unresolved questions surround these models and are now of
great interest in probability theory. The PI aims to resolve some of these
questions by (1) using computer simulation to identify new phenomena and (2)
applying tools from analysis, combinatorics, and probability to rigorously
understand the new phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models alluded to above
share a common theme; each is a diffusion processes on the integer lattice whose
scaling limit can be interpreted as the solution of a nonlinear elliptic partial
differential equation (PDE). The PI is primarily interested in three models: the
Abelian sandpile, random walks in random environments, and first passage
percolation. The PI will study the interplay between the asymptotic statistics
of the diffusion process and the regularity properties of the solutions of the
limiting PDE. Since the two sides here are tightly coupled, it is often possible
and fruitful to transfer results between them. The strategy will be to carefully
adapt the regularity machinery of the limiting PDE to the discrete setting,
since this occasionally leads to the discovery of new phenomena.