* 1606793
* Collaborative Research: Rheology of the Earth's Transition Zone - An Integrated Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Heat convection in the Earth is controlled by flow of the hot, but solid mantle.
This convection drives plate tectonics, generating major societal hazards (e.g.,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, etc.) and controls the compositional
and thermal evolution of the planet. Since the early 1960s, quantifying the
deformation properties of mantle rocks has been a major goal in experimental
Earth Sciences. Advancement has been limited by technology, owing to serious
difficulties in conducting experiments involving deformation of minerals at the
extreme pressures and temperatures prevailing in Earth's deep interior. The
upper-mantle (top 410 km) consists of peridotites, rocks comprised dominantly of
olivine, i.e., the semi-precious gem known as peridot. In the transition zone
(410-670 km depth) at pressure in excess of 140,000 atm, olivine is no longer
stable and transforms into high-pressure minerals, wadsleyite and ringwoodite,
which have comparable compositions but denser structures. Decades of
experimental work have provided strong constraints on olivine plasticity, yet
little is known about the viscosity of minerals in the transition-zone. The aim
of the present project is to provide accurate computational models for the
viscosity of Earth's transition zone, which will integrate new experimental data
on wadsleyite and ringwoodite obtained in state-of-the art high-pressure
deformation devices set at synchrotron facilities. These experiments, involving
newly developed devices and analytical techniques, are at the forefront of
research on the mechanical behavior of materials at high pressure. Besides
advancing our understanding of mantle convection, this program will provide
support and training in modern experimental science to one graduate student as
well as undergraduate students. All the new experimental and analytical tools
will become available to other scientists, advancing our general knowledge in
high-pressure research. The team's results will find direct applications in
Geophysics and Seismology, and broader applications in Materials Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow laws for Earth materials provide vital constraints on
mantle dynamics, while knowledge of deformation mechanisms at the atomic scale
provides insights into crucial observables such as seismic anisotropy. The
complexity of the stress field within deforming rocks, which varies from grain
to grain as plastic properties are anisotropic, can now be observed in situ
using new high-pressure devices coupled with X-ray synchrotron radiation, and
addressed by self-consistent mean-field modeling. In this project, the
investigators will take advantage of these recent developments to address the
plasticity of the transition zone. Specifically, they will study the flow
properties of wadsleyite and ringwoodite as a function of iron and water
contents, and constrain strength contrasts with olivine, using the Deformation-
DIA apparatus and the newly developed D-TCup and DT-25. In situ X-ray
radiography and diffraction will be used to measure strain, stress and texture
(i.e., lattice preferred orientation). The new flow laws will be integrated into
models for the effective viscosity and seismic anisotropy of the transition-
zone. Modeling efforts will benefit from the second-order (SO) method, a recent
improvement in mean-field schemes which describes accurately highly non-
Newtonian materials, such as silicates. The models will account for stress-field
heterogeneities due to crystal orientations, complex deformations mechanisms
(dislocation glide and diffusion), incorporate several minerals, and improve
confidence for extrapolation of results to geologic strain rates. The model
construction will be flexible, allowing integration of additional phases and
flow law parameters as they become available in the future. The outcome will
give crucial insights on transition-zone viscosity, and the crystal preferred
orientations that produce seismic anisotropy.