* 1606541
* I-Corps: Biomarker-assisted Breeding for Yield and Resilience of Commercial Shellfish Aquaculture in a Changing Ocean
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Dennis Hedgecock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Aquaculture, the fastest growing sector of global food production, now accounts
for more than half of global aquatic production, having surpassed capture
fisheries in 2013. Unfortunately, aquaculture relies largely on natural or
hatchery propagation of wild stocks and boasts few domesticated species. This
primitive exploitation of wild captives must be rectified quickly, if we are to
meet seafood demand and serious challenges to the sustainability of aquaculture,
such as increasing competition for coastal growing areas, adverse interactions
between wild and farmed stocks, emerging diseases, ocean warming, and ocean
acidification. Commercial breeding programs can help to meet these global
challenges, by accelerating the development and improvement of domesticated
stocks for aquaculture, while simultaneously reducing or eliminating
interactions with wild populations. The Pacific oyster is one of the top global
aquaculture species. Production of this species on the U.S. West Coast has
already been impacted by ocean acidification and emerging diseases. Project
participants recently founded a start-up shellfish breeding company, Pacific
Hybreed, for the commercial development of high-performing shellfish larvae and
early juveniles ("seed") to supply regional and global aquaculture markets. The
I-Corps project will facilitate this start-up company to translate decades of
basic biological research into secure, stable and sustainable supplies of
shellfish in the face of changing climate and ocean conditions. The biological
parallel between the improved yields of hybrid corn and other crops and of
hybrid oysters suggests a business parallel between the development of a
shellfish breeding company and the development of the modern crop seed industry,
which is today a $20B international enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuller
understanding of how aquaculture species will respond to environmental change in
the world's oceans requires a merging of physiological, genetic and
environmental information. Over the last 15 years, this team has repeatedly
demonstrated that experimental crosses of inbred lines produce hybrid vigor that
is as dramatic as hybrid vigor in corn and other crops. Thus, crossbreeding is
the basis for the innovation at the heart of this project; in this context, the
Team?s interdisciplinary insights into the genetic, genomic, and physiological
causes of hybrid vigor in the Pacific oyster promise the development of
biomarkers to improve the efficiency of identifying elite lines and superior
hybrid genetic material. The goal of this project is to bring these research
elements to bear on commercial production of superior brood stock and high-
performing shellfish larvae and early juveniles ("seed"). This I-Corps team will
participate in the program's entrepreneurship training, undertake market
research, and develop market strategies. The team will contact ~100 shellfish
growers, mostly members of the Pacific Coast Shellfish Growers Association, to
determine (1) the size and structure of the brood stock and seed markets on the
U.S. West Coast, (2) the production costs associated with seed supply, (3) the
types of brood stock and seed products presently available, and (4) the price
structures for these products, including premiums paid for triploid vs. diploid
seed. Interactions with potential customers will enable the team to develop a
strategy for marketing high-performing brood stock and seed. The short-term
outcome from this project will be a business plan that is based on hard numbers
about the shellfish seed market along the U.S. West Coast and is therefore
suitable for review, first, by our shellfish industry partners and, eventually,
by outside investors. The long-term contribution of this project is the
application of sophisticated animal-breeding technologies to increase food
production from global commercial aquaculture.