* 1606895
* Collective Ecophysiology and Physics of Social Insects
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Lakshminarayana Mahadevan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,291.00

Insects are the most diverse species on our planet, numbering more than five
million different types, and have exploited nearly every terrestrial and many
aquatic and aerial niches. Social insects, those that form cooperative societies
with specialized castes based on division of labor, for example, afford
spectacular examples of collective behavior in such instances as termite mounds,
locust swarms and bee clusters and hives. These collective architectures are
functional and allow the organisms to maintain a relatively uniform micro-
environment even with a variable macro-environment. Understanding how this is
achieved in a variety of climates and environments is not just a problem in
ecology or physiology, but also one in physics, given that they exchange
information, energy and matter continually with the environment. The study looks
at the collective dynamics of bee colonies that maintain their temperature in a
closed environment using active ventilation driven by fanning, and the
structural dynamics of actively adherent bee clusters that can respond to
vibrotactile stimuli by changing their shape. While current studies in active
matter primarily focus on the patterns in space and time that result from
interactions, the new experimental and theoretical approaches will focus on how
active systems can perform functions by coupling form, flows and forces in the
presence of feedback. Organisms live in varying environments and must therefore
be able to tolerate variations in the macro-environment they inhabit. They do
this by creating niches that damp out the large scale variations without
completely isolating themselves. Outside human societies, nowhere is this better
seen than in social insects. The current study takes a quantitative physical
approach to the problem, building on the empirical information obtained by
biologists. It aims to partially break down the artificial barrier between
physics and biology, i.e. between non-living and living matter by showing how
living matter shapes itself and its physical non-living environment to achieve
function. By synthesizing aspects of hydrodynamics, statistical mechanics and
decision making for active matter systems, the research will thus have impact on
a range of biological and engineered systems where behavior and decision making
come together with flows and forces.

The collective behavior of the organisms creates environmental micro-niches that
buffer them from environmental fluctuations e.g. temperature, humidity,
mechanical perturbations etc., thus coupling organismal physiology,
environmental physics and population ecology. The current study proposes to use
a combination of biological experiments, theory, computation and robotic
biomimicry to understand how a collective of bees can integrate physical and
behavioral cues to attain a non-equilibrium steady state that allows them to
resist and respond to environmental fluctuations of forces and flows. The
researchers will analyze how bee clusters change their shape and connectivity
and gain stability by spread-eagling themselves in response to mechanical
perturbations, using a combination of optical and x-ray imaging techniques.
Similarly, the researchers will study how bees in a colony respond to
environmental thermal perturbations by deploying a fanning strategy at the
entrance that they use to create a forced ventilation stream that allows the
bees to collectively maintain a constant hive temperature. When combined with
quantitative analysis and computations in both systems, the researchers will
integrate the sensing of the environmental cues (acceleration, temperature,
flow) and convert them to behavioral outputs that allow the swarms to achieve a
dynamic homeostasis, that will be tested using collective robotics using simple
agents that can sense each other, their environment and move in response to both
cues.