* 1606887
* RUI: Magnetic morphologies and excitations in ferrite nanoparticle assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Yumi Ijiri, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic nanoparticles are tiny magnets which
are being used for targeted drug delivery, biomedical imaging, data storage,
environmental remediation, and many other technologies. These applications all
depend critically on the specific manner in which the magnetic particles align
and interact with each other. However, it has been difficult to determine these
arrangements with standard experimental equipment, and it was even more
difficult to optimize particles for applications. This project addresses this
significant problem by helping to develop and promote the use of advanced
neutron scattering techniques at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) Center for Neutron Research. The research capitalizes on
recent upgrades in the capabilities of American neutron scattering facilities to
probe several key features of magnetic nanoparticle arrangements. Another
important aspect of this work is the extensive training of undergraduate
students at Oberlin College, a four-year liberal arts institution with a long
history of fostering diversity and integrating teaching and research. This
project is closely tied to the Principal Investigator's teaching assignments as
well as her mentoring and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The specific experiments are focused on quantifying the
nature of the magnetic spin arrangements and excitations in ferrite nanoparticle
assemblies. The goals of the research are 1) to determine magnetic morphologies
as a function of changes in chemical composition, particle diameter, and surface
solubility and 2) to determine magnetic energy parameters that characterize spin
excitations. The magnetic nanoparticles are being synthesized using solution
chemistry and ligand exchange techniques. X-ray scattering, transmission
electron microscopy, magnetometry, and magnetic fluid flow fractionation
approaches are being used to optimize the samples. The PI and her students have
been performing unusual polarization-analyzed small angle neutron scattering and
inelastic neutron scattering experiments at the NIST Center for Neutron
Research. The work involves collaborating with scientists at a variety of
institutions representing academia (Case Western Reserve University and Carnegie
Mellon University), industry (Cambrian Technologies), and government (NIST).