* 1606898
* Engineered nanophotonic Raman amplifiers and lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 426,000.00

Abstract title: Engineered nanoscale optical amplifiers and lasers
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Silicon photonics is presently
among the most active fields of research and development in optical science and
technology. Importantly, silicon photonics is compatible with modern electronics
technology on which everyday integrated circuit chips for computers and
communications are based. Motivating this project, there is a need for useful
and economic means for silicon-based light generation for silicon photonics
technology. We plan to fill this void by engaging a unique optical resonance
effect on nanostructured silicon films to generate light. Thus, we propose to
develop new active devices, namely lasers and amplifiers, enabled by this
fundamental effect. This can lead to new types of lasers serving as sources for
silicon photonic chips as well as amplifiers for enhanced detection of incoming
signals carried by light pulses as used in internet data transmission.
Integrated photonic systems are expected to increase transmission and processing
rates in optical communications. Under the project, we will evaluate the utility
of fundamental photonic resonance effects, thus far not applied for this
purpose, to enable advanced light generation in silicon. The project provides
excellent analytical and experimental experience for graduate students thus
supporting the development of the next-generation workforce in photonics
technology. If successful, the project will led to innovative light generation
and amplification concepts with substantial economic benefits and societal
value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to design, fabricate and characterize a new class of active nanophotonic
guided-mode resonance elements. Specifically, we will investigate Raman
amplifiers and lasers enabled by this effect. The research is motivated by the
fact that Raman emission can be enhanced to high levels with these high-quality-
factor resonance effects that are attainable in nanopatterned silicon films. We
present preliminary device designs where the spectral placement of the pump and
Raman lasing wavelengths achieves the proper Stokes-Raman shift in silicon.
Here, the pump and lasing resonances have large quality factors with
corresponding high Raman gain which is dominated by the product of the two
factors. These elements will be fashioned as periodic nanostructures in the
silicon-on-quartz and the silicon-on-insulator materials systems. We investigate
fundamental aspects of the resonance interaction in these devices by computing
emission spectra and attendant internal photonic field distributions including
local field strengths. The fabricated devices will be characterized by electron-
beam and atomic-force microscopy and their detailed spectral properties will be
measured. The efficiency of the Stokes-Raman emission, including gain relative
to pump, will be quantified relative to device architecture and input pump
configuration. This project undertakes fundamental nanophotonic device research
that is transformative, if successful, in view of potential applications in
silicon photonics.