* 1606008
* Elucidating the signal for contact guidance in aligned fibrils to improve tissue engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Robert Tranquillo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2020
* USD 315,000.00

PI: Tranquillo, Robert T.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1606008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contact guidance, the tendency of a cell to orient
and migrate in response to topographical features such as parallel grooves, is a
fundamental cell behavior key to many physiological processes and tissue
engineering strategies. The goal of this project is to identify the signal that
cells sense when interacting with aligned fibrils in a fibrin gel and exhibit
contact guidance. The project will specifically test the hypotheses that the
directional dependences of stiffness and adhesion of the network of aligned
fibrils are the major contributing signals. This will be accomplished by
systematically changing only the stiffness directional components of the fibrin
network and observing whether or not the contact guidance response of
fibroblasts in the fibrin gel changes, and then conducting similar studies with
blocking antibodies to modulate adhesion and thereby modulate a potential
adhesion directional dependent signal. Beyond the fundamental value in answering
the question regarding what signal cells sense when detecting aligned fibrils,
the research should lead to improved engineered tissues by providing a rationale
for designing fibrillar scaffolds that yield the desired cell alignment and the
associated tissue mechanical function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contact guidance is
a fundamental cell behavior key to multiple physiological processes and tissue
engineering strategies. While it has been highly studied on planar substrata,
and even related to the cell cytoskeleton for certain geometries, it has been
little studied in aligned fibrillar networks such as native tissues or the
reconstituted collagen and fibrin gels that are used as tissue models. Despite
its importance, the mechanism underlying cell contact guidance in an aligned
fibrillar network has defied elucidation due to multiple interdependent signals
that such a network presents to cells, including anisotropy of adhesion,
porosity, and stiffness. The proposed research combines several key technologies
along with appropriate experimental design to test the hypothesis that contact
guidance is primarily driven by sensing of anisotropic stiffness or adhesion in
the local fibrillar network. By forming magnetically-aligned fibrin gels with
the same alignment strength, but crosslinked to different extents, the
anisotropic stiffness and anisotropic adhesion hypotheses of contact guidance
will be tested. Cell orientation behavior and the dynamic pattern of cell
protrusions will be evaluated for fibroblasts seeded on the gel post-
crosslinking, which preliminary data show increases stiffness anisotropy and
yields stronger contact guidance. Crosslinking is achieved using a ruthenium-
catalyzed photocrosslinking method that forms dityrosine bonds in tyrosine-rich
fibrin fibrils. Experiments will be conducted to confirm preliminary findings
that the crosslinking only affects stiffness anisotropy and does not affect
anisotropy of adhesion or porosity, which are confounding effects in reported
contact guidance studies to date. The effects of modifying cell adhesion using
antibodies to binding sites on fibronectin and cognate b1 integrins will
similarly be evaluated in these contact guidance experiments, which can be
related to the anisotropic adhesion hypothesis. Adhesion will be quantified with
a centrifugation assay of fibroblasts seeded on fibrin gels and porosity (more
generally network microstructure) will be quantified from analysis of 3D
reconstructions from confocal image stacks. Beyond the fundamental value of the
proposed studies in answering the question--What signal do cells sense when
detecting aligned fibrils?-- the research should lead to improved engineered
tissues by providing a rationale for design of fibrillar scaffolds so as to
yield the desired strength of cell alignment and the associated tissue
mechanical function. Educational impact is achieved through enhanced courses,
access to a shared imaging system that will facilitate interactions between
students and engineers from local industries and collaborations expected with
cell biologists.