* 1606336
* CDS&E: Design Principles for Ordering Nanoparticles into Super-crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alex Travesset, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 385,047.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Chemistry, and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to
this award which supports computational research, computer algorithm and
software development, and education to develop software that will predict
properties of materials made from a class of nanoparticles - tiny particles with
dimensions some 10,000 to 100,000 times smaller than a human hair and in this
case include long chain molecules, such as DNA, in their structure. The
nanoparticles are arranged in regular spatially periodic arrays known as
superlattices. Because of the internal structure of each nanoparticle, these
nanoparticle superlattices can have unique physical and chemical properties that
are difficult or impossible to achieve with ordinary crystals of atoms and
simple molecules. Understanding nanoparticle superlattices can lead to the
ability to design light but very strong materials, engineer efficient solar or
hydrogen cells or identify and destroy cancer tumors, just to name a few.

The research focus of this award is to develop a comprehensive theoretical and
computational framework for the prediction of the structure, dynamics and
properties of nanoparticle superlattices. The PI will combine new theories with
start of the art computational tools developed by the PI. The research will
include close collaborations with leading experimental groups. The expected
impact of the research is to advance toward the capability to predict the
properties of nanoparticle materials and to design novel nanoparticle materials
and interfaces with new or given properties.

The PI will collaborate with the SUCCESS program of the Des Moines public school
system. Students are identified and referred to the SUCCESS program based on the
DMPS Early Indicator System which identifies students who are at risk of
dropping out of school due to poor attendance, lack of identification to
school/behavior, poor or failing grades, and low achievement scores. The PI will
organize several STEM activities for SUCCESS kids, both in Des Moines and Iowa
State University, and also convey that pursuing a college education is a very
valuable goal. Other educational activities include recruitment of high school
students for STEM fields, making computational tools available to non-
specialists, and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Chemistry, and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to
this award which supports computational research, cyberinfrastructure
development, and education focused on developing a computational framework that
makes it possible to design materials made of nanoparticle superlattices. The
PI's will focus on nanoparticles that have grafted ligands comprised of
hydrocarbon chains or DNA. The research combines theory and algorithms with
experiments to develop a realistic description of the dynamics of formation and
thermodynamics of nanoparticle superlattice materials. The goals of this project
will be achieved by developing HOODLT, software for Graphics Processor Units
(GPUs) that facilitates the exact calculation of free energies, which will be in
turn used to predict nanoparticle superlattice structure with simple and
universal potentials. The PI will also develop HOOSRIS, software for GPUs that
will implement a new microscopic theory for the interaction between the capping
ligands grafted to the nanoparticles, which determine the actual structure and
many of its physical properties. The role of two-body versus many-body
potentials will also be investigated. The last goal of the project is the
combination of these developments to the prediction of superlattices with given
and/or new structural and physical properties. Although the project is mostly
focused on nanoparticles where the capping ligands are hydrocarbons, the methods
are general and can also be applied to DNA mediated programmable self-assembly
or other strategies.

The PI has a long commitment to promoting STEM activities for under-represented
groups and minorities. As part of this project, a series of hands-on activities,
focused on materials and nanomaterials for airplanes, will be carried out with
kids from the SUCCESS program of the Des Moines public school. Rigorous
evaluation and assessment on the impact of these activities will be carried out
every year, and the activities modified accordingly. Other broader impact
activities include making software available to the broader community, both for
technical and non-technical audiences. The project will also support and mentor
graduate and undergraduate students.