* 1606128
* Uncovering Regeneration-Permissive Cues in Lower Vertebrate Retina to Inform Retinal Regenerative Medicine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Carrier, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,992.00

1606128 &lt;br/&gt;Carrier, Rebecca L. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Retinal
degeneration, particularly associated with aging, is a widespread and increasing
health problem currently affecting 2.1 million people in the U.S. and imposing a
substantial burden on the economy (~$2 billion annually). It is the leading
cause of blindness worldwide. Cell transplantation strategies have shown
tremendous promise, but are significantly limited by low levels of cell survival
and integration (&lt;1%). The proposed studies aim to elucidate the chemical and
physical cues required to enable survival and integration of transplanted cells.
This fundamental, quantitative understanding will provide a framework to guide
future retinal regeneration strategies and design of materials to serve as
effective cell delivery vehicles. The proposed project will also nurture a
cohesive education plan including teaching and learning across education levels
spanning from K-12 to postgraduate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the retinas of
some lower vertebrate species do regenerate, the human retina does not. The role
of lower vertebrate matrix composition, structure, and mechanical properties in
tissue regeneration has not been explored, yet is likely significant and could
be exploited to enable significant advances in regenerative medicine. The PI's
recent preliminary results indicate that mammalian retinal progenitor cells
display strikingly different behavior when introduced to the lower vertebrate
(axolotl) retina, in a manner analogous to cell transplantation, relative to a
mammalian retina. Specifically, the RPCs in the lower vertebrate retina exhibit
markedly enhanced cell survival and integration into the retina - processes
central to regeneration. This project will analyze the chemical and physical
features of the lower vertebrate regeneration-permissive retinal
microenvironment compared to that of adult mammalian retina. The research will
include an in-depth study of human retinal progenitor cell response to lower
vertebrate retinal matrix, including attachment, survival, differentiation and
3D migration, processes essential to successful cell transplantation strategies.
The study will analyze cell response to both intact tissue and decellularized
matrix, in the presence and absence of tissue-conditioned medium, to parse
effects of cellular vs. acellular (matrix) components and soluble vs. insoluble
cues. Importantly, an integrated systems-biology approach will quantitatively
relate cell response to tissue/matrix/soluble factor cues and cell signaling
events. This quantitative mechanistic understanding will provide a framework to
guide future retinal regeneration strategies and biomaterial
design.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Biomaterials Program of the
Division of Materials Research.