* 1606858
* Pressure Tuning of Competing Quantum States
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Thomas Rosenbaum, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Transitions between different states - solid to
liquid to gas, conductor to insulator - are common occurrences. At the absolute
zero of temperature, different physics enters. Quantum mechanics plays a central
role, altering the universal response that has been mapped out for classical
transitions. This can lead to new possibilities in the optical response of
materials, the electronic character of devices, or the magnetic capacity of
storage materials. This project probes the quantum characteristics of model
systems in three related arenas: parsing the cooperation and competition between
magnetism and superconductivity, delineating the new states of matter accessed
when sheets of electrons are placed in very high magnetic fields, and
deciphering the way in which an insulator can be transformed into a metal. In
each case, the research takes advantage of the ability of diamond anvil cell
technology to access pressures outside of everyday techniques and to transmit
high energy x-rays. The wide array of techniques, from x-ray scattering at a
synchrotron to electrical measurements in the laboratory, and the necessity to
apply physics, chemistry and materials science to these studies, trains students
well for careers in industry, the national laboratories, or academia. Bringing
research perspectives to education is another emphasis, including connections
with STEM teachers and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The effects of a quantum phase transition can be felt up to
surprisingly high temperatures. Many materials of technological import
demonstrate unusual electronic, optical, and magnetic properties that have been
ascribed to the close proximity of quantum critical points. However, complex
materials properties, conflated with competing ground states, have made it
difficult to discern the essential physics. Moreover, without temperature as a
variable, studies of quantum critical points are hard pressed to approach the
exactitude that has become the hallmark of experiments on classical critical
phenomena. This project combines high-resolution studies of pure materials tuned
to accessible quantum critical points using pressure to reveal fundamental
aspects of magnetism, disorder, correlated materials, and quantum phase
transitions. These include the competition between modulated spin order and
superconductivity, the fundamental quantum magnetism of spin singlets arranged
on a square lattice, and the transition from insulator to metal in a correlated
material. The wide array of techniques, from x-ray scattering to
magnetotransport, trains students well for careers in industry, the national
laboratories, or academia. Advances in diamond anvil cell technology are
important for condensed matter physicists and geophysicists alike. Supporting
STEM teachers and helping them develop curricula is a priority.