* 1606909
* SusChEM: Elucidating structure-property relationships in lead-free piezoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Michelle Dolgos, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 320,001.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectric materials are found in a wide
variety of applications as they can be used as components in both actuators and
sensors. The industry standard and most commonly studied piezoelectric is
Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT). A major concern in PZT is the lead, which puts manufacturing
workers at risk and, introduces hazardous waste into the environment upon
disposal of PZT-based components. The necessity for new piezoelectric materials
clearly exists, but there is currently no good substitute for PZT. Many studies
of PZT have led to a detailed understanding of how the crystal structure
contributes to the enhanced properties, but little is known about the structures
of its lead-free counter parts, slowing their development for use in
applications. The aim of this study is to investigate the fundamental structure-
property relationships in two key lead-free piezoelectric materials. The
research provides a fundamental understanding that aids in the development of
benign piezoelectric materials to improve the sustainability of electronic
devices. This project is also strongly committed to expanding the opportunities
available in student education and works to recruit and retain young scientists
in science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the fundamental understanding of
structure-property relationships in piezoelectric ceramics. The goal of this
project is to assess the local distortions from the average structure of two
well-known lead-free piezoelectric materials at their morphotropic phase
boundary (MPB) and correlate the structural information to observations of the
measured properties. Ba,Ca(Zr,Ti)O3, the most promising lead-free piezoelectric
material to date, and BaTiO3-BiInO3, a system with a non-traditional MPB are
being investigated. Systems are being studied both poled and unpoled to examine
the structural changes under real conditions. These detailed structural studies
utilize X-ray and neutron diffraction as well as EXAFS, with analysis using the
Pair Distribution Function method and Reverse Monte Carlo modelling. In
addition, this project aims to recruit and retain young scientists in STEM
fields and train graduate students to excel in their careers. Graduate students
are participating in the Lens of the MarketÂ® program to learn how to translate
their sustainable research ideas to innovation with the purpose of solving
market problems. Freshman and sophomore undergraduates will be given the
opportunity to work in the lab and gain the early research experiences that
result in increased retention in the STEM fields. High school women and minority
students in the Summer Experience in Science and Engineering for Youth (SESEY)
summer program will participate in sustainable piezoelectric research to become
engaged in the nation's science and engineering enterprise.