* 1606852
* Tradeoffs in childhood energy allocation and the impact of market  integration on ontogeny and health
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Lara Dugas, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,031.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports the interdisciplinary training and
research of a young scholar at the intersection of the fields of anthropology,
evolutionary biology, and public health to explore the tradeoffs in childhood
energy allocation and the impact of market economy on health. The way in which
children manage energetic resources and respond to changing environmental
conditions remains unclear. All of life's essential tasks -- maintenance,
growth, reproduction, immune function, and physical activity -- require energy
(i.e., calories), and it is often assumed that organisms allocate resources to
these competing demands in a manner that maximizes fitness. This framework of
energy allocation and tradeoffs has been widely applied to understand human
biological variation. However, few studies have tested its validity among
children. Addressing this limitation, the present project integrates methods and
perspectives from multiple disciplines to investigate the nature of childhood
energy use through the lens of allocation tradeoffs. It also applies this new
synthesis to explore an important real world problem: the impact of market
integration on child ontogeny and health. Utilizing a novel study design among
the Shuar of Amazonian Ecuador, we pursue two primary research questions. (1) Do
energetic tradeoffs exist between childhood growth, physical activity, and
immune function as predicted by the energy allocation model? (2) Is market
integration associated with changes in childhood energy allocation that promote
overweight/obesity and poor cardiovascular health? Results will have significant
implications for several scientific areas. They will also be used to develop
effective health policy and relief aid in Ecuador and the United States.
Promoting opportunity for training, this work involves numerous indigenous
educational health forums and significant research experience for minority
American undergraduates. Importantly, the project also provides scientific and
professional training and for the Fellow, preparing him for a career as an
independent researcher at the forefront of integrative biological
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the success of previous studies
investigating human biological variation using evolutionary life history theory,
important gaps in our understanding of human phenotypic plasticity and energy
use remain. Few studies have investigated energetic tradeoffs among children or
have explored the potentially important role of physical activity in child
energy dynamics. No previous life history research has incorporated accurate
measurements of total energy expenditure (TEE) and resting energy expenditure
(REE) into study designs, preventing assessment of several critical assumptions
of the life history tradeoff model. Directly addressing these limitations, the
present project aims to test the validity of the energetic tradeoff model and
apply this framework to investigate the role of tradeoffs in relationships
between Shuar market integration, ontogeny, and child health. We employ a novel
two-week longitudinal study design among 100 Shuar children (age 5-10 years)
living in two communities differing greatly in level of market integration,
lifestyle, and diet. Gold standard metabolic measures of child TEE (doubly
labeled water), REE (indirect calorimetry), and physical activity energy
expenditure (doubly labeled water and accelerometry), as well as robust measures
of weekly linear growth (knemometry), immune activity (finger-prick blood
C-reactive protein, total Immunoglobulin E, and total Immunoglobulin G),
cardiovascular health (finger-prick blood glucose and lipids), and energy intake
and market integration (observation and interviews) will be made from each
participant, supporting between-community, between-individual, and within-
individual analyses of energy use and tradeoffs. This work has the ability to
address many underexplored areas of research, including the relative importance
of energy intake versus energy expenditure in the etiology of overweight/obesity
and cardiovascular disease, the precise energetic costs of human immune
activation, and, importantly, the overall validity of the life history tradeoff
model.