* 1606885
* Household Financial Vulnerability and Immigrant Assimilation in the United States
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Geoffrey Boyce, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 219,262.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising social science scholar studying
the costs and consequences borne by U.S. households as an outcome of local,
state and federal immigration enforcement activity; and to examine the impacts
of these financial burdens on everyday household decision-making, socio-economic
vulnerability and long-term assimilation. he research has significant
implications for U.S. immigration and boundary enforcement policy. For example,
research already conducted in immigrant-sending communities shows how
enforcement activity produces significant financial hardships that have counter-
intuitive outcomes, driving patterns of unlawful migration as households and
extended family networks seek to spread and mitigate risk. In cities like Tucson
and Detroit, immigrant households concentrate disproportionately in low-income
enclaves where residents deal with the burdens of under- or marginal employment;
under-performing schools; high rates of crime; unstable housing conditions; and
exclusion from mainstream financial institutions. This research examines the
strategies used by such households to meet the acute financial burdens
associated with a household member's exposure to immigration detention and
removal, and how these strategies affect household members' short- and long-term
socio-economic opportunities, vulnerabilities, and assimilation into the fabric
of U.S. life. A key feature of the research involves the recruitment, training,
coaching and supervision of bilingual first-generation undergraduate students,
who will assist in the collection and analysis of data and dissemination of
research results. The involvement of these students is intended to encourage
their completion of a four-year degree and to increase their familiarity with
and excitement about SBE-related fields. At the conclusion of research
activities, the PI and sponsoring scientist will conduct a program evaluation
with participating undergraduate student researchers. This will allow for
assessment of research, training and mentorship activities, and will inform the
dissemination of the research and training model for broader application and use
by peer scholars and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research data are collected
using a 72-item, in-person detailed questionnaire, with questions related to
household finances, assets, immigration history, and social networks of
instrumental support used to mitigate risks (e.g., extended family who provide
loans or childcare services in an emergency). Responses are entered into a
central database and analyzed for bivariate and multivariate associations and
compared to national and local estimates of wealth and debt obtained by the U.S.
Census Bureau. For purposes of comparison, data will be collected in two
research sites: Tucson, Arizona and Detroit, Michigan. The target sample size is
100 interviews in each site. Respondents are identified using canvassing and
snowball sampling at sites where immigrant families receive services such as
churches, clinics and other non-profit organizations. Bilingual undergraduate
students are recruited in Tucson and Detroit to assist with data collection and
data entry. Student researchers are recruited through the University of Arizona
(UA)'s ASEMS program, which provides coaching and support to undergraduate
students pursuing a degree in a STEM field; the UA's Department of Mexican-
American Studies, which promotes the research opportunities described above to
students enrolled in its classes; and Pima Community College's "Upward Bound"
program, a U.S. Department of Education-funded initiative that provides first-
generation, low-income students with coaching and support to accomplish a four-
year college degree. All undergraduate research assistants recruited and
involved in research activities are trained in mixed-method data collection and
human subjects protocols. Research assistants receive ongoing coaching,
supervision and hands-on experience as they contribute to research outcomes. To
disseminate these outcomes a "white paper" highlighting key findings will be
produced and made available to local, state and national elected leaders and to
not-for-profit advocacy organizations. Presentations of key findings, in English
and Spanish, will be offered to all participants via recruitment sites, as well
as to advocacy networks and policy-makers.