* 1606334
* Algebraic Theory of Differential and Functional Equations: from Foundations to Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Alice Medvedev, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2017
* USD 35,000.00

The Differential Algebra and Related Topics (DART) VII conference will be held
at the CUNY Graduate Center and City College, 09/30-10/04/2016, in New York
City. The subject of differential algebra concerns the study of differential and
difference equations from an algebraic point of view. The study of these types
of equations has many applications outside of mathematics, including biology
(population dynamics and cellular biology), chemical reactions, and physics. The
aim of the conference is to bring together researchers who develop theory for
these types of equations and those who develop algorithms for working with them.

The DART international conference series started in 2000 and has become an
annual activity in the recent years. This research area includes differential
and difference Galois theories, differential and difference elimination,
symbolic computation in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry, and model
theory. The conference will foster the new interactions between researchers in
differential and difference algebra and researchers in model theory, algebraic
geometry, and commutative algebra. Special attention will be paid to mentoring
the participants who are junior researchers. Additional information can be found
at the conference website:
http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/~aovchinnikov/DART7/index.html