* 1606379
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Examining Long Term Social Interaction And Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* John Blitz, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 9,188.00

Researchers are attempting to understand the ways in which complex societies may
transform their social organization to accommodate new ideologies or changing
material conditions. Erik Porth of the University of Alabama, under the
direction of Dr. John Blitz, will use archaeological evidence to study the
transformation and reorganization of a socially complex prehistoric settlement
following rapid shifts in religious and political traditions in the Southeastern
United States. This research will study the linkages between ritual practices
and community resilience to identify how groups negotiated obligations and
social relationships through local and non-local resource acquisition during a
time when elaborate ceremonial and political institutions ceased and social
groups emphasized a new, communally-based affiliation. Archaeology can identify
how such changes occurred because it relies on physical evidence that
accumulated over long time spans in the places where ritual and community
practices occurred. The research contributes to a broader intellectual and
social benefit by adding to an understanding of community resilience in the face
of social and political change, an issue of importance in ancient and
contemporary societies. It will also provide historical context for
understanding how more recent processes of localized production and consumption
of goods may be associated with community solidarity and identity. This project
will result in scientific collaboration between institutions within the United
States and the results will be presented to the public in peer-reviewed
publications, online databases, and a planned museum
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Erik Porth will address key anthropological issues
concerning the poorly understood and under theorized relationship between social
transformation, community resilience, and material remains from ceremonial
activities on an earthen platform mound. The evidence needed to address the
research question was excavated from ritual mound contexts at the Moundville
site, a multiple-mound Mississippian ceremonial center in Alabama that was
occupied from A.D. 1200 to 1520. During the fifteenth century, non-local trade,
monumental construction, and elaborate ritual ended at Moundville, mirroring
similar processes in Mississippian societies throughout the Deep South and
Midwest. This research hypothesizes that after A.D. 1450, social relationships
shifted at Moundville from individually focused practices to communal oriented
activities by emphasizing locally acquired resources. Radiocarbon dates will
address the timing of these proposed changes during the fifteenth century. Use
of local materials will be assessed by analyzing the chemical composition and
source location of the clays used to make ritually important, but stylistically
non-local ceramic vessels. These techniques will determine if pottery production
was occurring locally by potters from other regions who maintained their
distinctive styles, or if the vessels were imported from other locations. This
question is important because it points to the maintenance or disintegration of
non-local connections. If potters were coming from other locations, they would
have brought with them new ideas and norms that might have shaped the social
transition occurring during this period. On the other hand, if pottery was being
imported, this would indicate exchange relationships, and would pinpoint a
different source of social influence with connected groups.