* 1606791
* Chemical-imaging guided characterization of cellular populations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Sweedler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2019
* USD 405,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Jonathan V. Sweedler and his research group at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are developing new measurement
technologies (based on mass spectrometry imaging and chemical separations) to
probe the chemical composition of individual cells in a high throughput manner.
In a test application, the new methods are used to analyze and classify all the
cells within the central nervous system of the marine sea slug, Aplysia
californica, an important neuroscience/physiological animal model. This research
promises to provide the most complete description of cellular chemistry of the
brain for any animal model, providing fundamental details linking neurochemistry
to brain function. This proof-of-concept study is ultimately expected to lead to
measurement of more complex brains. The interdisciplinary research bridges the
worlds of analytical chemistry and cellular neurobiology. The broad-based
dissemination of the results through scientific and lay publications,
conferences, high school and open house outreach programs, and training across
multiple disciplines assures that this research advances NSF's mission in
science education and research.

The analytical platform being developed integrates mass spectrometry-based
chemical imaging, capillary electrophoresis separations hyphenated to mass
spectrometry, and optical microscopy to enable high-throughput characterization
of tens of thousands of cells at the single-cell level, with an aim of global
characterization of the chemical constituents of complex tissues such as the
brain. The first goal is to create novel cell isolation approaches and then
high-throughput, multiplex single-cell chemical analyses based on laser
desorption/ionization and secondary ionization mass spectrometry imaging to
examine individual cells within larger cell populations. An enhanced method of
off-line coupling of selected cells of interest to a capillary electrophoresis
mass spectrometry system is used to perform follow-up assays. In a model test
system, the experiments provide detailed information on the cell types and
chemical heterogeneity within the Aplysia central nervous system. Undergraduate
and graduate students with diverse backgrounds are actively involved in these
interdisciplinary efforts, and are involved in multiple outreach programs in
both public and educational settings.