* 1606062
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: Fundamentals of N2/O2 plasma and heterogeneous catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* David Graves, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1606062 PI: Graves&lt;br/&gt;Title: INFEWS N/P/H2O: Fundamentals of N2/O2 plasma
and heterogeneous catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance
air plasma technology in order to substantially reduce human perturbation to the
global nitrogen cycle. The focus will be on establishing the scientific
foundation necessary to efficiently couple non-equilibrium nitrogen/oxygen
plasmas with heterogeneous catalysts in order to efficiently form nitric oxide
(NO). If efficient air plasmas can create nitric oxide (NO), this can be readily
transformed to nitogen oxide (NO2) and then to nitric acid (HNO3) by water
absorption. Nitric acid could be used to trap otherwise fugitive ammonia (NH3),
created when bacteria degrade organic waste. The ammonia is trapped at low pH as
ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), thus greatly increasing the nitrogen value of the
organic fertilizer and avoiding the damaging environmental effects of the
ammonia emission. The technology would be especially promising because the
plasma can be powered by electricity that could be generated in a distributed,
renewable fashion at the location of the waste generation, such as the farm.
Rather than compete with conventional Haber-Bosch NH3 manufacturing technology,
this technology seeks to reduce the need for synthetic fertilizers made in
centralized plants far from their use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium
plasmas can act as a homogeneous catalyst by lowering the activation energy of
nitrogen dissociation. This process can be substantially improved by the
addition of heterogeneous catalysts, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly
understood. The proposed project will employ radical beam - surface studies
under high vacuum and modulated beam mass spectrometry to study radical-surface
catalytic interactions for a range of metal and metal oxide materials and
surface temperatures. The data from these studies will be used to develop
parameterized site balance models that can provide insights into near-
atmospheric pressure studies of non-equilibrium nitrogen/oxygen plasmas in the
presence of catalytic surfaces. The successful implementation of plasmas for
this application could help motivate studies of other plasma electro-catalytic
technologies. In addition to training graduate students, the PI plans to recruit
undergraduate students from programs that engage women and minorities. An
outreach program to middle school students involving plasma demonstration
devices is also proposed.