* 1606904
* Neural oscillatory and social personality correlates for perception and performance of musical joint-action
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Takako Fujioka, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 238,264.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar
investigating neural oscillatory and social personality correlates for
perception and performance of musical joint-action. Fast-paced and dynamically
adaptive sensorimotor interaction can be seen in a group of musicians playing
together on a stage. Individuals have to constantly anticipate and perceive the
ongoing interplay between other agents in order to efficiently organize and
perform their own actions. Previous behavioral research has determined that
timing information plays a key role in the dynamics of such sensorimotor
coordination. Recent work employing non-invasive brain wave recording has also
started to shape an understanding of how the brain processes timing information
for rhythmic coordination, specifically during music-making. Given existing
evidence that these brain activities can facilitate an understanding of others'
actions even through mere observation, this research team is interested in the
patterns of neural activity that occur as an individual listens to coordinated
musical performance, and whether such perceptual processes are also related to
the listener's social awareness and dispositional nature. To answer these
questions, the proposed project integrates approaches from behavioral and brain
research and topics across the fields of music perception, neurophysiology, and
social cognition. As a result, the project contributes to an emerging
interdisciplinary area of research aimed at investigating complex human social
interaction across a variety of contexts. Because music-making has long been
associated with social, cultural, and therapeutic activities, the findings of
the proposed project will also have significant implications for rehabilitation
and intervention programs aimed at 1) increasing social skills and facilitating
social awareness for those with challenges in social interaction, and 2)
improving sensorimotor deficits through the design of novel approaches with
music therapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research by the fellow has
successfully identified a number of physical and informational factors that
affect the patterning of spatiotemporal coordination during the interpersonal
coordination of simple rhythmic limb and body movements. Through integration
with the mentor's work on the neural oscillatory mechanisms that support
sensorimotor rhythmic timing and movement prediction, this project provides a
unique opportunity to test the hypothesis that behavioral processes of
perception, prediction, and production during musical joint-action entail
effective modulation in the patterning of neural beta-band oscillations, which
may also be related to specific social/personality characteristics of an
individual. Specifically, the project employs EEG recording while individuals
listen to rhythmic musical patterns produced by a pair of musicians exhibiting a
variety of leader-follower relationships. Beta-band modulation during listening
to these musical performances will be evaluated with respect to the leader-
follower asymmetry between the performers as perceived by the listener. The
project further examines how beta-band oscillatory activities are related to an
individual's performance within a rhythmic coordination task, and to self-report
measures of the individual's locus of control and perspective-taking
characteristics. Finding links between neural oscillations during the perception
and production of joint musical behaviors will constitute a major advance in the
scientific understanding of how the brain supports functional social
interaction. The project will therefore establish a new interdisciplinary
neural-behavior approach for investigating joint-action mechanisms within an
ecologically valid and socio-culturally meaningful musical context.