* 1606976
* The Degree of Synchrony Across Physiological and Behavioral Indicators in Aggression
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Gayla Margolin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 237,600.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar at the intersection of
Psychology and Engineering (Dynamical Systems). In an increasingly collaborative
domain of science, this project represents a unique interdisciplinary direction
that should be beneficial for both the fields. The main focus of this project is
dating aggression, which poses significant societal problems including the
continuity of aggression into committed long-term relationships, negative future
implications for parenting, and an array of physical and mental health problems.
Identifying mechanisms that explain dating aggression is crucial to interrupting
maladaptive patterns of communication and bolstering healthy developmental
trajectories for relationships. In contrast to prior research that focuses
primarily on global individual characteristics associated with dating
aggression, the present study is designed to capture dynamic unfolding of
moment-to-moment relational processes that ultimately may lead to aggression.
This postdoctoral fellowship award supports a recent Ph.D. who aims to transform
the scientific study of dating partner aggression through the interdisciplinary
integration of novel technologies from psychology and electrical engineering.
The focus of investigation is each partner's physiological state, which will be
measured through behavioral, vocal, and physiological channels. Coordination
across channels of physiological conditions -within individuals as well as
between the dating partners-will be tested as putative factors in current
experiences of couple aggression as well as past legacies from exposure to
aggression in the dating partners' family-of-origin. Better understanding of
factors associated with dating aggression-particularly modifiable factors such
communication processes and accompanying physiological states can ultimately
inform prevention and intervention efforts designed to reduce dating aggression.
Decreasing the incidence of dating aggression as well as limiting the
transmission of aggression across generations are priorities for multiple
stakeholders: individuals, families, researchers, clinicians, and policy-makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the present project is to expand what is known
about dating partner aggression and its link to family-of-origin aggression by
identifying patterns of interaction and of physiological conditions that are
indices of risk versus resilience for couple aggression. The theoretical
innovation of this proposal lies in the conceptualization and testing of
synchrony versus asynchrony across different physiological indices: vocal,
physiological and psychological. Young dating couples will engage in multiple
emotionally-charged discussions during which behaviors, vocal qualities, and
physiology (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance) are measured and recorded.
Engineering-based methods of acoustic analysis and biomedical signal processing
along with psychology-based human coding of behaviors and emotions will allow
for the simultaneous capture of multiple regulatory processes. It is
hypothesized that patterns of synchrony versus asynchrony across different
channels will further knowledge of how ongoing regulatory processes contribute
to relational aggression (e.g., physiological states that are not accompanied by
concomitant behavioral ones may circumvent escalation). Risk and resilience for
aggression, often studied as trait-like propensities, will be examined here from
relational perspectives. By focusing on young adults who are in early stages of
significant intimate relationships and through the application of novel
technologies, this study will advance scientific inquiry on relationship
aggression as well as on the continuity of aggression across generations.