* 1606536
* Classical and Quantum Aspects of Black Holes, Horizons and Asymptotic Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Andrew Strominger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Symmetries play a critical role in physics and astronomy. They are usually
associated with conserved quantities that allow for a clearer picture of a
physical system. Of particular interest to the research supported by this award
are symmetries present at the horizon of black holes. These have potential
implications for gravitational scattering experiments, gravitational memory
measurements, astronomical measurements of spinning black holes and quantum
black hole information. The objective of this project is to further investigate
these symmetries and the role that they play in physical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years, Strominger and group have shown
that the infinitely many symmetries at light-like infinity form one part of an
exact triangular equivalence of three phenomena which recur ubiquitously across
a wide variety of physical systems and have been separately studied for a half
century -- the other two phenomena being memory and soft theorems. Soft theorems
characterize the low energy behavior of physical systems and can be derived as
the `Ward identities' of the infinite number of symmetries. The third corner --
memory -- turns out to be simply the Fourier transform of the soft theorems.
This very simple triangular equivalence occurs in various instances in physics:
QED, Yang-Mills theory, gravity, in any number of dimensions, with or without
supersymmetry, with leading, subleading or subsubleading soft theorems in one
corner. While several triangles have been filled out, most remain incomplete.
Each instance of the triangle has its own special and fascinating features,
which will be investigated in this project. More recently, the triangular
structure was found to have profound implications for the famous black hole
information puzzle, which will also be pursued. In another direction, general
relativity implies that the dynamics of the near horizon region of extreme Kerr
is governed by an infinite-dimensional emergent conformal symmetry. Precision
black hole spectroscopy has now advanced to the stage where astronomers are
beginning to observe the regions of spacetime governed by this conformal
symmetry. This award will support a systematic exploration of potential
observational consequences of the conformal symmetry.