* 1606826
* Multifunctional Microporous Hydrogen-Bonded Organic Framework Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Banglin Chen, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 404,246.00

Non-technical Abstract

Materials play a crucial role in advanced technologies that can improve our life
quality. With the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
this project will design and synthesize novel microporous materials from organic
compounds through hydrogen bonding interactions. Compared with traditional
microporous materials such as zeolites and activated carbons, they can be
straightforwardly synthesized, characterized, regenerated and processed, and are
of low cost. They can be applied to the separation and production of a number of
chemicals important for energy, environmental and pharmaceutical applications.
The proposed project at the University of Texas at San Antonio provides
exceptional educational opportunities and facilitate extensive
national/international research collaboration for underrepresented minority and
women undergraduate and graduate students, helping them to prepare their future
careers in academia and industry.

Technical Abstract

This project aims to construct self-assembled multifunctional microporous
hydrogen-bonded organic framework (HOF) materials from a variety of organic
building linkers with strong hydrogen bonding motifs. Two unique hydrogen
bonding motifs DAT (DAT = 2,4-diamino-1,3,5-triazin-6-yl) and CA (CA = -COOH)
are incorporated into a number of organic linkers for their construction of
porous HOFs whose pores can be systematically tuned and functionalized. These
novel porous materials will be examined for separations of small molecules,
enantioselective separations of chiral alcohols and amines, and heterogeneous
catalytic oxidation of alcohols to their corresponding carbonyl compounds,
asymmetric hydrogenation of keto esters, and asymmetric diethylzinc and
alkynylzinc additions to synthesize chiral alcohols. The proposed research has
significant impacts on the sustainable energy and separations of enantiopure
compounds. Separation and purification of some small molecules such as C2-6
hydrocarbons, xylene and thiophene isomers are industrially very important;
however, very challenging and energy-consuming. The realization of novel
microporous HOF materials for the separation and purification of small molecules
enhance the separation and purification efficiency and capacities of some
existing separation technologies, and thus save energy costs. In terms of
regeneration, microporous HOF materials are superior to other established porous
materials because they can be easily recovered through simple recrystallization.
The emerging of enantiopure microporous HOF materials for separations of
enantiopure compounds can not only reduce the cost for the production of these
important organic intermediates, but also initiate the new discoveries of these
enantiopure organic intermediates for the synthesis of novel biologically active
compounds, and pharmaceutical, agricultural, and fine chemicals.