* 1606820
* Geometry and classifications of Ricci solutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jiaping Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 301,079.00

It is a central theme in mathematics to categorize and classify geometric
objects. One effective way of doing so is to prescribe a canonical metric for
each object, namely a canonical way to measure the distance in an object. It is
a classical result that each two dimensional surface carries a certain metric
with constant curvature. For the three dimensional case, the problem becomes
vastly more difficult. It was a much celebrated achievement of Perelman who
successfully tackled the problem about ten years ago. He adopted an approach
developed by Hamilton who has devised a way of deforming an arbitrary metric via
a set of differential equations. A crucial step in understanding this set of
equations for Perelman is to classify the so-called self-similar solutions. The
current project aims to extend Perelman's work to dimension four and beyond. It
is expected that the results will aid in the study of four dimensional spaces.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ricci solitons, as self-similar solutions to the Ricci
flows, play a central role in the singularity analysis of the Ricci flows. The
main theme of this project is to study shrinking Ricci solitons. In dimensions
two and three, they have been completely classified. The classification has
found important applications in the resolution of the Poincare and
geometrization conjecture for three dimensional manifolds. The current project
aims to obtain a classification for four dimensional complete gradient shrinking
Ricci solitons, building upon the recent progress including curvature estimates
and a description of the structure at infinity. Another goal of the project is
to lay some foundation toward a possible classification for high dimensional
gradient shrinking Ricci solitons.