* 1607746
* RUI: Supramolecular anion-pi and halogen-bonded complexes and their role in electron-transfer processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Sergiy Rosokha, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 295,604.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sergiy Rosokha of the Department
of Chemistry at Ball State University studies intermolecular interactions
between molecules that have a halogen atom (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine)
and molecules with a negative charge (anions). These types of chemical
interactions are recognized as a powerful tool for recognizing molecules,
preparing materials, and designing pharmaceuticals. Professor Rosokha is
studying the role of these novel types of intermolecular interactions in
facilitating certain chemical reactions. These mechanistic studies should aid
the development of more efficient synthetic methods and the study of chemical
reactions in the environment. Professor Rosokha is also providing research and
training opportunities for undergraduate and masters students at Ball State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Rosokha is studying the mechanistic
role of anion-pi and halogen-bonded complexes in electron-transfer reactions.
More generally, he is addressing solution-phase chemical transformations of both
halogenated electrophiles and anionic nucleophiles. Through a combination of
spectral (UV-Vis, FT-IR, NMR, ESR) measurements, electrochemical, X-ray
structural studies, and computational analysis, Professor Rosokha is
establishing the structural, thermodynamic and spectral characteristics of
highly-reactive pre-equilibrium halogen-bonded and anion-pi complexes. The
properties of these complexes are then being used to explain, predict and,
ultimately, control kinetics and stereochemistry of the reactions of halogen-
containing molecules with anions.