* 1607410
* Neutrino Interactions in the NuMI Off-Axis Electron Neutrino Appearance (NOvA) Near Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Mathew Muether, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2020
* USD 246,000.00

Neutrinos are among the most abundant particles in the universe, emanating from
stars, nuclear reactors, the core of the earth and even interactions from the
early universe. Despite their abundance, there is limited knowledge about many
of the fundamental properties of neutrinos such as their mass. A broad
international research program is progressing to study the properties of these
particles. One aspect of this program is to investigate neutrino oscillations:
one type of neutrino changing into another type. Measuring these oscillations
could lead to new models of particle interaction. In order for measurements to
continue to improve, understanding how the neutrino interacts with other types
of matter becomes critical. This project will carry out a focused research
effort with the objective to characterize neutrino interactions with matter to
enhance the domestic neutrino research program. This work will also have broad
impact by enhancing the "big data" initiative at WSU, which is a
multidisciplinary effort that seeks to engage the campus, its student base, and
local industry in cutting-edge data analytic techniques which are applicable in
a wide range of both industrial and academic fields.

This work will be accomplished by analyzing neutrino interaction data from the
NuMI Off-axis electron-neutrino Appearance experiment (NOvA) near detector. The
NOvA near detector is sited in the main injector neutrino source at Fermilab,
just outside Chicago, Illinois. This setup provides a very intense, near mono-
energetic source of neutrinos, and a detector ideal for measuring a broad range
of interaction types. One of the limitations of neutrino oscillation measurement
is the uncertainty in neutrino - nucleon interactions. This work will provide
new and critical neutrino-nucleon measurements to help more fully understand the
nature of neutrino interactions with matter while providing several young
scientists opportunities to engage in world leading high energy particle physics
research.