* 1607201
* A Workshop to Explore Enhancing Collaboration Between US and Chinese Researchers in Systematic Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Patrick Herendeen, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 12/31/2017
* USD 78,001.00

This award supports a workshop in China to develop collaborations in the field
of systematics and biodiversity research between US and Chinese scientists.
Discovering and documenting the wealth of Earth's biodiversity and determining
how these millions of life forms are interrelated are labor intensive
activities. International research is a nearly universal aspect of modern
systematics, and building effective and productive collaborations is essential.
This research requires scientists to cross national boundaries to study plants,
animals, fungi, and microbial species in their native habitats. No single
country has all the expertise, resources, or human capacity to accomplish this
essential research on their own. The United States and China are home to many
researchers who are active in systematics, paleontology, biodiversity discovery
and related fields, but collaborations are relatively few. It is with these
thoughts in mind that this workshop has been organized to discuss the need for
greater collaboration between US and Chinese systematists, and mechanisms that
will facilitate the development of new collaborative relationships. The focus of
the workshop is systematics, broadly defined to include the study of the
diversity and evolutionary history of life, including both living and fossil
taxa. The workshop will be three days in length and will include 30 participants
and potential collaborators from the US and a similar number of participants
from China. Participant selection is based on criteria seeking to: maximize
taxonomic diversity representation among the species being studied; find equal
representation among scientists working on biodiversity inventory, taxonomy, and
phylogeny; provide broad representation of museums, botanic gardens,
universities, colleges, and other institutions. Workshop management will be
handled by six co-organizers (three in the US and three in China) and a steering
committee of three additional participants. After the workshops are concluded
the organizers and steering committee will prepare a comprehensive report for
public distribution. This workshop will benefit the discipline more broadly by
improving scientists' abilities to share resources and address a diverse range
of questions that depend upon solid understanding of biodiversity and systematic
relationships. Enhancement of international collaboration will also benefit
individuals directly through enhanced career development.