* 1607833
* Ultra-widebandgap Ga2O3 power devices for next generation power electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Xiu Yao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 368,000.00

Power electronics, in contrast to the electronics in laptops and smart phones,
controls and handles the flow of power. Power electronics is the enabling
technology for integration of renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and
geothermal to the future energy grid for both energy and environmental security.
In addition, power electronics has a critical role in power efficient electric
and hybrid cars. At the heart of power electronics is a power transistor that
switches the power on and off. Energy is lost as heat during this process.
Widebandgap semiconductors enable new power electronics technology that can
significantly reduce the energy losses than the present silicon based
technology. A new widebandgap semiconductor, gallium oxide, is investigated here
for efficient power electronics. The fundamental properties of this novel
widebandgap semiconductor will be explored using advanced scientific
methodology. Studies will also be carried out to develop a technology to change
the electrical conductivity of the semiconductor, which is essential to building
the power transistor. These studies will also increase the understanding of the
widebandgap semiconductor that have potential application in other fields. In
addition to the materials properties, electrical testing of the transistors will
be carried out to evaluate the speed of the power transistors.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will position US at the forefront of power electronics innovation and
propel the recent continued growth of the power electronics industry with
positive outcomes on the US economy. The environmental and energy security of US
will be enhanced due to high efficiency in switching and reduced greenhouse
gases. The research opportunity given to undergraduate and graduate students
will help build the skills of the future workforce for knowledge based economy
and maintain the economic competitiveness of the US. The research effort will be
integrated with educational outreach activities for undergraduates, high-school
students and under-represented students in science and engineering. It will
increase the participation of underrepresented minority and women in the field
of science and engineering enhancing US competitiveness in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposal is to develop a
fundamental understating of the materials properties of the emerging gallium
oxide widebandgap semiconductor and develop a high voltage power transistor.
N-type doping and isolation doping by ion-implantation will be investigated. The
doped films will be characterized by advanced materials characterization
techniques including secondary ion microscopy (SIMS), Rutherford backscattering
(RBS) and also by electrical test structures. The doping technology enables the
engineering of the electric field profile in the power transistor to increase
the breakdown voltage. In addition the electron transport properties and
interface electrical properties will be characterized. Building upon the
fundamental studies, high voltage power transistors will be fabricated. The
switching speed of the power transistors will be characterized by double pulse
method. These studies will be advance the understanding of the widebandgap
semiconductor properties. In addition, an accurate comparison of the technology
with other widebandgap semiconductors can be made.