* 1607414
* Effective Descriptions of Quantum Gravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Martin Bojowald, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

General relativity and quantum mechanics are the two major theories that govern
fundamental physics, of space-time and of elementary particles. However, it is
not known how they could be combined to a consistent theory of quantum gravity.
Fascinating phenomena such as the very first stages of the big bang or the cores
of black holes therefore remain out of the reach of our current understanding.
This project investigates a wide range of systems in which both general
relativity and quantum mechanics are relevant. The main interest is given by
methods that allow one to derive physical implications by approximations, and to
use the results to guide the developments of quantum gravity. Applications to
the big bang and black holes often lead to conclusions that capture the interest
of the general public. Related methods can also be used in systems not involving
general relativity, where they may help to solve technical questions or to
communicate results in a new way, supporting for instance the teaching of
quantum mechanics.

The objective of this project is to introduce and evaluate new methods for a
systematic analysis of physical implications of one set of candidate theories of
quantum gravity, based on canonical quantization. Throughout physics, a powerful
tool to derive potentially observable phenomena is given by effective theories
which provide quantum corrections to the classical equations. Such systems can
more easily be evaluated, analytically or numerically, than equations for
quantum states and thus are more direct sources for the discovery of new
phenomena. While standard techniques to derive effective equations do not apply
to canonical quantum gravity, a general scheme applicable to canonical quantum
theories exists (introduced by the PI) and is used in this project to address
the main problems of quantum gravity. It provides the basis for a long-term
program evaluating physical phenomena in the broad context of quantum gravity.
Such a systematic derivation will make it possible to put effects found
previously in simplified models on a firm footing, uncover new phenomena and
provide reliable predictions. Results will be used to compare the theory with
other candidates of quantum gravity, with the potential of a fruitful transfer
of ideas and techniques between the approaches.