* 1607919
* CRCNS: BrainPack: A Suite of Advanced Statistical Techniques for Mmulti-Subject, Multi-Group Neuroimaging Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Nicole Lazar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 580,000.00

Understanding the neural bases of psychiatric disorders is a critical component
in the development of targeted behavioral or drug therapies. Given the rapid
advancements in availability of, and access to brain imaging equipment, there
now exists a large literature reporting on functional neuroimaging results
differentiating people with psychotic disorders (such as schizophrenia) from
healthy people. The literature is littered, however, with failures to replicate.
The popularity of imaging as a research tool in psychiatric disorders, and the
lack of consistency in results, provide a compelling demonstration of why
resources would be well invested on the development of more reliable, accurate
and sensitive tools for analyzing data. These tools must be based on sound
statistical theory, yet accommodate the actual, practical challenges caused by
the realities of the data. The project develops a suite of robust, sensitive and
effective statistical methods which will help neuroscientists better understand
the etiology of psychiatric disorders. The enhanced sensitivity of these tools
also creates a better means for evaluating new treatments, as it provides
improved assessment of changes across time that are currently difficult to
capture due to their subtle nature.

The suite of methods developed in the project (BrainPack) is a comprehensive
system for the analysis of group-level imaging data that makes minimal
assumptions on the distributional behavior of the measured signal. It does not
require an a priori model of the expected activation across sessions, can
effectively reduce the size of large data sets containing mostly irrelevant
information, account for spatial and temporal correlations, and quantify the
discrepancy between groups and assess the statistical significance of these
discrepancies. As such BrainPack will provide robust identification of subtle
group differences that are common across many types of neuroimaging studies.
These advancements are generalizable and readily adapted across a wide range of
neuroimaging studies and beyond.