* 1607405
* Speeding Up the Spinning, Precessing Effective One-Body--Numerical Relativity (SEOBNRv3) Code by ~10,000x
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Zachariah Etienne, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,020.00

When LIGO detects a gravitational wave, a group of data analysts within the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC) addresses the question "What exactly produced
this wave?", by employing a suite of tools designed to estimate source
parameters of detected signals. Their findings extend our understanding of the
universe, and inspire the next generation of scientists. The process of
parameter estimation requires that the observed wave be compared to many
millions of gravitational waves generated by theoretical models. However, this
poses a major challenge: the software currently used for this task is far too
slow, requiring up to 1,000 years to estimate parameters for a single detected
gravitational wave. This grant will support an effort to improve this software
platform performance by a factor of 10,000, which will greatly increase the
usefulness of this state-of-the-art and widely-used model for LSC parameter
estimation. The grant will also support the implementation of an automated
software validation system for the LSC, to prevent certain types of software
"bugs" from influencing parameter estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For cases
where the sources of interest are spinning black-hole pairs, the LSC primarily
makes use of two highly-reliable theoretical models based on supercomputer-
generated solutions to Einstein's equations of General Relativity. One of these
models is called SEOBNRv3 (short for Spinning Effective One Body-Numerical
Relativity model, version 3). The SEOBNR series of gravitational waveform models
are among the best available for parameter estimation (PE) of spinning black-
hole binaries, filling gaps in perturbative waveform approximants with results
from numerical relativity simulations. Despite their great efficiency and
reliability when compared to numerical relativity waveforms, SEOBNR codes are
still far too slow to be directly useful for standard Markov-Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC)-based PE. This award supports work to drastically improve the performance
of the official SEOBNRv3 (v3) software. In addition to this effort, the award
will support the education of graduate students in STEM areas of research.