* 1607348
* Understanding Forced Asian Monsoon Changes in Observations and Coupled Model Intercomparison Project - Phase 5 (CMIP5) Models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Mingfang Ting, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2022
* USD 712,034.00

The Asian monsoon covers a region including India, Southeast Asia, and much of
China, and is the primary source of water for a large portion of the world's
population. The region also produces a large share of the anthropogenic aerosols
worldwide, and several studies have suggested that aerosols, in combination with
greenhouse gases and human land use and land cover (LULC) change, have a
significant effect on Asian monsoon rainfall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is to determine the Asian monsoon response to
anthropogenic forcing through the analysis of observations as well as model
simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5).
The work includes an examination of model simulations, including simulations
forced by individual anthropogenic factors (for instance only aerosols or only
greenhouse gas increases), to determine the relative contributions of the
different human drivers of monsoon change. Further work includes simulations
with two atmospheric general circulation models to test the monsoon rainfall
response to factors including LULC change, and to identify the separate effect
of remote sea surface temperature variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the large societal impact of changes in monsoon rainfall,
particularly given studies which suggest that the region could experience a
substantial reduction in agricultural production by 2050 due to climate change.
Work conducted here seeks to identify the underlying physical mechanisms which
lead to monsoon change, and determine whether monsoon change occurring in model
simulations is consistent with observational evidence. The work thus seeks to
provide better guidance on likely changes in monsoon rainfall over the 21st
century.