* 1607550
* Mechanical Responses at Intercellular Junctions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sanjeevi Sivasankar, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

This collaboration between experiment and theory will provide a physics-based
understanding on how cells withstand mechanical stress and maintain homeostasis.
The main hypothesis is that adherent cells resist mechanical failure in two
ways: by switching the conformations of their adhesive proteins and by
clustering them together at sites of cell-cell contact. The PI will test this
hypothesis on multiple length scales, ranging from single molecules to live
cells, by using an integrated approach that uniquely and innovatively combines
predictive computer simulations and quantitative single molecule experiments.
This research will be integrated with an education plan to attract undergraduate
students, particularly under-represented minorities from local community
colleges, into physics by motivating them with hands-on research experiences, by
offering one-on-one mentorship, and by developing new inquiry-based courses that
integrate research into teaching. The goals of the educational plan are to (i)
Provide hands-on research experience to underrepresented minority students from
local community colleges by partnering with the Iowa Illinois Nebraska STEM
Partnership for Innovation in Research and Education (IINSPIRE) (ii) Collaborate
with the Iowa State University Freshman Honors Program (FHP) to provide research
experiences for undergraduates early in their academic careers. (iii)
Collaborate with colleges serving underrepresented minorities to improve their
science curricula (iv) Increase knowledge of biological physics by developing
new courses that integrate research and teaching. A critical barrier to the
success of underrepresented minorities majoring in physics is the lack of direct
exposure to research and the absence of personalized mentoring. The partnership
with IINSPIRE and with colleges serving underrepresented minorities will
eliminate these barriers. With FHP, the PI will identify undergraduate talent
early and nurture their scientific potential and guide them into research-strong
careers. New courses are being developed by the investigators that will directly
encourage and foster student interest in biological physics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cadherins are prototypical adhesion proteins that mediate
the integrity of all soft tissue. Their principal role is to bind cells together
to survive mechanical perturbations. However, the mechanisms by which cadherins
resist mechanical stress, are not understood. Based upon extensive preliminary
experimental and simulation data, the PI hypothesizes that mechanical force
triggers a feedback loop to establish adhesive equilibrium. Two key mechanisms
are involved in this feedback: (i) force-induced switching between alternate
cadherin conformations and (ii) force-induced clustering of cadherin at cell-
cell contacts. To test this hypothesis, the PI will measure how force induces
shuttling of cadherins between alternate conformations, both in vitro and on
live cells, using single molecule force measurements. The PI will also measure
force-induced cadherin clustering, on the millisecond timescale, using single
molecule force microscope-fluorescence microscope, an innovation that this group
recently developed. Specific molecular interpretations of experiments will be
provided by a variety of multi-scale molecular simulations that will be carried
out in parallel with the experiments. The project is organized around two
specific aims: Aim 1: How does cadherin conformational shuttling establish
mechanical feedback? Aim 2: How does mechanical force promote cadherin
clustering? This project will provide a deep, physics-based understanding of the
force-induced response of cadherin within the context of fully functional cell-
cell adhesion junctions and provide molecular mechanisms for these processes.
The approaches developed in this project will have transformative applications
in numerous areas of mechano-biology, including studies of stem cell
differentiation and tissue remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division
of Physics and the Cellular Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.