* 1607971
* Chalcogenide-Based Hybrid Polymers with High Refractive Index for IR Thermal Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2019
* USD 490,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project project
aims to prepare a novel class of polymeric materials that are derived from
sulfur or selenium-based feedstocks. These materials will afford advanced new
polymers with special optical and thermomechanical properties that can be used
as lenses, windows, or other device components for thermal imaging. in the mid-
infrared range. Infrared (IR) optical devices are widely used in optical
communications, as well as in defense applications that require high-resolution
imaging under conditions of pure darkness. NSF support of this project will
enable fundamental insights into the key parameters required to control the
properties (optical, mechanical, thermal) of these materials that will be
essential for use in IR imaging applications. The advances from the project are
anticipated to enable the creation of new IR devices and applications that are
inaccessible with the inorganic materials that are currently used. The close
integration of fundamental scientific research with cutting-edge IR
technological problems will serve as a broader framework to train the students
working on the project and expose K-12 students to aspects of polymer science
through educational outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative interdisciplinary group will investigate the development of a new
class of chalcogenide-based copolymers with very high refractive index (n
greater than 2.0 in the visible and IR spectrum) and high IR transparency so as
to afford a new class of optical polymers for use in mid-IR thermal imaging.
Infrared (IR) optical technology is widely used in optical communications as
well as in military and defense applications that require high-resolution
imaging under conditions of pure darkness. Currently, synthetic polymers cannot
be used as transmitting materials for mid-IR imaging applications as lenses or
other device components since these materials strongly absorb IR radiation in
the spectral window (3-5 micrometers) required for thermal imaging. In the
proposed research, the PIs will investigate the copolymerizations of molten
elemental sulfur (S8) together with other chalcogenide comonomers to increase
the refractive index of these materials. Conversely, copolymerization of
chalcogenide monomers with trivinylic or halogenated styrenic comonomers will
also be conducted to lower the C-H content in these copolymers and ultimately
increase the IR transparency of the resulting optical materials in the 3-5
micrometer mid-IR regime.