* 1607432
* Molecular Quantum Control by Coherence Effects
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* A. Marjatta Lyyra, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 518,479.00

This project will use laser light to control molecules, atoms that are
chemically bound together. Typically it takes at least two electrons to create a
chemical bond between atoms. The spins of these electrons can be parallel
(triplet states) or antiparallel (singlet states). This project will use laser
light to switch the molecule between a singlet and a triplet state, thus
realizing a "spin switch" with potential applications to quantum computing.
Additionally, this project will study the collisions of atoms and molecules
under well-defined initial conditions. In general, molecules are not spherically
symmetric objects and as a result most collisional processes involving them
strongly depend on the relative alignment of the colliding partners. This
project will use lasers to control this alignment. Understanding the basic
physics of collision processes between atoms and molecules is of importance for
processes such as chemical reactivity.

The mixing of the character of quantum states due to coupling depends on the
strength of the interaction as well as on the energy separation between the
interacting quantum states. Using the AC Stark effect of a strong control laser
to shift the energy levels of a spin-orbit coupled pair of ro-vibrational levels
of the Lithium dimer into resonance, the population transfer between a singlet
and a triplet state would occur in a controlled fashion in the time domain under
the influence of an external optical field. When two states are on resonance
(have the same energy) the probability function has an oscillatory time
dependence with a period inversely proportional to the coupling strength of the
two states. Thus, if the population is initially placed in one of the states and
the two states are rapidly brought into resonance only for the duration of half
integer oscillatory periods, and then rapidly moved off resonance, the
population will effectively switch from one of the states to the other one. The
electric field amplitude of the control laser is determined by the resonance
condition of the two states, and the pulse duration by their oscillatory period.
The kinetics and dynamics of collisions between alkali molecules and noble gas
atoms will be studied under well-defined initial conditions of molecular
alignment created using the AC Stark effect of a control laser. The orientation
will be achieved by removing the degeneracy of the magnetic sublevels using the
orientation dependence of the transition dipole moment. The magnetic sublevels
are projections of the total angular momentum of the molecule on a laboratory
fixed axis defined by the polarization direction of the resonant laser field.
For sufficiently large control laser Rabi frequencies, the sublevels will be
separated well enough so specific quantized orientations of the molecules of one
or more rotational quantum states can be probed and the collisional transfer
between them studied. An advantage of this method is that it will allow for
selective removal of the magnetic sublevel degeneracy in contrast to cases where
external magnetic or electric fields are used.