* 1607387
* The NuPRISM Detector: Extending the Sensitivity of Neutrino Oscillation  Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Wilking, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports work to understand neutrinos: the smallest but most common
massive particle in the universe. Although there are a billion neutrinos for
every more well-known electron or proton, neutrinos interact only via the so-
called "weak" force: so they rarely bump into anything, even the detectors
designed to study them. That means they are also the least well understood of
the fundamental particles. One of the big mysteries in neutrino science is how
they change (or "oscillate") from one type to another. The study of neutrinos
has progressed rapidly over the past 25 years. The ultimate goal of neutrino
oscillation experiments such as this is to determine whether neutrinos and
antineutrinos behave differently. This can tell us about the evolution of the
universe a fraction of a second after the big bang, and provide clues about why
the universe is currently filled with matter and not anti-
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrino oscillation experiments produce neutrinos
in one particular type (referred to as flavor), which is measured at a near
detector close to the neutrino production point, and search for the
disappearance of this flavor and/or the appearance of a new neutrino flavor at a
far detector. The NuPRISM detector, which this award will develop, is a new type
of near detector that measures the produced neutrinos over a wide range of
angles, which provides a method for measuring the energy of the neutrinos with
unprecedented precision. This new technique has the potential to extend the
reach of current and future neutrino oscillation experiments.This project
includes enrichment activities for high school students interested in pursuing
careers in STEM fields. Students from local school districts will be selected to
spend a day at Stony Brook University learning about scientific research,
attending demonstrations, and meeting with graduate students and faculty.