* 1607517
* Search for the Electron EDM Using Cs and Rb in Optical Lattice Traps
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 568,866.00

The existence of an elementary particle with a permanent electric dipole moment
(EDM) would imply that the basic equations of physics are different when time is
reversed or all spatial coordinates (parity) are inverted. Although these
symmetries are an integral part of classical physics, both are known to be
violated in the current "Standard Model" of particle physics. In fact, there
have been many direct observations of parity violation, and several indirect
measurements of time reversal symmetry breaking. EDMs, however, have yet to be
observed. The major motivation for trying to observe EDMs is that most proposed
extensions to the Standard Model (such as supersymmetry) predict EDMs that are
in the vicinity of the current experimental upper limit, whereas the Standard
Model predicts that they should be much smaller. Increasing the precision of
experiments could rule out possible extensions to the Standard Model, or provide
the first experimental result that cannot be incorporated into the Standard
Model. As such it would be a harbinger of a theoretical revolution. To measure
the electron EDM, cesium atoms will be cooled with laser beams and trapped with
light, and then their internal energy states will be measured in a very large
electric field in a very low magnetic field environment. Undergraduates and
graduate students will be trained in the use of these tools, which have many
applications beyond this measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electron EDM will
be searched for in this experiment using laser-cooled cesium atoms. The
apparatus construction part of the experiment will be completed and data
collection will commence. In the experiment, atoms are loaded into a pair of
parallel one-dimensional far-off-resonant optical lattice traps in a
magnetically shielded region of space, laser-cooled and optically pumped.
Similar to the way permanent magnetic dipole measurements are routinely measured
by looking for linear Zeeman energy shifts in magnetic fields, the EDM will be
searched for by looking for linear Stark shifts in an electric field. The
experiment is designed to be insensitive to magnetic fields and magnetic field
gradients by simultaneously measuring two sets of atoms that experience opposite
electric fields. It is projected that the experiment will be sensitive to an EDM
as small as 3x10-30 e-cm, which is a 30-fold improvement over the current limit.
In parallel to making the EDM experiment fully operational, the group will
perform a related technological study to try to maximize the electric fields
that can be sustained with the conducting oxide coated glass plates that are
used. Along the way, there are two atomic polarizability measurements that the
apparatus is uniquely configured to measure with improved sensitivity. Before
incorporating improved field plates, the group will likely perform these
measurements, which can provide tests of atomic calculations and possible
improvements to the understanding of cesium clock shifts.