* 1607518
* CRCNS: Functional Dissection of a Looming-Sensitive Neural Pathway in Drosophila
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Fabrizio Gabbiani, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2021
* USD 878,090.00

The goal of the proposal is to elucidate the neural computations carried out by
the visual system to identify an impending threat and their use for the
generation of collision avoidance behaviors. The proposal will develop advanced
genetic, behavioral and imaging techniques to address these questions. The
experimental data will be summarized in a biophysical model of the neural
circuits generating collision avoidance behaviors that will be validated using
the experimental data acquired during the project. The project will advance our
understanding of how the visual system goes about reliably identifying a threat
in the natural visual environment without reacting to irrelevant visual stimuli.
The knowledge gained from the project is expected to allow the future design of
efficient, neurally-inspired collision avoidance systems.

The proposed experiments will be carried out in the fruit fly Drosophila, a
model system in which sophisticated genetics tools are available, including
genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators and modifiers of neural activity that can be
expressed in specific neural subpopulations. These tools, paired with the recent
anatomical description of visual pathways at the electron microscopic level,
offer the possibility of investigating how networks of neurons process
information leading to visually guided escape behaviors at an unprecedented
level of detail. In particular, these tools will allow (1) to carry out
behavioral experiments where specific populations of neurons belonging to the
visually-guided escape pathway are silenced; (2) to perform imaging experiments
allowing to study the activation of the neurons belonging to the visually-guided
escape pathway at all successive stages of the visual system and determine
how/when the specificity for looming stimuli arises; (3) to apply localized
stimuli and advanced microstimulation techniques allowing to isolate the
contribution of individual photoreceptors to the processing of visual
information related to looming stimuli in single neurons; (4) to develop genetic
tools allowing to silence populations of neurons by using novel anion channel
rhodopsins and allowing to sparsely label neurons of the pathway at two
successive stages, either with an indicator of neuronal activity or with an
optogenetic activator; (5) to test the functional connectivity at successive
stages of the pathway using these tools in conjunction with three dimensional
random access imaging; and (6) to model the neural computations carried out
along the visually guided escape pathway.