* 1607816
* Collaborative Research: Speleothem records of permafrost thaw and paleoclimate in the North American Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Shakun, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 117,761.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
possibility of substantial greenhouse gas release from thawing permafrost in a
warmer future, as well as the threats to infrastructure from thawing permafrost,
understanding the response of permafrost to past warmth is of fundamental
importance. Speleothems (stalagmites and stalactites) are expected to grow in
Arctic caves only when the overlying permafrost has thawed and no longer
presents an impermeable barrier to seepage from the surface into the cave. This
project will develop a record of when speleothems grew in Arctic caves and,
consequently, under what past climatic conditions continuous permafrost thawed.
The principal investigators will develop a website designed to educate lay
audiences on how speleothems are used to study past climate. They will
participate in the Cambridge Science Festivals‚Äô Science on the Street program,
which provides an outlet for scientists to engage with public audiences
attending community events on their research. This project will contribute to
STEM workforce development by helping launch the research programs of three
early-career scientists, as well as supporting the training of two graduate and
three undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study
represents a novel approach to reconstruct past episodes of permafrost thaw by
dating cave speleothems from now-frozen areas. Speleothems require liquid water
to grow and thus imply thawed ground conditions when they were deposited. This
work will take advantage of advances in uranium-thorium geochronology and use
existing speleothem collections from three remote areas of Canada, spanning 17¬∞
of latitude and range from isolated to continuous permafrost zones to document
the extent of speleothem growth, and thus permafrost thaw, across variable
interglacial conditions of the past 600 kyr some of which were warmer than
today. They will also apply uranium-lead dating to a selection of samples to
extend the dating range to millions of years. Well-dated, high-resolution
records of terrestrial paleoclimate are also rare in the Arctic, though critical
for understanding the response of this region to radiative forcings and
determining the climate forcing that drove past changes in ice sheets,
permafrost, sea ice, and vegetation. Therefore, they will measure stable isotope
records along the speleothems to reconstruct climate variability over the
intervals during which they grew. While likely fragmentary and confined to warm
periods, these records will essentially provide underground extensions of the
Greenland ice core ùõø18O record to numerous past interglacial periods.