* 1607854
* Collaborative Research:   A biomimetic dynamic self-assembly system programmed using DNA nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nils Walter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical: These collaborative awards by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Arizona State University (lead) and University
of Michigan Ann Arbor (non-lead) are to study DNA polymerization and
depolymerization to biomimic the functions of microtubules in cells. This award
is co-funded by the following programs: 1) BioMaPS program in the Division of
Materials Research; and 2) Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering program in
the Division of Chemical and Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems (ENG). The award will study the dynamic self-assembly and disassembly
observed in cellular microtubules, which are involved in a number of cell
functions such as intracellular transport, cell division, gene expression, etc.
With this award, the microtubule functions will be mimicked by designing the
self-assembly seen in DNA system. Scientific broader impacts of this study will
be in developing biocompatible motors, robotics, and other applications such as
drug and gene delivery systems. As part of the broader impact activities, this
project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities to students at the
interface between DNA nanotechnology and single molecule biophysics. In
addition, this project aims to engage high school students through experiential
learning, providing them with teaching tools, and developing a STEM volunteer
network. Finally, the single-molecular probing will be performed in the NSF-
funded Single Molecule Analysis in Real-Time (SMART) Center at the University of
Michigan, which has a vigorous outreach program to the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project will build synthetic
DNA-based assemblies that biomimic the salient features of dynamic self-assembly
seen in cellular microtubules. Taking advantage of the DNA nanostructure
programmability, this project aims to: investigate the kinetic determinants of
interactions including cooperative binding, nucleation, and growth; mimic the
treadmilling (active transport by self-assembly and disassembly) and dynamic
instability of microtubules by employing driving forces intrinsic to Holliday
junction isomerization with intermediate assembly stages that can be isolated
and studied; and visualize and control of the treadmilling and dynamic
instability of the DNA assembly line using comprehensive single-molecule
characterization methods. Examination of this synthetic dynamic assembly system
will lay the groundwork in the design and construction of sophisticated dynamic
molecular assemblies based on DNA. Results from this project will provide a
theoretical foundation for DNA-based motors, robotics, and other dynamic
transport systems. These studies could in turn pave the way for assembling a DNA
tile system that can directionally step on a programmed dynamic assembly line
that mimics the motion of motor proteins (e.g., dynein or kinesin) seen in
microtubules.