* 1607451
* Disorder and interaction in topological matter
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Dmitri Feldman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education on the theory of topological quantum
materials. Progress on electronic device miniaturization has culminated in the
ability of modern technology to confine electrons at the nanoscale. Such
confinement results in drastically changed material properties. A striking
example is the fractional quantum Hall effect, where electrons behave as if they
were split into several smaller particles, called anyons. The properties of
anyons are unlike those of any other particles in nature, and can be used for
potential applications in topological quantum computing, which is uniquely free
of errors that are inherent in all other approaches to quantum computing. As a
consequence, a topological quantum computer could accomplish the same tasks as a
much larger non-topological quantum computer but with fewer qubits.

The project aims at understanding the properties of anyons, which is a critical
open problem. The PI will collaborate closely with experimental groups, and
incorporate research insights from the field of topological insulators.
Topological insulators are new materials that do not conduct electricity in the
bulk like their conventional relatives rubber and plastic. However, in contrast
to rubber and plastic, their surface forms a conductor. The PI will investigate
the flow of electric current on the surfaces of topological insulators in the
presence of material disorder. In addition to research, the award supports
several educational and outreach activities. Most of the budget will be directed
towards supporting graduate students. Other activities will involve advising
undergraduate students, performing outreach at different school grade levels,
and organizing a scientific conference. Graduate and undergraduate research on
novel materials will contribute to the scientific education of the US workforce.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education on the theory of topological quantum
materials. The properties of topological materials are dramatically different
from others, particularly in the presence of strong interactions, or quenched
disorder. For example, Coulomb interaction leads to the formation of fractional
quantum Hall states, where electrons fractionalize into anyons, a theoretical
prediction that opens up possibilities of great importance for basic research
and applications, and that has stimulated much experimental work.

The first thrust of this project is motivated in part by recent experiments and
focuses on the nature of the fractional quantum Hall states in the second Landau
level in GaAs systems. The other motivation of the first thrust comes from the
recent breakthrough work that connected theoretical ideas about surface states
of topological insulators with 2D electron gases at half-filling. The project
explores related physics in the absence of particle-hole symmetry at filling
factor 5/2, and uses it to explain experimental data. The research addresses the
effect of strong interactions on the existing experimental tools, and in
collaboration with experimentalists' aims at developing new approaches to
probing anyons.

Topological properties are robust with respect to weak quenched disorder, but
strong disorder may lead to striking effects, such as the formation of a
metallic phase in 3D topological insulators. The second thrust of the project
investigates the physics of that unusual metal. The project explores the
crossover between bulk and surface disorder by considering insulators with
fractal surfaces, as well as transport in low-dimensional structures based on
topological insulators.

In addition to research, the award supports several educational and outreach
activities. Most of the budget will be directed towards supporting graduate
students. Other activities will involve advising undergraduate students,
performing outreach at different school grade levels, and organizing a
scientific conference. Graduate and undergraduate research on novel materials
will contribute to the scientific education of the US workforce.