* 1607204
* Collaborative Research:  Few-Body Interactions in Ultracold Quantum Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jose D'Incao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 90,000.00

The understanding of how systems containing many particles, so-called many-body
systems, behave is a fundamental question driving modern research with impacts
across multiple fields of science and technology. Dilute, ultra-cold atomic
vapors provide a unique arena for the study of collective, many-body phenomena,
and for exploring the relationship between few-body dynamics on the one-hand and
the behavior of many-body systems on the other. This project aims at the
development of improved theoretical understanding of a number of key aspects of
few-body systems that are deeply quantum mechanical in nature and which occur
within ultra-cold quantum gases. The work could potentially have unprecedented
impact with far-reaching scientific and technological ramifications. For
example, the ability to regulate few-body interactions within a complex system
could significantly impact the possibilities for quantum control of chemical
reaction dynamics. Furthermore, a deep understanding of the ultra-cold atom
interactions can spawn applications to atomic clocks, quantum information
science, and the exploration of many novel phases of matter.

A key element of the project is the design of computational methods and
techniques of analysis capable of describing ultra-cold few-body interactions
far more realistically than any other existing methodologies. For example, the
project will explore whether a laser field can change the interactions among
three or four nearby atoms that are part of a many-body Bose-Einstein
condensate. The central idea is that whenever a few atoms within the large
ensemble temporarily collide, they can absorb or emit radiation as a unit. This
resonant radiation has distinct frequencies which can be detected
spectroscopically or tuned to alter the few-body dynamics. In accord with its
general objective, the project has two specific goals; to develop coherent
control of few-body interactions, and to explore new fundamental phenomena in
the exotic interaction regime produced by artificial gauge fields. The project
will also build on recent discoveries of few-body, Efimov resonances, in order
to explore the relevance of Efimov physics to the control of many-body ultra-
cold systems. The key educational impact of this work derives from the training
of graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral researchers in
state of the art theoretical and computational research techniques.