* 1607316
* From Negative to Zero Thermal Expansion IR Transparent Materials Using the Defect Chemistry of ReO3-Type Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Angus Wilkinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 313,835.00

Non-technical Abstract Thermal expansion, which is change in dimensions with
temperature, plays a very important role in determining if a material will be
suitable for a particular application. Low or zero thermal expansion is
necessary when dimensional stability is important, such as in the fabrication of
precision optical devices, and it is also highly beneficial in ceramics that are
exposed to rapid changes in temperature, such as those used in cookware and in
some engine and aerospace applications. Materials that shrink on heating
(display negative thermal expansion) can be used to compensate for positive
thermal expansion in other components. This research focuses on enhancing our
fundamental understanding of the relationship between atomic structure and a
material's properties, finding new compositions with interesting properties,
developing chemical strategies for controlling thermal expansion, and using them
to create infrared transparent zero thermal expansion materials. Such materials
are potentially of value in thermal imaging, communications and laser
applications. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the wide
variety of synthetic and characterization techniques needed to prepare and
understand the properties of these materials. They will be introduced to
important concepts and methods in materials chemistry/science, and engaged in
activities that develop general professional skills.

Technical Abstract With support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, the project will focus on the control of thermal expansion in metal
fluorides with an ReO3-type framework, as this structure type is relatively
simple, which helps facilitate both experimental and computational approaches to
the elucidation of underlying principles, a wide range of different chemical
compositions can be prepared, and metal fluorides typically have good
transparency in the infrared. In early 2015, the team reported that calcium
zirconium fluoride displays extremely strong negative thermal expansion over a
wide temperature range. The family of materials which calcium zirconium fluoride
belongs to has considerable compositional and structural flexibility. This
provides for the control of thermal expansion by 1) cation substitutions, 2)
cation disorder and 3) movement away from the ideal stoichiometry to form
fluoride excess solids, which either have interstitial fluoride or cation
vacancies. The control of thermal expansion by the deliberate generation of such
structural defects is novel and potentially very powerful. Variable temperature
/ pressure neutron and x-ray scattering methods will be used to establish the
links between atomic level structure and properties.