* 1607377
* Collaborative Research:  Cold Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Noel, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 343,507.00

The goals of this project are twofold: first, to understand and control the
movement of energy among strongly connected groups of atoms, and second, to
improve an experimental technique for measuring the energy distribution among
these atoms. These general goals are present in many areas of science (for
example, in the study of the transport of energy in metals) but they are often
difficult to realize for the simple reason that solids are densely packed with
atoms and typically opaque. This work will be done in an "ultracold gas" of
atoms that are cooled so that they move slowly like the atoms in a solid, but
are at low density. Collections of these atoms are transparent and can be probed
and controlled with lasers. If the outer electrons in these atoms are excited to
high energy levels, then the atoms can exchange energy in ways that are similar
to other quantum systems. Using a combination of simulation and experimental
imaging techniques, the transport of energy will be measured. In this way, the
project aims to create and study atomic systems that will yield insight into
both fundamental quantum mechanics and the behavior of materials. The second
goal of this project concerns a widely used experimental technique in which the
energy level of an electron is measured by using a rapidly increasing electric
field to rip off, or ionize, the outermost electron from the atom. The stripped
electron is accelerated to a detector and the resulting signal is characteristic
of the electron's original energy level. However, the ionization process is
complex and nearby energy levels produce signals which are indistinguishable.
This project will precisely shape the electric field pulse so that the signals
from closely spaced energy levels can be distinguished, making new experiments
possible in many areas of atomic physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the valence electron of ultracold rubidium atoms in a magneto-optical trap is
excited to a weakly bound state of high principle quantum number, or Rydberg
state. Both the spatial distribution of the atoms and the internal states to
which they are excited are precisely controlled. The atoms in such a sample
exchange energy through a dipole-dipole interaction. Building upon earlier work
implementing "state selective field ionization" with two parallel cylinders of
atoms excited to two different Rydberg states, other geometries and state
distributions will be explored. As the electron's amplitude traverses the many
avoided crossings on the way to ionization it splits due to Landau-Zener
transitions and spreads throughout many Stark levels, complicating the
identification of the original electronic energy level. Previous attempts at
manipulating the electron's path to ionization have focused on coarsely
determining the slope of the electric field ramp. Since there are hundreds of
avoided crossings on the way to ionization, a genetic algorithm will be used to
design the electric field ramp. In addition, recent simulations have revealed
the possibility of observing the anisotropic nature of the dipole-dipole
interaction as well as Anderson localization.