* 1607942
* Development of Novel High Strength Biodegradable Metals for Temporary Biomedical Implants
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Carl Boehlert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 02/28/2023
* USD 579,653.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A dream of the biomedical devices
industry is to replace permanent endovascular stents with stents that can
perform their function in the first few months and then dissolve in the host
body, eliminating harmful long-term effects experienced with current permanent
stents. This work seeks to overcome one of the most challenging aspects of
biodegradable implant materials, controlling the microstructure, through
processing, for enhancing the mechanical behavior and controlling the lifetime
in physiological environments. The broader impacts of this work include use of
the advanced thermomechanical processing methods to improve the mechanical
properties of zinc-based biodegradable metals. This approach has the potential
to change how biodegradable implants are processed and can initiate a revolution
in the biomedical industry by implementing new processes for manufacturing
biodegradable implants materials. Other broader impacts of the proposed work
include producing modules on processing-microstructure-property relationships of
zinc alloys, expanding an established K-12 hands-on SEM-based outreach program
at Michigan State University (MSU), and providing research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. The modules and outreach program are
intended to help promote K-12 students to enter Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math (STEM) disciplines. Overall, this work is intended to make a lasting
effect by understanding processing-microstructure-property relationships of zinc
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
they exhibit near-ideal biocorrosion and biocompatibility behavior, zinc (Zn)
and its alloys show promise for biomedical applications such as biodegradable
stents. However, a primary drawback of pure Zn as an absorbable stent material
is the lack of mechanical strength. The strengths of Zn alloys can be
significantly improved through severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques such
as high-pressure torsion and equal channel angular pressing, both of which
result in a significantly refined microstructure. The application of SPD
techniques, such as these, is especially promising for metal matrix
nanocomposites (MMNCs). Although MMNCs containing Zn as a matrix is in its
infancy, they have the potential to result in biodegradable materials with
enhanced strengths, while maintaining biocorrosion behavior and biocompatibility
attractive for biodegradable implants. Overall, this program will evaluate the
viability of Zn-matrix MMNCs as biodegradable implants and will test the novel
SPD approach for grain refinement. A focus of this work will be to understand
processing-microstructure-property relations of these materials. In addition, an
understanding of the corrosion behavior and mechanisms and the nature of the
biocompatibility of these materials in comparison to standard biodegradable Zn
alloys will be obtained.