* 1607811
* Collaborative Research:   From School to Work: Understanding the Transition from Capstone Design to Industry
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2021
* USD 226,384.00

Extant research pinpoints gaps between school and work in respect to engineering
practice. For example, a recent American Society of Mechanical Engineering
(ASME) study identified a number of student weaknesses, such as: practical
experience, project management, problem solving, and design. Equally important,
industry supervisors have also identified these gaps. The misalignment between
the engineering classroom and workplace poses serious challenges with the
professional formation of engineers. Generally speaking, capstone courses are
key academic experiences that can bridge these gaps. Few studies, if any, have
examined the effectiveness of capstone courses in helping students make the
transition from engineering classrooms to the workplace. Instead, most research
focuses on course structure, pedagogy, assessment, and end-of-course outcomes.
To address the knowledge gaps, the investigators draw on Wenger's concept of
communities of practice to study students' experiences as they move from
capstone courses to the workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multi-case
study design, the project is focusing on four primary research questions:
&lt;br/&gt;(a) What skills, practices, and attitudes fostered through the
capstone experience do individuals draw on or apply in their early work
experiences? &lt;br/&gt;(b) What differences do individuals identify between
their capstone design and early work experiences, and how do those differences
help or hinder their school-to-work transition?&lt;br/&gt;(c) What specific
pedagogical practices or aspects of the capstone course do students identify as
helping or hindering their transition?&lt;br/&gt;(d) In what ways do individuals
perceive themselves to be underprepared in their early work experiences?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, with a particular focus on women and Hispanics,
the investigators proposed to study the extent that capstone design courses
prepared these students to enter communities of practice in engineering
workplaces. This project is closely aligned with the National Science
Foundation's strategic priorities to build the STEM workforce with capable
individuals, as well as broadening participation in engineering among
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the scientific literature,
there are numerous studies that highlight the gaps between theory and practice
in relation to engineering education and the workplace, yet capstone courses are
common practices that engineering instructors use to help students gain more in-
depth engineering knowledge. There is a dearth of studies that have examined the
effectiveness of capstone courses and how these courses may help students to
translate and apply prior engineering coursework to the engineering workplace.
With this in mind, this project has immense potential to positively impact
engineering instruction across the nation. It also possesses great potential in
helping engineering faculty to develop more effective capstone courses, while
maximizing their instructional resources to create such courses. Ultimately,
this project will benefit U.S. engineering industries seeking to hire adaptable
engineering graduates who are technically and professionally prepared to enter
the engineering workforce.