* 1607374
* Hyperbolic Geometry, Heegaard Surfaces, Foliation/Lamination Theory, and Smooth Four-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* David Gabai, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 666,662.00

Low-dimensional topology, which studies manifolds of four or fewer dimensions,
is a central, active area of mathematics. Many of the mathematical tools
successfully used to study high-dimensional manifolds do not apply in low
dimensions, and despite advances in the last forty years, fundamental, important
problems remain unresolved. Low-dimensional topology is at the nexus of many
branches of mathematics. Methods from geometry, minimal surface theory and
analysis, group theory, number theory, dynamical systems, and theoretical
computer science have contributed to its development, and conversely, research
in low-dimensional topology stimulates advances in these areas. This research
project addresses topics in hyperbolic geometry, lamination and foliation
theory, Heegaard theory, and smooth 4-dimensional manifold theory. Many of the
questions under study are accessible to graduate students and new researchers,
several of whom will be involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will continue research on the topology of ending lamination space,
the classification of both small cusped and low volume hyperbolic 3-manifolds,
and the classification of Heegaard splittings. Through a novel approach, the
project will investigate the smooth 4-dimensional Schoenflies conjecture: any
smoothly embedded 3-sphere in the standard 4-sphere bounds a smoothly standard
4-ball.