* 1607076
* Stimuli-Responsive Shape-Changing Molecular Brushes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Bin Zhao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 490,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular brushes are a class
of very long, chain-like molecules consisting of a polymer backbone with densely
attached side molecules, so the whole molecular assembly looks like a brush.
Their dimensions and shapes are determined by the backbone and side-chain
lengths and the interactions of side chains with themselves and their
environment. These giant molecules exhibit intriguing properties and are found
in the human body performing a wide variety of functions, including joint
lubrication, lung clearance, and cell signaling. This project will design,
synthesize, develop, and study in detail molecular brushes that can change their
sizes and shapes in water in response to environmental variations and stimuli.
They will be designed to emulate the behavior of a natural protein in our bodies
called the "von Willebrand factor", which causes our blood to clot at the site
of an injury, thus stopping the bleeding. The synthetic strategies, properties,
and fundamental understanding of such macromolecules will have potential impact
to many technologies, including material surface modification, lubrication,
medication delivery, etc., thus benefiting society. The research program will
also have societal impact via human-resource development. It provides a platform
to train next-generation scientists (postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students). Outreach activities will be organized in collaboration
with local high school teachers, aimed at stimulating the interest of high
school students toward STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is aimed at synthesizing and studying molecular brushes that can exhibit
controllable changes in size and shape upon application of external stimuli. Its
behavior is inspired by the von Willebrand factor, which enables blood clotting
in response to an injury by unraveling from a non-sticky soluble globular shape
to an extended nano-object exposing a large number of binding sites to form a
clot at the site of an injury. Specifically, the research program will develop
general strategies to prepare responsive molecular brushes using state-of-the-
art polymer synthesis techniques, investigate stimuli-triggered changes in
molecular dimension, conformation, and shape in aqueous solution, and elucidate
the effects of various molecular parameters on stimuli-responsive properties. A
series of molecular brushes with various molecular architectures, chemical
compositions, grafting densities, and molecular weights will be prepared, and
their stimuli-responsive behavior in water will be characterized by a broad
range of techniques, including dynamic light scattering (DLS), atomic force
microscopy (AFM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). DLS can
conveniently provide in-situ information on molecular dimensions under different
conditions; AFM and TEM allow for directly visualizing the brush molecules. The
control of interactions of these giant molecules with other macromolecules and
solid materials will be demonstrated via external stimuli. The knowledge gained
from this study will be used to guide the design and synthesis of functional
molecular brushes.