* 1607475
* Molecular Understanding and Design of Physically-linked Double Network Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 343,616.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While polymer hydrogels as soft-and-
wet materials have a wide range of applications for wastewater treatment, tissue
engineering, medication delivery, and in the food industry, most hydrogels are
mechanically weak which greatly limits their uses. Double network (DN)
hydrogels, consisting of two contrasting and interpenetrating polymer networks,
are considered as perhaps the toughest soft materials. Current knowledge of DN
gels stemming from synthesis methods to toughening mechanisms comes mainly from
chemically crosslinked DN gels, but these lack in self-recovery and self-healing
properties. Differently from chemically crosslinked DN gels, the proposed work
attempts to develop a new class of physically-based DN hydrogels with integrated
superior mechanical, self-healing, self-recovery, and mechanically-induced
optical properties. Systematic exploration of both chemically- and physically-
linked DN gels will enable a better fundamental understanding of structure-
property relationships and a better design of next-generation tough hydrogels
with other desirable properties. New knowledge and techniques derived from this
project may also lead to engineering applications such as robust artificial
tissues, self-healing materials, smart stress-responsive robots, and damage-
control sensors. The project will provide research opportunities to students at
all levels, including underrepresented students, and help develop textbook
knowledge and hands-on skills in polymer physics, materials chemistry, molecular
simulations, and engineering design. The project will also integrate broader
educational aspects via curriculum development, summer internships, and local
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to develop
new physically-linked double-network (DN) hydrogels with three integrated
properties of highly mechanical strength, self-healing properties, and
mechanical-induced luminescence. By studying three types of physically-linked DN
gels with and without different crosslinkers, the PI's group expects to reveal
some fundamental principles about the intrinsic structure-property relationships
amongst structural network topologies, functional interactions between and
within two networks, and structural dependence on toughening, self-healing, and
energy-dissipation mechanisms. To this end three tasks will be explored: The
first task is to study the functional role of the first and second networks on
mechanical properties of the physically-based DN gels and to understand how
different networks and their interactions affect observable mechanical
properties. The second task centers on the study of the self-recovery and self-
healing properties and mechanisms of the DN gels while still retaining good
mechanical properties. In parallel to the experimental tasks, computational
components will include the study of structure, dynamics, and interactions
between the two networks and crosslinkers. Moreover, a theoretical model will be
developed to describe the dependence of networks on mechanical, self-
recovery/healing properties, and energy dissipation. Combination and comparison
of the computational and experimental results will help to establish a
relationship between the macroscopic performance of the physically-linked DN
gels and the nanoscopic network interactions at different time-scales and
length-scales, eventually aiming to develop a set of rules for rational design
of new tough gels.