* 1607670
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Bridging the gap between atomistic simulations and fracture mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2021
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and
the United States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
this collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher.
The NSF Division of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research
and education on the fundamental nature of fracture in materials, which is
governed by processes that occur at the atomic scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to answer the following question: why do atomistic simulations
predict cracks in materials with different characteristics than those predicted
by theory and observed in experiments? The PIs postulate that this is because,
up until now and due to computational limitations, most atomistic simulations
are artificially constrained and study systems that are too small. To go beyond
current capabilities, the PIs will extend and apply a novel computational
approach that will enable realistic simulations of fracture experiments. The
simulations will focus on silicon, and will be validated against unique high-
resolution dynamic fracture experiments performed by the Israeli collaborator.
Silicon was chosen due its importance in many technologies including
microelectronics devices, micro- and nano-electro-mechanical systems, solar
cells, and bio-inspired devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
potential for a significant positive impact on industry by elucidating how to
prevent catastrophic failure in devices. All computer codes developed in this
project will be made freely available to the research community via dedicated
web portals (qcmethod.org and openkim.org). The collaborative project will also
strengthen research ties between the US and Israel, and engage Israeli graduate
students (both Jewish and Arab) with their US counterparts to create a positive
example of collaboration in a troubled region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and the United
States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this
collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The
NSF Division of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research and
education on the fundamental nature of fracture in materials, which is governed
by processes that occur at the atomic scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate
aim of this project is to develop a predictive multiscale framework for
simulating fracture phenomena that explicitly account for the effect of a
variety of factors including crystallographic orientation, loading rate,
temperature, and preexisting defects. This requires a multiscale approach that
includes both the correct treatment of the long-range stress field generated by
a crack, and the atomic-scale fracture processes that involve bond breaking at
the crack tip. Fully-atomistic simulations that focus primarily on the crack tip
region exhibit an effect called "lattice trapping" whereby the loading device
has to overcome an energy barrier associated with breaking atomic bonds that
span the cleavage plane. This overloading causes cracks to begin to move at high
initial speed. In contrast, continuum theory does not account for lattice
trapping and predicts that a crack can begin to propagate at any speed. Recent
high-resolution fracture experiments on silicon crystals performed by the
Israeli collaborator agree with continuum theory, and show that the lattice
trapping effect is small and that slow initial crack speeds are possible. The
PIs posit that lattice trapping is an artifact of the size and 2D constraints
imposed on the atomistic simulations. The proposed framework will make it
possible to simulate fracture experiments at realistic loading rates for
specimens with a large enough atomistic region for curvature effects to
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has potential for a significant
positive impact on industry by elucidating how to prevent catastrophic failure
in devices. All computer codes developed in this project will be made freely
available to the research community via dedicated web portals (qcmethod.org and
openkim.org). The collaborative project will also strengthen research ties
between the US and Israel, and engage Israeli graduate students (both Jewish and
Arab) with their US counterparts to create a positive example of collaboration
in a troubled region.