* 1607532
* The Structure and Function of a Novel Bacterial Nitric Oxide Sensor, NosP
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Boon, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 550,008.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Elizabeth Boon of the State University of New York Stony
Brook for the investigation of a new protein in bacteria called NosP that may be
involved in forming bacterial biofilms. A biofilm is generally a slimy,
protective layer on a surface. Biofilms may form on living or non-living
surfaces and can be found in natural, industrial, and hospital settings.
Bacterial biofilms include dental plaques, some forms of pneumonia, and films
that cover medical devices and harbor infectious diseases. These structures are
sometimes resistant to antibiotics and harsh chemical treatments. Very little is
known how biofilms form or how to destroy them. Dr. Boon is studying how
biofilms are disrupted by nitric oxide. This research program provides broad
training at the interface of chemistry with biology for undergraduate, graduate,
and high school students. Dr. Boon has designed a course to help transition
undergraduate students into research-based careers. She also collaborates with a
local high school teacher so that underrepresented local students gain
laboratory experience and the confidence to pursue careers in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial biofilms are a considerable threat to
food and water safety because they cause persistent biofouling of food and food
contact surfaces, and are resistant to antibiotics. Biofilm regulation by nitric
oxide (NO) has been observed broadly in bacteria, thus interventions based on NO
signaling could have an impact on food and water safety. Bacterial NO signaling
is poorly understood. In this research project, the Boon group clones expresses,
and purifies NosP and point mutants, then quantifies the specificity and
affinity of diatomic ligands for NosP and its variants to determine if NosP
binds NO at concentrations known to modulate biofilms (nanomolar). To gain
insight into the heme environment and structure of NosP, Dr. Boon and her
coworkers generate high-resolution crystal structures of NosP, as well as
vibrational structures of the heme cofactor using electronic and resonance Raman
spectroscopy. NosP is expected to be established as a novel NO sensor in P.
aeruginosa. This research elucidates the molecular basis for NO signaling in P.
aeruginosa and may open opportunities for controlling biofilms caused by this
pathogen. Successful delineation of the role of NosP in P. aeruginosa may
provide a basis for understanding NosP in other bacteria.