* 1607976
* Syndication of an one-hour documentary about mathematicians: Counting from Infinity via American Public Television
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project involves the preparation of a documentary film about mathematician
Yitang Zhang for national broadcast on public television via American Public
Television syndication (APT) in May, June of 2017. Counting from Infinity:
Yitang Zhang and the Twin Prime Conjecture premiered theatrically in January
2016. It tells the story of Yitang Zhang, who made an important breakthrough
towards solving the Twin Prime Conjecture in 2013. In the film, the story of
Zhang's quiet perseverance amidst adversity, and his preference for thinking and
working in solitude, is interwoven with a history of the Twin Prime Conjecture
as told by several mathematicians, many of whom have wrestled with this
enormously challenging problem in Number Theory - Daniel Goldston, Kannan
Soundararajan, Andrew Granville, Peter Sarnak, Enrico Bombieri, James Maynard,
Nicholas Katz, David Eisenbud, Ken Ribet, and Terry Tao. The film was produced
and directed by George Csicsery, and has proven highly effective at conveying
mathematical ideas to the general public through the human stories of the
mathematicians behind the ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modification of the film
in preparation for public television broadcast involves editing, adding required
modules, closed captioning, and other technical work, as well as promotional
efforts aimed at individual station programmers.