* 1607343
* Detection and Characterization of Gravitational Wave Transients
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Neil Cornish, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The detection by Advanced LIGO of a gravitational wave signal on September 14,
2015 heralds the beginning of a new branch of astronomy. This award supports
research to enhance the sensitivity of searches for transient gravitational wave
signals by improving the algorithms used to tease faint gravitational wave
signals out of the instrument noise, and to provide detailed information about
the physical characteristics of the signals so that we can connect them to
possible astrophysical sources. The proposed research will build upon the
BayesWave algorithm that was developed under two predecessor awards. BayesWave
separates gravitational wave burst signals from the pops and crackles of the
instrument noise. The BayesWave analysis helped confirm the first detection of
gravitational waves, and results from the analysis can be found in the first
figure of the discovery paper. The LIGO project presents young researchers and
students with a wonderful opportunity to participate in the birth of a new
observation science that is poised to make discoveries that will revolutionize
astronomy and deliver unique insights into some of the Universe's most exotic
phenomena. The MSU research program offers tremendous opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students. The blend of creative activities associated with the
development of sophisticated and innovative data analysis techniques, combined
with hands on exposure to running existing search pipelines and working with
production level computer code, will provide excellent training for the next
generation of gravitational wave astronomers. These skills are transferable and
highly sought after in other fields. The MSU group has been very active in
bringing gravitational wave science to the public through talks, a school
lecture program, and the production of a documentary. The group plans to produce
new web-based educational resources that illustrate the signal processing
techniques used in their research by applying them to related problems in
auditory signal analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported work will improve
and extend the BayesWave algorithm in several ways, including the development of
targeted searches for specific signals, providing new functionality in the
extraction of physical information about the signal that can aid in the
identification of the source, and developing a low-latency capability. The new
directed searches will target the post-merger signals from neutron star
binaries, burst-trains from high eccentricity systems, and the late inspiral,
merger and ringdown of high mass black hole binaries. The physically
parameterized models used in these targeted analyses will allow us to produce
estimates for quantities such as the masses, spins, and radii of the compact
objects. For signals from unknown sources it is important to thoroughly
characterize the signal to make connection with possible astrophysical models
for the source. To this end, the group will develop new tools to extract
information about the time-frequency development of the signal, and related
measures such as rise and decay times. A low-latency version of the algorithm
will provide a new frontline search capability that will compliment, and give
redundancy to, the existing burst search pipelines.