* 1607762
* RUI: Photons Acting Like Fermions: Search for Violations of the Spin Statistics Theorem Using Sr Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Jennie Guzman, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 0.00

Fundamental particles of nature can be characterized by their individual
properties such as electric charge, mass, and spin. This last property, spin
angular momentum, appears to determine whether a particle falls into one of two
general categories. Particles with integer valued spin are called "bosons", and
those with half-integer valued spin are called "fermions." The boson or fermion
distinction has a remarkable effect on the statistical behavior of particle
groups. For example, an unlimited number of bosons (such as photons) can occupy
the same quantum state, but only a single fermion (such as an electron) can
occupy a specific state.  These differences in properties result in vastly
different macroscopic behaviors. The distinction between a boson an a fermion is
important for the structure of the periodic table of the elements, the degree to
which atoms interact with each other during collisions, and even the stability
of matter in everyday objects. This research aims to answer the question: are
there exceptions to the general rule which links spin to the characterization of
a particle as a boson or fermion?  Researchers at California State University
East Bay will probe the fundamental properties of light (a spin-1 particle) and
explore whether it, a boson, ever exhibits any fermion-like behavior.  Such a
discovery would provide a new direction for the theoretical development of the
basic axioms of physics and supply an essential ingredient to a more fundamental
view of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental searches for violations of
the spin statistics theorem (SST) test fundamental assumptions of quantum field
theory, such as local Lorentz invariance.  For this research, researachers will
constrain the SST-forbidden two-photon transition rate between the ground J=0
and excited J'=1 states in atomic strontium.  A two-photon transition between
these two states would possess total angular momentum J=1, which is an exchange-
antisymmetric (fermionic) state forbidden by the SST.  This new experimental
search is motivated by an expected three orders of magnitude increase in
sensitivity over previous searches.  This increase is made possible by using
laser-cooled strontium atoms and separate detection and excitation regions,
reducing the leading systematic effect, scattered light. This work will take
place at an undergraduate institution and will directly engage undergraduate
students in hands-on research.  This research program will especially benefit
the diverse student body at California State University East Bay, where nearly
two-thirds of students are women, over sixty percent are first-generation
college students, and over seventy-five percent are underrepresented minorities.