* 1607601
* Time-Resolved Spectroscopic Study of Diatomic Molecular Sodium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Burcin Bayram, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 295,157.00

This project will measure the "excited state lifetime" of a molecule, which is
the amount of time a molecule remains in a high energy state after absorbing
light. The characteristic timescale of this lifetime is determined by the laws
of nature, and is one of the fundamental properties of the molecule. It is
typically a few tens of nanoseconds (billionths of a second). The lifetime of
sodium molecules is measured in this project using very precisely pulsed lasers
in a technique called "time-resolved spectroscopy." When the lasers are pulsed
on, a high-speed electronic stopwatch is switched on to record the amount of
time that lapses between the absorption and the emission of the photon. The data
obtained has applications in fields such as astrophysics (determining what kind
of molecules are in space and how they formed), plasma physics (determining the
temperatures of very hot materials), and laser physics (helping to predict what
materials could be used to make better lasers). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on experimental studies of radiative lifetime measurements (for
a variety of rotational quantum numbers) of the excited ion-pair state of sodium
molecules from direct fluorescence decay using a time-resolved spectroscopic
technique. Sodium molecules can exhibit exotic behavior since their structural
and radiative properties vary strongly as a function of internuclear distance.
This is due to the effect of the ion pair character, which causes the formation
of double well in the molecular potential energy curves. Recently, the radiative
lifetimes of some of the ion-pair states of sodium molecules have been
calculated and mapped out. This provides benchmark values against which the
reliability of recent theoretical approaches can be tested in the laboratory.
Measurements of excited state lifetimes play an important role in understanding
the interplay between molecular potential energies, molecular electronic
structure, and related quantities such as transition probabilities, oscillator
strengths, and line intensities. The experimental approach is to create sodium
molecules in a heatpipe oven and excite them by a two-step laser double
resonance excitation to reach the ion-pair state. Molecular fluorescence
detection, atomic fluorescence detection from dissociating molecules (a process
which happens on different time scale than molecular radiative timescale), and
polarization of atomic fluorescence from predissociating molecule will be
measured. If a dissociated molecule is detected, polarization measurement will
provide detail information about the nonadiabatic dynamics of the
predissociation process. Thus, the time-resolved spectroscopic technique
provides a tool for studying the intramolecular vibrational energy distribution
in molecules and the dynamics of atomic motion in a molecule.