* 1607069
* 2016 Cellular &amp; Molecular Fungal Biology GRC, Plymouth, New Hampshire, June 19-24, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Amy Gladfelter, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This project will facilitate the attendance and participation of early career
scientists in the Gordon Research Conference on Cellular and Molecular Fungal
Biology to be held at the Holderness School, June 19-24, 2016. The goal of the
conference is to disseminate information about fungal biology among an
interdisciplinary group of researchers, and to increase our collective
understanding of basic fungal biology and its application to socially important
problems. Fungi are essential parts of the terrestrial nutrient cycle, play a
central role in the development of biofuels, and produce many critically
important chemicals. These diverse applications of fungi require the
interdisciplinary acquisition and application of fundamental fungal biology.
This project will support the convergence and exchange of new findings amongst
an interdisciplinary group of scientists dedicated to the study of fungi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is rooted in the
meeting's highly interdisciplinary and interactive format. The meeting will
feature topics that integrate multiple time and space scales for different
questions in fungal biology to promote interactions amongst researchers with
diverse perspectives within the community. There is a specific emphasis on
integrating mathematical modeling and biophysics as a new addition to this
meeting and an entire session is dedicated to the interface of fungal biology
with the physical sciences. The meeting enables cross-fertilization of ideas,
from cell biology to evolution, that occurs in and outside of the sessions and
especially between junior and senior scientists. Young investigators emphasize
from previous meetings how interactive the conference is and how responsive it
is to the presentation of their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference has
broad impacts on training and is dedicated to extending the research community
by emphasizing women and members of underrepresented groups in inviting
speakers. The current invited speakers are approximately 50% women, including
several Latinas. The small size of the meeting and the emphasis on discussion
(40% of meeting time is dedicated to discussions) encourages active
participation. Poster sessions are featured without competing events to focus
attention on the most junior scientists, who often have the newest data. The GRC
on Cell and Molecular Fungal Biology also is dedicated to research that applies
basic knowledge to socially important questions involving filamentous fungi,
particularly mutualisms with plants (mycorrhizae), parasitism with plants (plant
pathology) and animals (animal pathology), and industrial mycology (enzyme
production). The interactions among researchers focused on both basic and
socially important research speeds research aimed at solving societal problems
caused by or that can be improved by fungi.