* 1607489
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference for Functional and High Dimensional Data with New Dependence Metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Xiaofeng Shao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 184,996.00

Due to the rapid development of information technologies and their applications
in many scientific fields such as climate science, medical imaging, and finance,
statistical analysis of high-dimensional data and infinite-dimensional
functional data has become increasingly important. A key challenge associated
with the analysis of such big data is how to measure and infer complex
dependence structure, which is a fundamental step in statistics and becomes more
difficult owing to the data's high dimensionality and huge size. The main goal
of this research project is to develop new dependence measures for quantifying
dependence of large scale data sets such as temporally dependent functional data
and high dimensional data, and utilize these new measures to develop novel
statistical tools for conducting sparse principal component analysis,
dimensional reduction, and simultaneous hypothesis testing. Building on the new
dependence metrics that can capture nonlinear and non-monotonic dependence, the
methodologies under development are expected to lead to more accurate prediction
and inference, as well as more effective dimension reduction in the analysis of
functional and high dimensional data.

The research consists of three projects addressing different challenges in the
analysis of functional and high dimensional data. In Project 1, the
investigators introduce a new operator-valued quantity to characterize the
conditional mean (in)dependence of one function-valued random element given
another, and apply the newly developed dependent metrics to do dimension
reduction for functional time series under a new framework of finite dimensional
functional data. In Project 2, the investigators explore a new dimension
reduction framework for regression models with high dimensional response, which
requires less stringent linear model assumptions and is more flexible in terms
of capturing possible nonlinear dependence between the response and the
covariates. In Project 3, the investigators develop new tests for the mutual
independence of high dimensional data via distance covariance and rank distance
covariance using both sum of squares and maximum type test statistics. Overall,
the three lines of research are all related to big data, and they touch upon
various aspects of modern statistics; the project aims to push the current
frontiers in areas including sparse principal component analysis, inference for
dependent functional data, and high dimensional multivariate analysis to another
level.