* 1607612
* Theoretical Physics of Biological Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Machta, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Theoretical physics is the search for concise mathematical models of Nature. It
has had great success in dealing with the inanimate world: we can now predict in
quantitative detail what the most sensitive experiments will observe inside the
nucleus and in the cosmos at large. By contrast, even as our ability to observe
and measure improves dramatically, the phenomena of life remain largely
unpredictable, even in their most qualitative aspects. In this project, a group
of theoretical physicists will engage with students and postdoctoral scholars in
an effort to close this gap; in short, to construct a theoretical physics of
biological systems. The proponents have explored phenomena that span the tree of
life: from metabolism in bacteria, through the determination of cell fate in
embryonic development, to coding and computation of sensory information in
brain. They have identified broad theoretical problems which cut across the
traditional biological divisions of organism and system: Do living organisms
operate near the limits set by the laws of physics as they gather and process
information? Can we learn the detailed microscopic "model" of an organism, its
"wiring diagram", from the finite set of observations we can make on how it
behaves? How do organisms set the parameters that govern their function (i.e.
how do they learn from experience)? These questions can all be given a
mathematical form which guides a search for answers in terms of general
principles, in the tradition of physics that will apply across disparate
biological domains. The time is right to bring the beautiful phenomena of life
under the powerful predictive umbrella of theoretical physics. Just as cosmology
has progressed, in roughly one generation, from wild speculation to a precise
framework for analyzing a rapidly expanding set of observations, the proponents
believe that the intimate interaction between theory and experiment can lead to
a new and deeper physics of biological systems. It is the creation of this
scientific culture, where theory and experiment are equal partners in the
exploration of life that is the fundamental intellectual merit of the project.
It is not just the boundaries of academic disciplines, but our view of
ourselves, which is at stake. A very important aspect of this project will be
the training of a new generation of physicists for whom the development of a
theoretical understanding of biological systems is a central part of their
discipline. The graduate students and postdoctoral scholars who pass through the
group will learn by example how to pursue that goal in a way consistent with the
intellectual rigor and traditions of physics. They will eventually move on to
faculty positions of their own, where they will transmit this attitude to new
generations of students. More broadly, all project personnel are deeply engaged
with new educational initiatives, addressing levels from the first year of
college to advanced PhD students, which provide a more complete guide to the
evolving, multidisciplinary intellectual landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participants in the project will assemble into subgroups to attack instances of
these problems. The individual projects will have unusual scope: as an example,
the question whether we can capture the complex statistics of biological
behavior in a learnable mathematical model can be asked in very similar terms
both of spiking retinal neurons, and of the antibody sequence repertoire of
individual zebrafish. If the answer is yes and the models have similar
mathematical structure, one will have learned something novel and deep about
what makes evolved, living, systems different from the inanimate world. Since
these questions can only be answered in the light of accurate data, the work
will involve a close partnership with many experimental groups in fields ranging
from bacteriology to human perceptual psychology. The product of these
interactions will be the design of novel experiments and the creation of novel
data analysis methods in order to address clearly formulated mathematical
questions of broad significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics, the Cellular Cluster and the Systems and Synthetic Biology in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Neural Systems Cluster
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.