* 1607949
* Entangled Photon Imaging and Microscopy for Chemical and Biological Investigations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2021
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Understanding the Brain Initiative, Professor Goodson at
the University of Michigan and his group are developing an optical technique to
enhance imaging spatial resolution with minimal damage to samples. The use of
optical microscopy has greatly progressed over the last decade. Many optical
microscopic methods have been used in materials and biological imaging as well
as chemical sensing. While these techniques hold great promise in sensitivity,
some do require high and potentially damaging light intensities in illumination.
What is now needed, is a chemical imaging technique which takes advantage of the
highly focused behavior of the two photon process, but at the same time it keeps
the peak intensity at low levels. The imaging technique under development by
Professor Goodson uses a beam of light where the quantum states of photon pairs
are linked, i.e. entangled photons. Utilizing the property of quantum
entanglement, Professor Goodson and his group probe and image molecules with
extremely high resolution and with a very small number of photons. The developed
technique subsequently enables them to study interesting biological systems such
as tissue imaging and the formation of amyloids with Alzheimer's patients. This
support from the National Science Foundation also helps to train and mentor a
diverse group of scientists (graduate students and postdoctoral students) in
areas such as chemistry, physics and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, Professor Goodson at the
University of Michigan and his research group are investigating a new approach
to chemical sensitivity through entangled two-photon absorption (ETPA)
microscopy. The entangled two-photon microscopy concept provides a breakthrough
over the classical TPA microscopy allowing 10 orders of magnitude lower
excitation intensity which is of immense importance for biological and materials
applications. The objectives of the project are to a) demonstrate the limits of
sensitivity of the ETPA microscopy at very low input flux, b) test the ETPA
microscope's ability to probe important chemical processes at very low input
flux and with enhanced spatial resolution, and c) apply the methodology to an
important chemical system illustrating the impact of the ETPA microscopy method.
The broader impact of the work: a) provides summer educational experience in
optics through the WISE program for middle school students, b) provides a
broader experience for high school students in chemistry and physics with an
emphasis on optics, and c) develops and expands a workshop for the next
generation professors who might have a strong interest in the physical sciences
including optics. The impact of this investigation also includes providing the
chemical and imaging community a new approach with important details regarding
the specifics of the methodology, materials, and theory.