* 1607486
* US-German Research Proposal: Neurocomputation in the Visual Periphery: Experiments and Models
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Ruth Rosenholtz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2021
* USD 681,746.00

Peripheral vision comprises over 99.99% of the visual field. Its strengths and
limitations strongly constrain visual perception -- what humans can see at a
glance, and the processes by which they move their eyes to piece together
information about the world. Peripheral vision differs from foveal vision in
complex and interesting ways, most importantly due to "crowding," in which
identifying a peripheral stimulus can be substantially impaired by the presence
of other, nearby stimuli. This project will examine the nature of the encoding
in visual cortex, through development and testing of a set of models of
peripheral vision. These models will be targeted at answering key questions
about the neurobiological mechanisms. The collaborating investigators, in the US
and Germany, will develop models and create a benchmark dataset of behavioral
results to be explained. The models and dataset will be made freely available,
to aid other researchers and to inform the development of applications such as
heads up displays and user interfaces. This work will provide insight into what
features are encoded in visual cortex, as well as what tradeoffs may have led
the visual system to develop that encoding. Understanding those tradeoffs may
inform computer vision which, like human vision, faces constraints on processing
capacity.

The development of new model variants will be based on insights from
neurophysiology, natural image statistics, sparse coding, and the recent success
of convolutional neural networks in artificial intelligence. The investigators
will gather benchmark behavioral phenomena far richer than existing crowding
datasets, through a combination of studying natural image tasks and model-driven
experiments. They will then compare predictions of the new models, as well as of
Dr. Rosenholtz's existing high-performing model of peripheral vision, on the
benchmark dataset. Doing so will identify the best-performing model(s), and
answer key questions about the nature of pooling computations and of non-linear
operators, and about the complexity, nature, and purpose of the features encoded
by peripheral vision.

A companion project is being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, Germany (BMBF).