* 1607643
* Workshop on Aging and Failure in Biological, Physical and Engineered Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Dervis Vural, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 31,442.00

The workshop: "Aging and Failure in Biological, Physical and Engineered Systems"
will take place in May 15-17, 2016 in Cambridge, MA and the participants will
discuss the mechanisms by which most complex systems fail. Biological organisms,
complex machines, materials, buildings, and social and economic structures loose
integrity as they age, and catastrophically fall apart. Failure is investigated
by a wide range of highly differentiated disciplines ranging from evolutionary
biodemography to solder joint reliability, each of which has established highly
differentiated research tracks, specialized language and methodology in order to
study one universal phenomenon. The purpose of this meeting is to bring these
divergent research tracks together in order to attain a unified view of failure,
and point towards a common description. This will be a follow up of the two NSF
funded aging workshops that took place for the last two years. Continuing in the
tradition of the previous two, we will invite biologists, physicists, medical
scientists, and prepare the ground for synergistic discussion. Different from
the previous two workshops, we will include reliability engineers and
evolutionary biologists. The invited speakers will deliver 20-minute
presentations. Since the number of invitees will be few, there will be plenty of
time for synergistic interaction: Session chairs will encourage short questions
during the presentation and a long discussion that follows every talk, for which
we will allocate an extra 20 min. Many students will attend the workshop from
different departments and engage in discussions with leading scientists from
this interdisciplinary field of research.

Through this workshop the participants will work towards an understanding of the
fundamental principles of aging and failure by generalizing the conclusions
drawn from specific mechanisms taking place in specific systems. By identifying
quantifiable, testable questions on how living and nonliving systems age and
fail, by establishing commonalities and differences between engineering,
physical, social and biological aging and failure, and by bringing the languages
of engineering reliability, aging biology, molecular biophysics and statistical
mechanics together (i.e. set up the foundations of a translation table between
aging and failure in living, material/physical, social and engineered systems)
we will lay forth the state of art theoretical understanding of the mechanisms
underlying aging and failure.