* 1607243
* Quantum Vortex Laboratory: Generation, Manipulation, Imaging, and Dynamics of Vortices in Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Brian Anderson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 548,696.00

At high speeds, fluid flow past an object or through a tube results in
turbulence, a chaotic state of flow characterized by unpredictable motion of the
vortices or eddies of the flow. Turbulence is ubiquitous, commonly experienced
in aircraft or watercraft, observed in rushing rivers, and may be present in
blood flow. Yet despite centuries of research on turbulence, this state of fluid
flow is one of the least understood phenomena in physics. Discovering its
physical origins, and fully characterizing its dynamics and the transition
between smooth and turbulent flows, remain significant challenges in physics.
Overcoming some of these problems is essential for reaching a deeper
understanding of how numerous aspects of our universe evolve. This NSF-funded
project experimentally tackles aspects of fluid flows related to turbulence in a
special type of fluid for which theoretical and analytical approaches have been
developed. In these fluids, called Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs), microscopic
droplets of gases cooled to temperatures of a few billionths of a degree above
absolute zero, laser light can precisely generate, manipulate, and observe
turbulence and the dynamics of the vortices that comprise turbulence. By testing
theoretical predictions, this project pushes the boundaries of our understanding
of these features of fluid dynamics as they appear in BECs, advancing an
understanding of turbulence built up from the most fundamental framework that
physicists use to describe the universe, its structure, and its
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific aim of this project is the
development of a complete understanding of quantized vortex dynamics in BECs,
superfluids for which quantum mechanics governs the dynamics of fluid flow. To
achieve this aim, a multi-faceted approach is pursued. First, the project builds
on previous work to construct a state-of-the-art microscope designed for and
dedicated to observing and measuring vortices and their dynamics directly in
BECs. Second, the transition to turbulence in a two-dimensional BEC is studied
by examining vortex generation as BECs are stirred by laser light. Results test
key theoretical results, and help establish links between quantum and classical
fluids. Third, the construction of a toolkit for on-demand creation and
manipulation of vortices in a BEC is continued, building on previous successful
methods that use moving laser beams to generate and manipulate vortices so that
specific arrangements of vortices or types of fluid flow can be created and used
on-demand in quantum fluid dynamics experiments. Finally, newly observed methods
of vortex nucleation are examined in order to more fully round out an
understanding of how vortices and turbulent fluid flows can be generated in
BECs. By exploring the dynamics of BEC vortices, this work advances a broader
understanding of quantum many-body phenomena in systems with vastly different
microscopic properties, such as superfluids, superconductors, and the cores of
neutron stars. The project relies on and promotes the scientific education and
technical training of students, keys to maintaining national scientific strength
and societal breadth and creativity.