* 1607916
* The Development of a New Instructional Approach to Teach Engineering in Middle School Science Classrooms
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Richard Crawford, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 418,000.00

The Development of a New Instructional Approach to Teach Engineering in Middle
School Science Classrooms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two overall
goals. The first goal is to create a new instructional approach that middle
school science teachers can use to teach the engineering design process. The
second goal is to learn more about how middle school students propose, support,
critique and revise design solutions. This project will result in new findings
about how middle school students learn about the engineering design process, how
they propose, support, critique and revise engineering designs; and how
different aspects of instruction support or constrain middle school student use
of disciplinary core ideas and cross-cutting concepts while engaging in the
engineering design process. This project will directly impact four teachers and
a diverse group of approximately 1000 students. Once the instructional model is
developed, it has the potential to be adopted by teachers throughout the United
States. This new approach to instruction will enable science teachers to
integrate engineering concepts and practices into any middle school science
course as prescribed by the Next Generation Science Standards - without needing
to adopt or purchase an entirely new curriculum. In addition, the project has
the potential to enhance interest in the field of engineering and to broaden the
participation of women and minorities in engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) call for middle school science teachers
to add engineering design into their curriculum so all students can learn to use
core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and engineering practices to solve problems.
This project uses a design-research mixed-methods approach. The project team
will develop, implement and revise 4 prototype engineering design tasks (EDTs)
based on a new instructional model called Argument-Driven Engineering (ADE).
Iterative improvements of the instructional model and the EDTs will be made from
analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data. This project will result in
the generation and validation of a new assessment of practices related to
engineering design, referred to as the Scenario-based Assessment of Design
(SAD). The SAD will be administered three times (pre-, mid- and post-) to track
changes in students' knowledge and skills over time. Qualitative data, including
the collection of video data of EDTs and student artifacts, will be analyzed
using iterative content analysis. This research project will also result in new
findings about: a) how middle school students propose, support, critique and
revise engineering design; b) how patterns of the these skills change over time;
and c) what features of instruction support or constrain learning of the
engineering design process. The results will be used to refine the ADE model so
that it can be used effectively by teachers who incorporate engineering design
in their classes.