* 1607411
* EAGER: The Next Frontier - Advances in Nanopore Sequencing of Ultra-long DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Susan Gerbi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The projected experiments will lead to new advances in understanding of DNA
replication and in technology development. DNA replication starts at "origins of
replication" of which there are many in all the chromosomes in a cell. There are
exquisite controls to ensure that each origin of replication is not activated
more than once per cell cycle. When cells override these regulatory controls,
regions can become re-replicated leading to gene amplification that is a
hallmark of many cancers. To understand such overrides, it is important to have
fundamental knowledge about the origins of replication themselves. Although
several methods exist to map replication origins, their results are not in full
agreement with one another. The focus of this project is to refine a new
nanopore sequencing technology using the MinION sequencing device. One future
application of the projected refinement is to provide a new method to map
origins of replication genome-wide. There are also many other important
applications as summarized below.

The project aims to advance the nascent technology of nanopore DNA sequencing to
obtain ultra-long reads, using the MinION sequencing device from Oxford Nanopore
Technologies. The projected experiments include: (i) improved preparation of
ultra-long DNA; (ii) characterizing the signal space of the nanopore device;
(iii) testing hybrid assembly methods using the MinION coupled to other methods;
(iv) direct nanopore sequencing of non-amplified, single-molecule, ultra-long
DNA with modified nucleotides as a platform for future experiments in DNA
replication and other areas. The impact of sequencing ultra-long DNA molecules
and being able to identify modified, labeled, or damaged bases is enormous and
will be transformative to many scientific subfields. Development of methodology
to obtain ultra-long MinION reads (up to megabase lengths) will dramatically
enhance the contiguity of hybrid and non-hybrid genome assemblies, and will
allow the exploration of numerous biological questions with a single molecule
perspective. Ultra-long MinION reads as well as signal space operations will
also allow researchers to discover the covariation of single nucleotide
polymorphism (snp), chromosomal rearrangements, and base modification co
variations on single molecules. There will be broad educational impact of the
research, both in classroom teaching and as laboratory training for
undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project. STEM education will
be advanced by lectures in genomics and a Genomics Club organized by the
graduate student funded by the grant. The PI will continue her track record to
broaden participation by women and underrepresented minorities, and education of
the public on biological research.