* 1607786
* Role of Chain Structure and Melt Topology in Polymer Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Rufina Alamo, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2024
* USD 918,826.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most commercial polymers are
processed into useful materials by cooling them from a high temperature. During
this process, a fraction of the long polymer molecules self-assemble in ordered
crystalline regions connected by regions where the molecules remain disordered.
The speed of the solidification process depends on the liquid phase structure of
the melt and the entanglements (topology) that long polymer molecules adopt
during heating. Molecules that retain memory of the ordered state in the melt
act as seeds to speed up the crystallization. This project addresses how the
seeded melt structure changes in polymers with short or long branches, or with
polar or non-polar branches and their role on crystallization. Studies of model
blends, and polyethylenes with pendant groups, either random or at a precise
distance will enable building of fundamental relations between molecular
structure and properties to predict the behavior of commercial complex
polyethylene materials. These studies are significant also because the great
expansion of shale gas extraction has placed the US as a very highly competitive
provider of derivatives such as polyethylenes. Hence, advances in the
understanding of the state of the melt and the crystallization of polyethylenes
are of major relevance as they could lead to improved processing technologies
and to reduced costs and energy utilization. The proposed research is also aimed
at providing learning and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, many of them underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program builds on recent
developments on the strong melt memory of crystallization of random ethylene
copolymers, and the unique layered crystallization of precision halogen
substituted polyethylenes to further address the role of chain structure in the
evolution and final crystal morphology of semicrystalline polymers with various
types of short and long-chain branching. Models for random copolymers will be
used to address: (a) the effect of branch length (ethyl to hexyl), chain
architecture (stars, H-type, comb, pom-pom), and branch polarity (acetoxy) on
melt diffusion, and self-nucleation; (b) the effect of comonomer content
distribution on co-crystallization in model blends, and the interplay between
sequence segregation and LLPS; (c) the generality of the role of sequence
selection in crystalline melt memory. A second thrust aims to advance
understanding of the evolution of the crystalline state of polyethylenes with
pendant groups placed at the same equidistant length along the backbone. Taking
advantage of model systems with pendant groups with controlled tacticity, the
origin and drive for the formation of lamellar crystallites from isotactic as
well as from atactic systems will be sought. Differences in sublamellar
structure, and crystallization kinetics are of special interest as they relate
to novel crystallites formed from ethylene-like copolymers with controlled
tacticity that are not accessible in classical random ethylene copolymers.
Molecular details at the crystal growth front will be extracted from the unique
temperature gradient of growth rate kinetics.