* 1607571
* Precision Measurement of Atomic Dipole Matrix Elements Using Tune-Out Wavelength Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Charles Sackett, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 592,409.00

Although an atom is sometimes depicted with the electrons orbiting the nucleus
like planets orbit the sun, in reality motion at the atomic scale is governed by
the laws of quantum mechanics. These say that even though the electron is a
point-like particle, it is impossible to say exactly where an electron is at any
given time. Instead, the location of an electron is spread out around the
nucleus. In order to understand an atom's properties it is necessary to know how
all its electrons are spread out. One useful set of properties that measure how
electrons are distributed are the "dipole matrix elements" (numerical values
that arise from particular mathematical constructs which help describe how the
electron distributions change when the energy of the atom is changed). Even the
dipole matrix elements cannot be measured directly, but they can be reliably
inferred from several types of experiments. Recently, a new way to obtain dipole
matrix elements more precisely has been demonstrated, called tune-out wavelength
spectroscopy. For this project, tune-out wavelength measurements will be used to
obtain improved values for several matrix elements of the rubidium atom. One
example of why these measurements are important relates to whether an atom has
"handedness," like a right-handed or left-handed glove. Theories and
measurements in nuclear physics indicate that the atomic nucleus has a
handedness. The role of this handedness in nuclear physics is very important for
understanding how matter was created in the early universe, and why the universe
looks the way it does now. It can be studied in large particle accelerators, but
doing so is difficult and expensive. In an atom, a slight amount of the
handedness is transmitted from the nucleus to the electrons. Although the effect
is small, the atomic handedness can be measured very precisely and this has been
useful for improving nuclear physics theories. However, relating the atomic
measurement to nuclear physics requires accurate dipole matrix elements. The
improved values that will be provided by this project will be useful for this
purpose, and in this way help improve our understanding of why the universe is
as it is.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tune-out wavelength spectroscopy, the atom is
illuminated by a laser beam that is tuned far from any atomic resonances. In
most cases, this causes the energy of the atom to change. The energy can either
increase or decrease, depending on the wavelength of the light. At specific
wavelengths, however, the energy change is exactly zero. The value of these
wavelengths depends on the dipole matrix elements of the atom, and by measuring
the wavelength accurately the ratios of various matrix elements can be
determined with high precision. The method used in this project to determine the
tune-out wavelength is atom interferometry. Here the overall wave function of
the atom is split into two branches that separate in space. One branch passes
through the laser, and any resulting energy change results in a phase shift of
the wave function. When the two branches are later recombined, this phase shift
can be detected. The tune-out wavelength is determined by adjusting the laser to
make the phase shift zero. A particular focus of this project will be to observe
how the tune-out wavelength depends on the polarization of the laser light. By
combining polarization-dependent measurements at a few different tune-out
wavelengths, it is possible to accurately extract several groups of small matrix
elements that are otherwise very challenging to measure or calculate. These
small matrix elements are nonetheless important, as they represent dominant
uncertainties in measurements of atomic parity violation and other atomic
properties like the dc electric polarizability.