* 1607631
* Solid-liquid transition and intermediate state formation in strongly correlated 2D systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xuan Gao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 419,159.00

Nontechnical abstract Understanding the ground states and phase transitions in
two-dimensional(2D) electronic systems with strong electron-electron
interactions has been a central unsettled problem in condensed matter physics.
In addition to the strong correlations between 2D electrons, a further challenge
in the problem is the unavoidable presence of disorder in real materials. Recent
theoretical studies suggest that novel intermediate electronic phases might
exist between the liquid and solid states in 2D systems when the interactions
between particles are strong and the disorder is weak. However, it is far from
clear whether such new intermediate states of matter exist in experiments. The
goal of this project is to provide new insights to help unraveling this
challenging problem in fundamental physics through new transport measurements on
state-of-the-art samples with the highest purity. The results obtained through
this research have broader implications to the deeper understanding of
correlated condensed matter systems in general. Moreover, the project serves as
a valuable platform to educate graduate and undergraduate students, and outreach
pre-college students on cutting edge research in condensed matter and
semiconductor physics. Student participants in the project receive hands on
training in cryogenics, low temperature experimentation, signal and data
analysis, and semiconductor processing and fabrication. These research
experiences and skills are expected to prepare young students for continuing a
successful career in either academia or industry.

Technical abstract The project aims to shed new light on the nature of strongly
correlated two-dimensional (2D) carriers in semiconductor quantum structures
through new electronic and thermoelectric transport experiments on state-of-the-
art semiconductor gallium arsenide 2D heterostructures. The scope of this
research mainly encompasses the study of the Coulomb interaction driven 2D Fermi
liquid to Wigner solid phase transition in correlated 2D hole or electron
systems. In the past, various many-body quantum liquid and solid phases of 2D
electrons have been found in the presence of a strong magnetic field. However,
very little is known in experiment about how the quantum 2D Wigner solid
transforms into the liquid phase when the magnetic field is small or absent,
despite much theoretical interests and investigations. In this project,
complementary electronic and thermoelectric (entropic) transport techniques are
employed to elucidate the 2D liquid-solid transition in strongly correlated 2D
carrier systems with weak disorder, and explore the emergence of new
intermediate phase(s) driven by Coulomb interaction effects, as predicted in a
number of theoretical studies.