* 1607646
* Reduced Basis, Symbolic Regression, and Closed Form Expressions for Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Manuel Tiglio, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

The recent detection of gravitational waves by Advanced LIGO has ushered in the
new discipline of gravitational wave astronomy. To date the only sources that
have been detected are merging black holes. However, there are many other
possible sources for gravitational waves, some known and others unknown. The
search for these sources, and how they contribute to the structure of the
cosmos, lies at the heart of this new discipline. Their detection through LIGO
relies on the development of data analysis tools that allow the extraction of
the gravitational wave signal from the interferometer background. The analysis
of LIGO data is of such complexity that new techniques are currently being
developed to cover the large parameter space spanned by potential sources. This
award supports research on how to accelerate data analysis pipelines through
application of new numerical methods that employ techniques previously developed
by the group from general mathematical principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports a systematic approach for deriving closed form approximations of
waveforms emitted by binary black hole collisions. These closed form expressions
will not sacrifice fidelity or modeling accuracy, will not perform
phenomenological fits, but instead will find closed form expressions from ab-
initio simulations of the full Einstein equations. Though the approach will be
generic, during this project only the case of two non-spinning black holes will
be considered. The goal of this project is to provide the LIGO project with a
very fast way of evaluating gravitational waveforms for data analysis. This
project will be a continuation of the group's research on surrogate and reduced
order modeling and sparse representations, with applications to gravitational
waves. It will add the additional thrust of symbolic regression through genetic
programming. The goal is to design a systematic framework for deriving closed
form expressions for gravitational waves from different types of sources. The
scope will be limited in this project to demonstrating a proof of concept using
existing surrogate reduced basis models for non-spinning black hole collisions.