* 1607023
* Stabilization of Nonlinear Systems with Uncertain Equilibrium States with Application to Energy Efficient HVAC Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Se Young Yoon, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2020
* USD 257,607.00

Compressors are the main driving components of heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems in modern buildings. The performance and efficiency
characteristics of these compressors are given by their characteristic curves,
which map the steady-state compressor pressure rise as a function of the gas
flow-rate. The peak of the characteristic curve not only determines the maximum
operating capacity/efficiency of a compressor, but it also marks the inception
point for a system instability known as compressor surge. Control methods for
surge have been studied extensively in the literature. These controllers would
allow HVAC systems to operate safely at their peak efficiency. However, a common
limitation of these surge control methods is that they require exact knowledge
of the compressor steady-state characteristics, and their effectiveness degrades
rapidly when errors are introduced to the characteristic curve. The objective of
this research project is to develop the necessary theoretical tools for this and
similar situations, and to use the developed theory to design surge controllers
for unknown or uncertain compressor characteristic curves. Analytical tools will
be developed to maximize the safe operating region of an HVAC system under the
developed controllers, and to quantify the maximum level of uncertainty in the
characteristic curve that the system can tolerate. Finally, these results will
lead to the development of a surge control method that allows HVAC systems to
operate safely and continuously at their peak energy efficiency condition, and
is robust to variations in external conditions that may affect the steady state
characteristics of the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective
of this project is to develop new control-theoretic methods for the robust
stabilization of nonlinear systems with unknown or uncertain equilibrium states.
Most methods for the analysis and control of nonlinear systems assume precise
knowledge of the equilibrium states. It is however not always possible to obtain
this information accurately when complex nonlinear dynamics are involved, due to
model uncertainties and/or system chaotic dynamics. The challenges introduced by
uncertain equilibrium states are amplified when nonlinear systems are subjected
to strict control constraints. For example, uncertainties may introduce a static
offset in the control effort, limiting the control available to compensate for
unwanted external disturbances. Furthermore, uncertain equilibrium states can
reduce the accuracy of modeling assumptions on the controlled plant, adding
further uncertainty to the open loop dynamics. These factors can significantly
reduce the domain of attraction of the steady states, even if stability is
achieved. This research will provide theoretical arguments to demonstrate the
validity of methods considered in the literature for the control of chaotic
systems with unknown steady states. Furthermore, these control methods will be
extended to incorporate new capabilities using robust and optimal control
techniques. The proposed research will offer novel control methods for
constrained systems with uncertain steady states, and optimization methods to
maximize the corresponding domains of attraction. The motivating application of
this research is active control of compressor surge to achieve increased energy
efficiency of HVAC systems. Application of the developed control methods to the
active control of surge with uncertain characteristic curves will demonstrate
the industrial relevance of the methods developed in the project.