* 1607190
* Universality and Beyond in Atoms with Large Scattering Lengths
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

The concept of reductionism in science refers to the general observation that
physical characteristics of systems at the smallest length scale often determine
macroscopic properties and phenomena. So copper wires and aluminum wires behave
differently because of the physical characteristics of the atoms of which they
are composed. Departures from reductionism are rare, but they do exist. This
project explores a breakdown of reductionism known as "universality" that is
sometimes displayed by ensembles of ultra-cold atoms. Ensembles of ultra-cold
atoms provide especially important examples of universal phenomena because they
can be controlled and probed with exquisite precision. They also provide
valuable paradigms for universality in other fields of physics, including
nuclear and particle physics, astrophysics, and condensed-matter physics.
Examples of the universal properties observed in dilute, ultra-cold gases,
independent of the species of atom employed, include the binding energies of
weakly bound clusters, the reaction rates for collisions between atoms and
clusters, and the stability or lifetime of trapped ensembles. This project will
help to interpret these results, and to predict other observable, universal
properties of ultra-cold systems.

The goal of this research project is to extend our understanding of universal
aspects of few-body and many-body systems consisting of atoms whose scattering
length is large compared to the range of their interactions. The project has
three major thrusts: (1) A recent breakthrough in calculating transition rates
from an oscillating magnetic field near a Feshbach resonance will be applied to
the breakup of paired fermions in a superfluid of fermionic atoms. The goal is
to provide motivation for experiments that would make the first direct
measurements of the pairing gap for superfluidity. (2) The first experiments on
the unitary Bose gas, which consists of bosonic atoms with infinitely large
scattering length, were carried out in the last few years. A new theoretical
approach to the unitary Bose gas will be developed based on interpolating in the
dimension of space (which is 3) using expansions around the critical dimensions
2 and 4, where the problem is simpler. (3) The simplest universal properties
correspond to the mathematical limit in which the range of the interatomic
potential is taken to zero and its strength is taken to infinity with the
scattering length fixed. Additional universal aspects can be identified by
expanding in powers of the range. Recent work simplifying the first-order range
corrections for bosonic atoms will be extended and applied to results from cold
atom experiments.