* 1607570
* Bacterial Photosynthetic Design Probed by Multidimensional Spectroscopies
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Jennifer Ogilvie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

Photosynthetic organisms employ elaborate antenna arrays to harvest solar energy
and transfer it to reaction centers with ~95% efficiency. At the heart of this
stunning efficiency is the energy landscape that provides directional ultrafast
transfer of energy between the antennae and reaction centers, and directional
charge separation within reaction centers. Recently two-dimensional electronic
spectroscopy (2DES) has emerged as a powerful method for studying energy
transfer and charge separation in photosynthesis. 2DES and other spectroscopic
measurements have suggested that key electronic-vibrational dynamics may enhance
photosynthetic efficiency. The proposed work will enhance the experimental tools
for studying energy transfer and charge separation in natural and artificial
systems. The extensive experimental characterization of bacterial photosystems
will drive the development of theoretical models of the electronic structure and
dynamics of multichromophoric assemblies. The understanding gained from purple
bacteria as a model system will inform our understanding of the more complex
plant photosystems and may guide the design of artificial light-harvesting
materials. The proposed work will provide extensive scientific training for
graduate and undergraduate students and will also support a wide range of
outreach activities. These include the organization and participation in the APS
Conferences for Undergraduate Women in Physics (CUWiPs). These meetings bring
together undergraduate women from the across the country, educating them about
career opportunities and state-of-the-art research in Physics, thereby
strengthening the network of women in Physics in the US. The proposal aims to
foster a love of physics among children from diverse age groups and backgrounds
through participation in the yearly Physics Olympiad and science exploration
days for Girl Scouts troops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to push the
frontiers of multidimensional spectroscopy to address the following open
questions about bacterial photosynthesis: i) Do key protein or cofactor dynamics
enhance energy transfer and charge separation in purple bacteria? ii) How do
purple bacteria remodel their energy-landscape to regulate energy transfer under
high and low light conditions? To address question i) bacterial reaction centers
will be studied in unprecedented detail with a palette of electronic and
vibrational multidimensional spectroscopies, providing a dynamical picture of
the pigments and surrounding protein during charge separation. Moving beyond
studies of the isolated components to address question ii) 2DES of whole cells
will be used to map the complete energy transfer and charge separation pathways
of purple bacteria: from the visible to near-infrared wavelengths with ultrafast
time resolution. The rich spectroscopic data to be obtained in the proposed
experiments will provide critical feedback to theoretical modeling of energy
transfer and charge separation in purple bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.