* 1607965
* Conference on Nonparametric Statistics-Integration of Theory, Methods and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Naisyin Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The conference Nonparametric Statistics: Integration of Theory, Methods and
Applications will be held at the University of Michigan, October 5-7, 2016. (See
http://sites.lsa.umich.edu/npworkshop2016/.) The goal of the conference is to
bring together researchers in nonparametric statistics, practitioners requiring
these methods, and graduate students interested in this area, in a relaxed and
stimulating atmosphere focused on research and applications. The development of
nonparametric methods contribute to an essential part of modern data analysis
and provide important research topics within statistics. Reduction or
elimination of overfitting, uncontrollable biases and elevated variation through
approaches supported by theoretical and numerical investigations have always
been the key exercises in the field of nonparametric statistics. Exposure to and
understanding of these methods are essential to practical applications and
education of the next-generation statisticians. NSF funding will ensure that
junior researchers are able to attend this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Michigan will host a conference on Nonparametric Statistics:
Integration of Theory, Methods and Applications, October 5-7, 2016. Plenary
speakers for the conference are Peter Bickel, Raymond Carroll, David Ruppert,
and Jane-Ling Wang. The goal of the conference is to bring together researchers
in nonparametric statistics, practitioners requiring these methods, and graduate
students interested in this area, in a relaxed and stimulating atmosphere
focused on research and applications. This award provides travel support for
junior researchers to attend the conference.