* 1607296
* Control of Rydberg Interactions and Exotic States of Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Shaffer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 472,899.00

This award supports the study of an exotic type of atom (so-called "Rydberg
atoms") in which an electron orbits the nucleus at an unusually large distance
from the nucleus . The characteristics of these atoms can be changed by changing
the orbit of the electron, making them "tunable." One of the most important
properties of these atoms is that when the electron is excited to a very large-
sized orbit using laser light, a Rydberg atom can interact with other Rydberg
atoms at macroscopic distances, on the order of microns. The interaction range
is over 1,000 times larger than for typical atom-atom interactions. These unique
ultralong-range interactions have many uses in exploring fundamental aspects of
quantum mechanics as well as applications that exploit the unique features of
quantum mechanics that can be used for quantum engineering. For example, these
interactions can be utilized to put collections of atoms into quantum
mechanically entangled states, that is, states where the collection of atoms
acts as a single "super atom" which interacts with light in an enhanced manner.
These types of states have many uses in the area of quantum information science
and quantum sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the group will
investigate how to manipulate the interactions between Rydberg atoms with
electric and magnetic fields in order to use them for quantum engineering and
fundamental studies of quantum mechanics. They will study how magnetic and
electric fields can be used to manipulate the topology of Rydberg atom-Rydberg
atom interaction potentials. These interactions will be studied using multi-
color excitation of Rydberg atoms at ultracold temperatures (T&lt;1mK), and
quantitative comparisons between theory and experiments will be carried out. The
topology of the potentials will be investigated in terms of gauge potentials.
Dephasing rates of excited super atoms will be studied. Ground state atom-
Rydberg atom molecules will also be studied. Cesium Rydberg atoms excited in an
ultracold gas can be viewed as impurities to which an electron is bound. These
artificial impurities can be used to investigate the physics of defect
scattering in a controlled fashion which is particularly important in
semiconductors. These studies can lead to investigations of highly correlated
phenomena in quantum degenerate gases such as rotons, solitons and super solids.