* 1607101
* Problems in Distributed Sensing and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 430,000.00

Current interest in distributed sensing and control has led to a very rapid
increase in the application of graph theoretic ideas to problems of analyzing
and synthesizing a variety of desired robotic team and mobile sensor group
behaviors such as swarming, rendezvousing, reaching a consensus, as well as well
as a variety of sensing and communication tasks associated with distributed
averaging, search and rescue, environmental monitoring, security, etc. While
this in-depth assault on these problems using a combination of graph theory and
system theory has been underway for about a decade, it is likely to
significantly expand in the years to come. One example of this is the resurgence
of interest in an old concept called structural controllability and its
applications to new problems involving swarming, complex social networks and
network security. Another is the explosion of interest in the development of
distributed computational procedures for addressing basic numerical problems
such as estimating parameters of a linear system, or solving a system of
possibly nonlinear algebraic equations. Still another is the recent theoretical
work by a number of individuals focused on the coordination of networks of
mobile robots and mobile sensors by means of rigidity-based formation control.
In broad terms these are the three problem areas within which we propose to
work. This project will promoting teaching, training and learning in at least
two different ways. First, graduate students involved in the project will be
expected to attend and present there results at technical meetings. Second,
project graduate students will contribute to and participate in a short course
on the topic which we envision organizing and giving towards the end of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, this project will
address distributed sensing and control on three fronts. First the task is to
characterize in graph theoretic terms a significantly more general notion of
structural controllability than the one currently being pursued. Second, task is
to develop distributed and asynchronous algorithms for solving systems of
nonlinear functional equations including para-contractions across a given
network of autonomous agents assuming limited communication between agents and
time-varying networks. The third task is to explore various algorithms for
controlling both directed and undirected rigid formations of sensors and mobile
robots in a distributed manner. The goal is to address the question of
robustness to measurement errors and parameter discrepancies among agents and
attempt to find a way to avoid the recently discovered fundamental robustness
issue with undirected formation control.