* 1607385
* Sensors for Low-Frequency Improvements in Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Last February, Advanced LIGO detected gravitational waves for the first time,
opening a new window to the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the development of new equipment to be deployed at the LIGO sites in Hanford,
WA, and Livingston, LA. This consists of a high precision inertial tilt sensor
to measure horizontal tilt independently from horizontal acceleration, which
will improve Advanced LIGO seismic isolation, enabling robust operation of the
interferometer under adverse environmental conditions. Research on tilt sensors
will have a broader impact in areas such as seismology and geophysics by
enabling measurement of tele-seismic tilts and tilt-free ground acceleration at
frequencies as low as 10 mHz. The high precision angle readouts developed for
these tilt sensors have a wide variety of applications in metrology and
precision experiments. This award not only supports the development of a device
for Advanced LIGO, but it also serves to maintain and strengthen synergistic
activities of this table-top gravity group with the gravitational wave detection
community. Importantly, this STEM research will train undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdocs in building precision mechanical
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In LIGO's transition from Detector to
Observatory, maintaining high duty cycles is a key challenge. Environmental
conditions such as high wind, microseism and earthquakes were primarily
responsible for significantly limiting the duty cycle during the first observing
run. This is due to the inability of seismometers to distinguish between low-
frequency tilt and translation, known as tilt-horizontal coupling. The ground-
tilt sensors the group has developed have been demonstrated to improve the low-
frequency seismic isolation in LIGO. Further improvement by making them smaller
and more sensitive with interferometric readouts, would allow them to be mounted
directly on the isolated platforms from which the LIGO mirrors are suspended,
enabling a stronger and direct benefit to low-frequency differential motion of
the mirrors. In addition, they may prove useful in measuring seismic tilts in
the gravitational wave-signal band between 5-30 Hz, allowing cancellation of
Newtonian noise, which is expected to limit sensitivity of aLIGO and future
detectors.