* 1607169
* Data Quality for Compact Binary Signals in the Era of Gravitational Wave Discovery
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Peter Saulson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2019
* USD 750,000.00

The Syracuse group will support the search for gravitational waves by the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), with special emphasis on
the search for signals from binary star systems consisting of black holes and/or
neutron stars. The group's research will be aimed at developing better ways to
recognize brief intervals of time when LIGO's data is of poor quality or when
one of the LIGO interferometers generates a spurious signal. This work will
improve the sensitivity of searches for new signals by increasing our confidence
that weak signals are real astronomical events, not instrumental artifacts. The
group will continue to train students and postdocs who will be tomorrow's
leading scientists. The P.I. will also support broader understanding in the
community by completing the editing of a book on the technology of gravitational
wave interferometers, and by consulting with sociologist Prof. Harry Collins as
he completes his study of the history of gravitational wave detection and hands
off the project to a new generation of scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In
support of LIGO's search for signals from compact binary systems, the group will
develop a new technique for distinguishing between genuine black hole binary
signals and instrumental transients that mimic signals, improving the
sensitivity and reliability of the search. They will improve on tools for
associating transients in auxiliary data channels with spurious binary signals
in the main gravitational wave channel. The group will also build tools for
exploring the LIGO data via audio methods, and will compile a library of
standard sound files for comparison with interesting events. They will develop
new tools for examining data quality in close to real time, in support of the
effort to link gravitational wave signals with electromagnetic observations. By
learning better ways to distinguish between genuine gravitational wave signals
and instrumental artifacts, the Syracuse group will improve the sensitivity of
LIGO's searches and increase the believability of its results. This research
will also enable instrument specialists to focus more clearly on instrumental
problems that are detrimental to searches for signals, leading to further
improved performance.