* 1607585
* The Transient Universe as Seen in Gravitational Waves by LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xavier Siemens, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,349,989.00

One hundred years after Einstein predicted that gravitational waves, ripples in
the curvature of spacetime, should exist, scientists in the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) measured the waves from a pair of black
holes that collided 1.3 billion light years from Earth. This first detection has
ushered in a new era of scientific discovery: an era in which gravitational-wave
observations are of vital importance for understanding the transient universe.
This grant supports the research activities of the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee LIGO Scientific Collaboration (UWM LSC) group. The theme is
gravitational-wave astronomy with an emphasis on activities on the critical path
for the scientific success of LIGO. The project's strongest feature is the
synergy: bringing highly-engaged faculty with a proven track record in
gravitational physics, astrophysics, data analysis, and education and outreach
together with undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs in a close
collaborative environment to deliver gravitational-wave science and to engage
the broader community in the discoveries to come. This project will convey the
excitement of this budding branch of astronomy to the community through outreach
efforts such as the UWM Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UWM LSC group will
deliver critical elements to a low-latency search for transient gravitational
waves including those produced during the coalescence of binary neutron stars
and black holes. The group will help develop and operate the data-calibration
system, an on-line search for signals from compact binary coalescence, and a
rapid parameter estimation pipeline. Rapid identification of signals is an
essential element of gravitational-wave science in the Advanced Detector Era,
and will enable multi-messenger astronomy in which observations of several kinds
(gravitational waves; electromagnetic waves; high energy particles) are
synthesized to obtain a detailed understanding of the sources of the most
cataclysmic events in the universe. Gravitational waves will reveal the inner
mechanism of gamma-ray bursts, provide a means to measure the population of
black holes and determine the channel by which massive black holes are grown,
and probe the fundamental nature of matter above nuclear densities. New ways of
measuring cosmological parameters will become available, complementing existing
observations. To this end, this award supports work that will continue to
produce gravitational-wave discoveries of binary coalescence, provide rapid sky-
localization and parameter estimation to facilitate electromagnetic follow-up
efforts, yield fast turn-around targeted searches prompted by triggers generated
by other observational facilities, obtain the nuclear equation of state by
measuring the tidal interactions of binary neutron stars just prior to their
merger, and exploit gravitational-wave observations to measure various
cosmological parameters. This award supports the integration of gravitational-
wave science into the broader field of astrophysics. The UWM LSC group excels at
educating new researchers. This project will train a new generation of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in gravitational-wave astronomy. A main
deliverable is a calibrated data set for LIGO which has immense scientific
broader impacts. In addition to being used in gravitational wave searches by
hundreds of scientists around the world, calibrated data will be distributed to
more than 250,000 Einstein@Home users in searches for gravitational waves. As
per LIGO open data policy, the data set will also be made available to the
scientific community and the public at large.