* 1607664
* RUI:  Cell Growth Laws and Quantitative Microscopy for Cancer Aggressiveness Imaging
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Min Xu, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2019
* USD 238,749.00

The project aims to develop and establish a quantitative relation between the
cell growth rate, cellular metabolism, and the cellular nuclear structure and
further evaluate its application in determination of cancer aggressiveness. Cell
growth kinetics controlled by cellular metabolism and nuclear structure will be
first obtained, which will then be tested and validated by cell line
experiments. A novel approach of snapshotting cell growth rate will be developed
through imaging ATP production and nuclear structure with quantitative phase and
chemometric microscopy. The efficacy of the approach will be assessed in
distinguishing aggressive prostate cancer from non-aggressive ones with tissue
section measurements. The interplay between function and structure is one
central problem in cancer research. This work will provide new insights into
understanding this complex interplay. Cancers, such as prostate tumors, can take
two distinct disease courses -- indolent or highly aggressive, leading to death
if not treated. Clinicians and patients daily must choose a primary treatment
modality from surgery, accompanying morbidity and compromised quality of life to
watchful waiting, risking life with delayed treatment. Accurate risk
stratification of cancer at time of diagnosis to identify those patients at high
risk is critically needed to choose the optimal treatment strategy, enable
higher life quality for the patient, and reduce the economic burden. The
quantitative growth rate as an objective marker for cancer aggressiveness will
address this urgent need. The funding will also support the PI to continue his
effort in integrating research and education in a primary undergraduate
university, and further the cutting-edge research on developing optical
techniques for quantifying the static structure and dynamic processes in
biological systems and revealing physics of cancer. Undergraduate students will
be recruited from Physics, Engineering and Biology majors. Premedical and
minority students will be encouraged to participate. Special emphasis will be
placed on nurturing and training future scientists and engineers from
undergraduate students. Dissemination of research results and technical transfer
will be actively pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a minimal
coarse-grained model expressing explicitly the cell growth rate in terms of
cellular metabolism and nuclear structure. This model captures the main features
of the growth of a cell, especially in the context of energy fluxes and DNA
replication, with the purpose of understanding the complex processes of cell
reproduction in a simple yet experimentally verifiable way. This should shed
quantitative insight into the underlying mechanisms of cell growth. The
quantitative growth rate as an objective marker for cancer aggressiveness and
risk stratification will find wide applications in cancer screening, diagnosis,
and decision making in cancer treatment.