* 1607973
* GOALI: Precursors for the Atomic Layer Deposition of Metallic Films
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 474,999.00

Thin metallic films of very high quality are required in the manufacture of
computer chips and other high technology devices, but current methods for
growing these materials are not adequate to the task at hand. Dr. Winter of
Wayne State University and his industrial collaborator, Dr. Ravi Kanjolia of
SAFC Hitech, are investigating new molecules and chemical reactions that can
enable the growth of thin metal films. They are especially interested in
understanding how changes in the structures of the molecules affects their
ability to fabricate high purity films. The team employs a technique known as
atomic layer deposition which allows metal films to be grown with precise
thicknesses and spatial resolution, even in narrow and deep features required in
the manufacture of computer chips. The fundamental understanding gained in this
project advances the future design of new molecules to grow films and create new
devices. Dr. Winter's research program attracts students at many levels, ranging
from undergraduates to postdoctoral fellows, and has broader impact in educating
scientists for a well-trained future workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research program, Dr. Winter of Wayne State University and his industrial
collaborator Dr. Ravi Kanjolia of SAFC Hitech are supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop new
precursors and deposition methods for the growth of nickel, cobalt, manganese,
titanium, aluminum, and magnesium thin films by atomic layer deposition (ALD).
The project entails the synthesis and characterization of metal silyl complexes
with optimized atomic layer deposition precursor properties, solution reactions
of the metal silyl complexes with complementary metal complexes or organic
reducing agents. The researchers identify reactant pairs that afford metal
powders, transform the solution reactions to atomic layer deposition processes,
explore of selective metal growth on various substrates, and grow
titanium/aluminum alloy films by atomic layer deposition. This project is in
collaboration with SAFC Hitech, which enables advanced atomic layer deposition
precursor evaluation, large scale precursor synthesis, advanced growth trials,
and technology transfer to industry. The broader impacts involve training
graduate and undergraduate students, enhancing research and education
infrastructure by bringing together a collaborative group under the GOALI
program that includes Wayne State University and SAFC Hitech personnel,
industrial internships for Wayne State University students at SAFC Hitech, and
the potential societal benefits of having new precursors and atomic layer
deposition processes for electropositive metal thin films.