* 1607502
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Vector-State Estimation and Control for Linear Systems with Additive Heavy-Tailed Distributions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Jason Speyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/2020
* USD 360,000.00

The bell shaped curve, known technically as the Gaussian probability density
function (pdf), has been a central element in engineering and financial
algorithms that process data and automate a desired operation. For example, in
air traffic control the distance and bearing to an aircraft in a dynamic
environment is measured by an active radar. This measurement is not exact,
having an uncertainty or error in its value. This uncertainty is not described
well by the Gaussian pdf because the portion of the bell shaped curve far from
zero, called the tail of the pdf, is far smaller than the radar data suggests:
the Gaussian bell shaped curve is known to have a light, rapidly (exponentially)
decaying tail, while radar data is said to have a heavy tail. It has been well
recognized that reliance on the Gaussian pdf can be dangerous (reference: The
Black Swan by Nessim Taleb). Many dynamic systems in engineering, economics,
biology, financial movements, earthquakes, atmospheric turbulence, etc., are
poorly described by Gaussian pdfs and better described by heavy tailed ones.
However, majority of current data processing algorithms are based on the
Gaussian pdf assumption mainly because it leads to tractable, real-time
implementations. The newly proposed theory is a paradigm shift, which proposes
new algorithms based on a heavy tailed pdf, known as the Cauchy pdf. The result
is a more accurate and reliable automated system, which even for probabilistic
models that are not Cauchy has demonstrated comparable performance to the
Gaussian when the probabilistic environment is such. Since extreme data is
likely, the estimator is rich in structure and hence is computationally more
intense than its Gaussian counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a more
technical viewpoint, a new class of implementable real-time vector-state
estimators and stochastic controllers for linear dynamic systems with additive
heavy-tailed Cauchy process and measurement noises are to be developed. The
estimation methodology for this vector-state, linear dynamic system with
additive Cauchy noises was addressed by developing a recursion for the analytic
measurement update and propagation of the character function of the unnormalized
conditional probability density function (ucpdf) of the state given the
measurement history. Through a spectral transformation, the character function
of the ucpdf is used explicitly in the development of stochastic controllers,
based on a model predictive structure. These results entail significant
analytical and numerical complexities due to the rich analytic form of the
character function of the ucpdf, which produces a sum of terms that grows at
each measurement update. The primary goal of the proposed study is to determine
implementable real-time vector-state estimators and stochastic controllers by
using simplifications that are due to the fundamental structure of the
algorithms. Approximations that will conserve the basic structure of the
character function are sought, and will be implemented on current computational
hardware, such as graphic processing units. This work was performed with a
colleague at the Technion under a Bi-national Science Foundation (BSF) Grant.
This international collaboration will continue under the NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF and
BSF grants.