* 1607318
* Design Principles for the Growth of High-quality Binary and Ternary Tin Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Wayne Gladfelter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 433,000.00

Non-technical Description: Metal oxides play important roles in many critical
applications such as photovoltaics, gas sensors and coatings for architectural
glass. These applications require that thin oxide films be doped with small
amounts of a different chemical element that improves the electrical
conductivity of the film without changing its structure. For example, fluorine-
doped tin oxide is used as an electrically conductive coating on glass in
photovoltaic cells and in gas sensors. When tin oxide combines with an equal
amount of barium oxide, a ceramic compound known as barium stannate forms. It
has a more complex structure known as a perovskite, and its properties are
extremely dependent on the perfection of the film. Initial experiments on barium
stannate demonstrate remarkable electrical conductivities that can enable the
development of a new class of microelectronics based on metal oxides. Depositing
films with exact elemental ratios that are free of defects is difficult. This
research studies the fundamental factors controlling the deposition of high
quality tin oxide and barium stannate films. An important broader impact of this
combined experimental and computational research is the production of videos
that can be used to explain to students and the general public the events
involved in the deposition processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Through a combination of experimental and theoretical/computational
techniques, the researchers are identifying fundamental factors at the atomic
and molecular level of detail that influence the rates and quality of crystal
growth in binary and ternary tin oxides. Mechanistic knowledge gained from this
work is aiding in the design of new molecular precursors and deposition
processes. In addition, a separate chemometric approach offers a potentially
powerful tool for rapid in-silico screening of alternative precursors with the
goal of prioritizing experiments to focus on molecular precursors having a high
likelihood of utility. An initial group of six tin precursors, including metal
alkyls, amides and nitrates, is being used to deposit tin oxides in an ultrahigh
vacuum reactor. Growth rates, measured in situ by using time-dependent intensity
oscillations in the reflection high energy electron diffraction peaks, are
studied as a function of substrate temperature, precursor and oxygen pressure,
aiming to elucidate the deposition kinetics to be used as the basis for
designing depositions of ternary tin oxides having the perovskite structure. In
these depositions, molecular precursors are used as the tin source and effusion
cells are used as sources for the group-two elements with the ultimate goal to
understand the underlying design principles for chemical precursors that lead to
self-regulating stoichiometry control.