* 1607749
* High Precision Casimir Force Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Roya Zandi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 459,022.00

According to quantum theories, whose many predictions have now been verified
with great precision, empty space is not empty but is teeming with particles
such as photons (particles of light) which pop into and out of the vacuum and
are referred to as virtual photons or zero point photons. The presence of these
zero point photons has been verified in experiments such as those which measure
the "Lamb shift," a small but significant shift in the energy levels of hydrogen
atoms (Nobel Prize 1955). Virtual particles are not just concepts of esoteric
interest to physics but are central to biological life and chemistry as they
play a role in the van der Waals forces that are responsible for the strength of
cell walls and determine the preferred structure of proteins, among many other
effects. They also contribute to a large component of the frictional and
adhesive forces between neutral objects. While the importance of the virtual
photons is clear, exactly how they interact with real objects and lead to such
forces is not fully understood. In this project the principal investigators
study this directly by comparing precision measurements and theory of the
Casimir force, the macroscopic long distance version of the van der Waals force
which predicts a force between two uncharged ideal metal plates placed in empty
space. The Casimir force can be thought of as the net force from the photons
bouncing off the plates on reflection or as an interaction of the charge and
current fluctuations induced by the same photons. If real photons such as the
thermal photon emission from the interacting objects are also present, they will
contribute to the Casimir force in the same manner. One of the most basic
questions is how zero point photons interact with real material objects and
whether the interaction is different from that of real photons. For one, it has
to be different with regard to the net energy absorption. Real photons interact
with all materials to transfer energy and heat (for example, heating of an
object left in the sun). But zero point photons cannot do the same, as that
would lead to a net creation of energy. This project will look for potential
differences between real and zero point photons by performing precision
measurements of the Casimir force with different materials and at different
temperatures. Different materials have different reflections and thus different
Casimir forces. Also all materials at non-zero temperature emit real photons
which can be related to their temperature and material properties. By using
different materials, the principal investigators will vary the ratio of
contribution of the real photons to the zero point photons and thus be able to
tease out any differences in their interaction. The scientific impact is a
fundamental understanding of the nature of zero point photons. The technological
impact will be in the design of novel micro electromechanical (MEM) devices. As
the Casimir force exceeds normal electromagnetic and gravitational effects in
MEMs operating with submicron scale features, there is a real need to understand
these effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At room temperature and plate separations
below 1 micron, the Casimir force comes overwhelmingly from zero point photons.
As the peak of the Planck thermal emission spectrum is around 7 microns, one
intuitively expects that the additional thermal photon contribution adds to the
force as separation increases, but with material absorption, the thermal photon
contribution is surprisingly repulsive up to 6 microns. The case of two objects
at different temperatures is fascinating, as the force can be repulsive,
oscillatory or zero. In this case the critical contribution is from the near-
field thermal emission, which is many orders of magnitude larger than that
expected from the Planck thermal emission spectrum. The principal investigators
will also develop a new experimental configuration to improve the precision of
the experiments: instead of using two plates, a sphere-plate arrangement will be
used to avoid issues with keeping two plates perfectly parallel. Two methods
will be used: (i) measurement of the Casimir force gradient through the
resonance frequency shift of a cantilever; and (ii) difference Casimir force
measurement between a surface and vacuum using periodically patterned deep
trenches which drive a cantilever into resonance with a large amplitude which
can then be detected. Measured forces will be compared to the developed
scattering theories relevant to the different experimental configurations to
understand the roles of the zero point and thermal photons.