* 1607606
* Evolutionary Dynamics and Diversity in High Dimensions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Daniel Fisher, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 900,000.00

Extensive DNA sequencing has revealed a tremendous amount of genetic diversity
within species, including fine-scale diversity within local populations of
single bacterial species in nature, as well as in populations evolved from a
single clone in the laboratory. Yet the causes and statistical properties of
this diversity are far from understood, with the evolutionary processes of
mutation, recombination, selection, stochastic fluctuations, and spatial
dispersal all playing roles, as well as the ecological interactions between
subtypes and changing environments. The complexities of the organisms and
environments mean that the eco-evo dynamics takes place in high-dimensional
space. The primary goal of this project is to study various aspects of the
evolutionary and ecological dynamics focussing on the statistical properties of
the diversity, including aspects not previously studied, that these give rise
to. This will be done by developing and analyzing simple models, some rough
approximations of the actual processes and others abstract caricatures that
endeavor to make use of the high-dimensional aspects to extract general
features. Laboratory experiments and data from natural microbial communities,
some of which the PI has been and will continue to be involved with, will
motivate some of the modeling and the predictions will be compared with
sequencing and other data. The theory to be developed on the statistical
consequences of genetic hitchhiking on selection elsewhere in the genome has the
potential to enable better use of human genetic diversity data to infer
evolutionary history, and other aspects, of human populations. The educational
impacts include development of courses and curricula bringing together biology
and the quantitative sciences as well as training of women students and
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better theory on the interplay between various
sources of diversity and their observable consequences will advance both
qualitative and quantitative understanding of short term microbial evolution.
The project will focus on identifying statistical properties of genetic
diversity that can most effectively distinguish between scenarios for
evolutionary history and ecology when the phenotypic differences are subtle
enough that they cannot be readily observed. This will enable more effective use
of DNA sequencing data and motivate which types of data would be most
informative for future studies. Likewise, it will will help motivate which
laboratory experiments that combine evolutionary and ecological aspects
experiments might shed most light on these complex processes. The modeling and
analysis will involve developing some new statistical dynamical and asymptotic
methods, as well as exploring the potential of crude caricature models to
explore scenarios and develop intuition.