* 1607416
* Predicting How Fluid-Solid Transitions in Cancer Tumors Help Govern Invasion and Metastasis
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2020
* USD 686,366.00

Two important issues that arise in clinical treatment of carcinomas are 1)
identification of tumor boundaries to guide surgical resection and 2)
identification of biomarkers that accurately predict the
invasiveness/aggressiveness of carcinomas in individual patients. The work in
this proposal will address both of these issues using ideas that are different
from yet complementary to ones currently being explored in cancer biology.
Specifically, the PIs will identify the mechanical state of the tumor and use
that information to quantify the mechanisms that are responsible for tissue
cohesion and boundary maintenance. This will allow them to develop structural
order parameters such as cell shape, tissue stiffness, or adhesion molecule
expression that better delineate tissue boundaries for future use by
pathologists or clinicians. The PIs will also test the conjecture that in
combination with their theoretical framework, measurements of tissue fusion
experiments or distributions of cell stiffness from primary tumor samples can
serve as very accurate mechanical biomarkers for cancer aggressiveness. In
addition, the proposed work will broaden participation in the interdisciplinary
field of biophysics as the PIs will train a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdocs, as well as organize conferences and schools that
provide professional development opportunities for a large number of young
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a physical barrier called the
basement membrane initially encapsulates many primary tumors, tumor boundaries
are often maintained even when cells break through that barrier. The mechanical
and biochemical mechanisms that maintain and regulate these boundaries are
poorly understood. Together, the PIs have very recently developed and
experimentally verified a theoretical framework that for the first time explains
fluid-to-solid transitions in confluent tissues, where there are no gaps between
cells. There is mounting evidence that such transitions also occur in cancer
tissues. Because fluid-like and solid-like tissues have different mechanisms for
migration, self-organization, and cohesion, this proposal will augment and test
a theoretical framework for jamming for cancer tissues and investigate how
fluid-to-solid transitions affect tumor boundaries. In particular, the PIs will
extend their framework to make testable, quantitative predictions for how cancer
tissue boundaries evolve in different experimental geometries, and develop new
theoretical techniques for predicting how mechanical heterogeneity can lead to
rigidity percolation and self-organization of stream-like flows of soft cells. A
second new technique will couple tissue models to extra-cellular matrix models
to understand how the mechanical properties and motility modes of escaping cells
are influenced by the mechanical properties of both the primary tumor and
surrounding substrate.