* 1607495
* OP: Quantum Phases and Dynamics of Bose-Einstein Condensates with Artificial Gauge Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Peter Engels, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 586,630.00

This project investigates fundamental laws of nature predicted by quantum
mechanics, one of the cornerstones of modern physics. The predictions of quantum
mechanics are very counterintuitive and unfamiliar compared to the experiences
of everyday life, but they play a dominant role when spatial dimensions get
small, e.g. at length scales reached using modern nanofabrication or computer
chip fabrication techniques, and on atomic scales. Conducting experiments on the
nanoscopic length scale poses severe technical difficulties, but an alternative
approach exists: the same laws of quantum mechanics can also be studied when a
gas of atoms is cooled down to temperatures near absolute zero. At these
temperatures, fundamental quantum lengths become larger and details about these
ultracold quantum gases can be imaged in a custom microscope, allowing their
properties to be examined in very flexible ways using tools from the realm of
atomic physics. The particular predictions investigated in this project concern
a property called spin-orbit coupling. In the vast majority of existing
electronic devices, the transport of electrically charged particles (i.e.,
electrons) is exploited to perform a device function. However, electrons have an
additional property called spin, which can be pictured as a fast spinning motion
akin to that of a spinning top. The orientation of this rotation can also be
used to perform a device function, leading to "spintronic" devices. Spin-orbit
coupling denotes an interplay between this spinning motion and the linear flow
of particles that constitutes a conventional current. It is the basic building
block of many proposed future devices and of advanced materials with exotic
properties. The underlying physics are rather complex, and the experiments of
this project provide an important test bed with which new concepts are explored.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the recent years, immersing ultracold atoms into
suitably tailored laser beams has emerged as a powerful tool to investigate
quantum dynamics. The different hyperfine states coupled by the lasers can be
considered orientations of a "pseudo" spin, so that absorption and emission of a
photon constitutes a spin flip. At the same time, due to momentum conservation,
the atom's motion is changed when a photon is absorbed or emitted. As a result,
the pseudospin and the motion of an atom become coupled in a laser-driven
transition, in analogy to spin-orbit coupling known from condensed matter
physics. A suitable dressing of atoms with laser light can also lead to
artificial gauge fields and artificial magnetic and electric fields, so that
charged-particle behavior can be investigated with neutral atomic quantum gases.
Furthermore, the dispersion relation of the atoms can be modified to exhibit
intriguing double-well structures showing roton-like minima. Over the previous
grant period, such techniques have been applied to a rubidium Bose-Einstein
condensate to investigate quantum phases and quantum dynamics in spin-orbit
coupled condensates. Capitalizing on the insights gained and technological
developments performed in the previous grant period, this project will explore
new frontiers that challenge current theoretical descriptions. Aspects include
novel quantum phases induced by spin-orbit coupling and by the interplay with
optical lattices, as well as the dynamics of solitons in a spin-orbit coupled
environment and topological structures in higher dimensions.