* 1607922
* In-situ transmission electron microscopy of microstructure formation during laser irradiation induced irreversible transformations in metals and alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jorg Wiezorek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 503,435.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity develops scientific
understanding of the formation of microstructures in multi-component metallic
materials during solidification under far-from-equilibrium conditions. Binary
and ternary model alloys will be studied using unique electron microscopy in
conjunction with characterization of the microstructures. Direct correlation of
local features in the solidification microstructure with the conditions of their
formation will deliver experimental data sets unobtainable with other approaches
that are suitable for validation of predictions from competing theoretical
models of alloy rapid solidification. The research enhances scientific
understanding of microstructure formation during solidification in complex
alloys and contributes to the development of techniques for nano-scale resolved
studies of materials. Understanding of microstructure formation during
processing of engineering materials is a fundamental challenge of the field of
materials science and engineering (MSE). It enables identification of strategies
for property tailoring for optimal material performance in a technological
application. Solidification is ubiquitous in fabrication of metallic materials,
which are particularly critical to energy generation and transmission, advanced
transportation, biomedical and information technologies. Research results will
be emanated by journal publication and presentations at conferences. Integration
with instructional resources and outreach module development will enhance the
MSE undergraduate curriculum. Modules for targeted outreach will be developed
collaboratively with student teams and sustain improved MSE outreach efforts at
the University of Pittsburgh. Future members of the US science, technology,
engineering and mathematics workforce will receive research training, advanced
science and engineering education, leadership and mentoring opportunity.
Collaboration with the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory team provides
synergy for project resources and multi-faceted professional preparation outside
of academia. The activity will positively impact engineering education, promote
lifelong learning, broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and advance the scientific knowledge of transformations in metallic alloys under
technologically relevant non-equilibrium
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solidification is a ubiquitous and fundamental process in
materials fabrication. Under extreme conditions arising in rapid solidification
processing the migration of solid/liquid interfaces is driven far-away from
equilibrium and kinetic factors can become dominant over thermodynamic factors
in determining the final microstructure. We use the movie-mode dynamic
transmission electron microscope (MM-DTEM) for nano-scale spatio-temporal
resolution in situ imaging observations and diffraction measurements of rapid
solidification transformations in alloy thin films. Complementing the in situ
studies with quantitative post-mortem micro-characterization delivers direct
correlation of local features in the solidification microstructure with the
conditions of their formation during the irreversible transformation under-far-
from-equilibrium rapid solidification. Focusing on concentrated binary Al-Cu and
Al-Ag alloys, and for ternary Al-Cu-Ag alloys the research will deliver accurate
global and locally resolved information on the transformation interface,
including average and local velocity, changes in these velocities, and the
morphology associated with changes in crystal growth modes. Post-mortem analyses
of solidification microstructures provide compositional gradients, crystal
structures, as well as the local arrangements, size, shape and composition of
the constituent phases, which may differ from those that would form at or near
equilibrium conditions. The use of thin film alloy specimens enables study of
rapid solidification transformation microstructure formation for unexplored
regimes of composition (e.g. hypereutectics in Al-Cu) and very large
transformation rate, suitable to elucidate details of transitions to banded
morphology and partitionless alloy crystal growth for instance. Effects of
atomic size misfit, faceting tendencies, chemical ordering and interfacial
coherency, as well as Ag addition effects on two-phase solidification
microstructure formation will be determined using Al-Cu and Al-Ag alloys Al-Cu-
Ag ternaries. The proposed research will deliver unique experimental data sets
and insights suitable to evaluate current rapid solidification models and will
enhance scientific understanding of microstructure formation in solidification
of multi-phase alloy systems.