* 1607132
* Searches for Astrophysical Neutrino Sources with IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Naoko Kurahashi Neilson, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2020
* USD 472,616.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena. This award will provide
funding for an astroparticle neutrino program at Drexel University. The goal is
to resolve neutrino sources by developing new techniques and analyses to be
applied to a new analysis in the southern sky, a hemisphere that has
traditionally been a challenge for IceCube because of backgrounds created in the
atmosphere reaching the detector without the Earth to act as a shield (as is the
case for the northern sky studies).

The IceCube experiment is well suited for making a broader impact given its
geographical location and the diverse yet accessible science topics it covers.
The program outlined here will continue to provide a wide range of opportunities
for undergraduate research. The PI will continue her mentoring efforts through
the physics department, and external groups such as the Philadelphia chapter of
the Association for Women In Science. She has a long record of commitment to
public outreach that will be applied to the many opportunities that Drexel
University and the greater Philadelphia region offer.

The group is planning an innovative approach to perform the most sensitive
search of Galactic sources to date. It will also perform two new analyses: one
focused on measuring the large scale cosmic ray anisotropy in the northern sky
using atmospheric neutrinos, and another on testing a high-energy neutrino
emission model from the cores of Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs). The PI's longer
term interest is to develop neutrino astronomy so that neutrinos can become an
integral part of multi-messenger astronomy.