* 1607709
* Gravitational-Wave Inference from Binary Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

In the coming years, beyond the first direct gravitational-wave detection that
was announced in February 2016, LIGO observations will provide uniquely reliable
answers to some of the most long-standing questions in astrophysics: e.g., What
are the masses of black holes in binary systems formed in nature? What is the
engine powering short-hard gamma-ray bursts? What is the maximum neutron star
mass and what does it imply for matter at extreme densities? How fast do black
holes spin? Can we distinguish between different astrophysical environments that
form binary compact objects (black holes or neutron stars)? How do black-hole
masses evolve with redshift and what can we learn about the delay times between
their formation and their merger? The research supported by this grant couples
gravitational-wave physics to applied mathematics and astrophysical modeling.
The work focuses on developing a concrete framework for the processing of
detections of binary compact object mergers by Advanced LIGO. The goals are to
extract the maximal available astrophysical information for binaries with
compact objects with any mass and spin configuration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the following two main research projects are
targeted: (i) physical parameter estimation for compact-object coalescence
events using advanced sampling methods, targeting the acceleration of parameter
estimation simulations and results, using waveforms of maximal physical realism
including numerical-relativity waveforms, accounting for non-Gaussian noise, and
for improvements from electromagnetic counterpart detections; (ii) the
calculation of astrophysical models of binary compact objects detected by
Advanced LIGO and the use of LIGO observations to constrain such models.
Furthermore, the involvement in public outreach activities is intended to
strengthen the connection between astronomy and gravitational wave physics, by
focusing on projects that explain the formation of the sources of these waves to
the public.