* 1607637
* Physics and Applications of Cooperative Effects in Nonlinear and Quantum Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Susanne Yelin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 09/30/2019
* USD 270,000.00

A dense collection of atoms can display collective phenomena which are
fundamentally different from those in dilute samples. An example is super-
radiance, where an ensemble of atoms collectively interacts with a specific
light field. While recognized long ago, this topic has gained importance over
the last few years. Many areas of fundamental research, such as quantum
information science, and of applications, such as the construction of accurate
atomic clocks, now utilize collective properties of dense ensembles. Density
effects can be detrimental. Increasing the interaction strength between atoms
can destroy the coherent response of the atoms to external stimuli, which is
necessary for quantum computers or precise clocks. The goal of this project is
to (i) find and understand density-dependent collective effects and their
consequences, (ii) to investigate methods to either mitigate or isolate the
effects in a way to improve experimental control of the ensembles, and (iii) to
research the various ways in which such effects can enable new technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic questions will be studied regarding collective
effects in cooperative media, such as: Do super-radiant effects depend on
density or optical depth? What exactly is the role of the exchange interaction?
What makes driven cooperative systems special? Is super-radiance fully described
by pairwise correlations, and for which systems are other approximations needed?
In order to achieve these goals, new analytical and numerical methods will be
developed. In addition, the particular effects that will be investigated in this
project include induced and spontaneous collective line shifts, spin and light
field "squeezing" and entanglement. In addition, statistics and nonlinearities
of the dynamic Casimir effect will be compared to the collective effects of
super-radiant systems. Most of these projects will include collaboration with
experimental efforts.