* 1607156
* Measurement and Control in Open Quantum Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Kater Murch, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 319,528.00

According to quantum mechanics, particles do not have definite properties such
as position and momentum, but are instead described by a "complex valued
wavefunction" which describes them mathematically in terms of probabilities. The
wave nature of quantum particles means that these particles can exist in
superpositions of seemingly disparate states, for example a quantum particle
could be in two places at once, or heading in two different directions, or
occupy a superposition of two different energy levels. The evolution of this
wavefunction obeys the Schrödinger equation which was formulated in 1925. Since
its formulation, the Schrödinger equation has been applied to understand the
properties of atoms and molecules and the basis for chemistry and materials.
Yet, the Schrödinger equation only applies to isolated quantum systems. If one
is to measure the properties of a quantum particle with suitable precision, a
definite answer may result even if the particle is in a superposition of states.
Thus the act of measurement collapses the wavefunction from an initial
superposition to a definite state. This collapse process cannot be described by
the Schrödinger equation and reconciling the evolution of measured "open"
quantum systems with the theory has been a topic of intense debate and research
since the origins of quantum theory. The goal of this project is to deepen our
understanding of quantum measurement and to harness the measurement interaction
to control the evolution of quantum particles. The approach will use microscopic
superconducting circuits as artificial atoms and the interaction of these atoms
with microwave light to create open quantum systems. The team will conduct a
series of experiments that explore the measurement process and how measurement
can be used to control quantum evolution, an important component of emerging
quantum-based technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize
fabricated quantum systems (superconducting artificial atoms) and the physics of
cavity quantum electrodynamics to create systems with unprecedented control of
the quantum environment. The team will undertake a series of experiments that
explore the physics of quantum measurement, quantum control, and fundamental
symmetries. The first experiment examines the boundary between quantum and
classical information. A few photon signal will be entangled with the energy
states of an artificial atom and then controllably amplified (or squeezed) with
a superconducting parametric amplifier, enlarging the Hilbert space of the few
photon pointer state. A second amplifier will then be used to probe the
resulting entanglement between the amplified pointer state and atom. The second
experiment examines the process of radiative decay and how detection of
spontaneously emitted photons can be used to control the evolution of the atomic
states. A parametric amplifier will be used to perform homodyne measurement of
radiation emitted from a quantum emitter. The team will study how the choice of
homodyne measurement angle can be used to steer the evolution of the emitter's
state. The third project will create a system of two artificial atoms that
exhibits space-time inversion symmetry to study the parity-time symmetry
breaking phase transition. The parity-time symmetric system will be created
through quantum reservoir engineering, inducing loss for one atom and gain for
the other atom. The steady states of the system will be probed through
spectroscopy and quantum state tomography as a function of the coupling between
the two atoms.