* 1607835
* US-French Research Proposal: Hippocampal Layers: Advanced Ccomputational Anatomy Using Very High Resolution MRI at 7 Tesla in Humans
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Thomas Henry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 573,342.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plays a pivotal role in the evaluation of brain
disorders by allowing clinicians to visualize brain alterations in vivo. For
instance in focal epilepsies, it allows to detect lesions that cause seizures,
which can subsequently be treated surgically in patients who present drug-
resistant epilepsy. This ability to unveil lesions is crucial to achieve
favorable surgical outcome and may allow limiting or avoiding invasive
explorations with intracerebral electrodes. However, standard MRI techniques
have a limited spatial resolution, which results in limited sensitivity to
detect subtle structural alterations. This is particularly true in the case of
the hippocampus, a relatively small cerebral structure frequently involved in
adult and adolescent temporal epilepsy, as well as in other brain disorders.
Indeed, the hippocampus is composed of a complex set of internal structures
whose typical size is below the resolution of conventional MRI. This project
aims to develop new techniques to image the hippocampus, by combining cutting
edge MRI acquisition techniques, taking advantage of higher signal to noise
ratio at a ultra high magnetic field of 7 Tesla, with advanced mathematical
modeling techniques. This new approach will be evaluated in patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy. It is expected that exploiting to their full extent very
high-resolution structural MR images will allow unveiling cerebral lesions
currently undetected in conventional radiological evaluation. Furthermore, by
providing unprecedented insight into hippocampal structures, this research will
help developing new patient classification and new rationale to guide
therapeutic choices in temporal lobe epilepsy. The proposed approach is also
expected to provide critical information to advance our understanding of other
brain disorders, including Alzheimer's disease and depression, which are major
public health concerns. Ultimately, this will pave the way to new biomarkers for
diagnosis and prognosis, and help developing new
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop
a coherent mathematical framework for computational anatomy of the internal
structures of the hippocampus based on cutting edge MRI acquisition techniques
at 7 Tesla. The project introduces a new approach to move computational anatomy
beyond morphometry by integrating both volumetric MRI data and shape into a
single framework. To achieve this goal, the researchers will first develop MRI
acquisition techniques at 7 Tesla to perform high-resolution and multi-contrast
imaging, including new technical developments that will facilitate the use of
these advanced methods in clinical settings, for adults and teenagers patients.
The second part of the project will be devoted to the development of advanced
computational techniques to model multi-contrast 7 Tesla MRI. Such techniques
will be based on recent mathematical advances allowing to model multi-scale
geometric deformations and to combine shape and intensity information in a
coherent framework. Finally, the developed approaches will be applied to 7T MRI
acquisition of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. To that purpose, adult (in
the US) and teenagers (in France) patients will be studied with 7 Tesla MRI.
This should enable to demonstrate the utility of the developed techniques to
unveil lesions that are undetectable by conventional means. This should result
in important benefits for patients with focal epilepsy. Beyond the present
project, the results should have an important impact on the diagnosis and
treatment of brain conditions in which the hippocampus plays a key role,
including Alzheimer's disease, depression and schizophrenia. A companion project
is being funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).