* 1607449
* Dynamical, Strong-field Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Frans Pretorius, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

The research goals of this project are focused on understanding the strong-field
regime of Einstein's theory of general relativity. This encompasses both
astrophysical and theoretical aspects of general relativity. On the
astrophysical side, the main effort is numerical simulations of binary black
hole, black hole-neutron star and binary neutron star collisions. This is
important to support the field of gravitational wave astronomy recently ushered
in by LIGO's detection of the collision of two black holes. Numerical models of
such sources are needed to aid in detection, and are crucial to decipher details
of observed signals. On the theoretical side, there are many outstanding
questions about the nature of spacetime in extreme situations. The one that will
be the main focus here is the ultra-relativistic limit of black hole collisions;
namely, what happens when two black holes collide at the speed of light.
Speculation about the outcome began in the 1960's when Penrose used this
scenario to help formulate his cosmic censorship conjecture, stating all
singularities in spacetime are hidden behind event horizons. Numerical methods
are now giving us the tools to definitively tackle this regime of general
relativity. The pursuit of these projects will involve graduate students,
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. They will be trained to do leading
scientific research, become knowledgeable in corresponding areas of physics, and
adept in high-performance computing and numerical methods. These skills are
invaluable to many professions, and would thus also benefit and further the
development of those students and postdocs that subsequently wish to pursue
careers outside academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific list of gravitational
wave source modeling projects that will be pursued are (1) understanding the
consequences of neutron star spin in binary neutron star and black hole-neutron
star mergers, (2) improving estimates of heavy element yields and corresponding
electromagnetic counterpart emission in collisions involving neutron stars when
there is significant ejected material, (3) beginning to include neutrino and
radiation transport, and improving our models of magnetic fields in our
evolution code, relevant for mergers involving neutron stars, (4) continued
development of the parameterized post Einsteinian (ppE) framework for eccentric
binaries to allow such events, if observed, to be used to test general
relativity, and (5) explore binary mergers in alternative theories of gravity
and/or exotic alternatives to black holes within general relativity (such as
boson stars), to allow the merger event recently detected by LIGO and future
detections to constrain/rule-out/discover these alternatives. Regarding the
ultra-relativistic collision problem, the route to approaching this limit will
be by developing a code to study the collision of distributions of null dust.
Such distributions can be tailored to approach both the point-particle and
plane-parallel wave collision limits in a non-singular manner amenable to full
numerical treatment.