* 1607630
* Chronicling a Major Scientific Breakthrough: a Longitudinal Video Documentary of Advanced LIGO and the Beginning of Gravitational Wave Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* David Reitze, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2022
* USD 186,798.00

This award supports the production of a longitudinal video documentary of the
evolution of Advanced LIGO and will chronicle the most critical and exciting
period in the history of gravitational wave science in the past 100 years. LIGO
resumed the search for gravitational waves in 2015 with a newly upgraded
detector and on September 14, 2015 detected gravitational waves for the first
time, astounding not only the scientific community but the entire world. Using
footage captured at critical periods between August 2015 and March 2016 during
the discovery phase as well as new filming taking place over the next two years,
the team will produce films which will impact at least hundreds of thousands of
people and possibly many more than that. The goal is to educate, inspire, and
motivate. Students at the high school and undergraduate levels may be more
inspired to pursue STEM careers after watching scientific vignettes focusing on
the exciting science and technology of Advanced LIGO. Scientific historians and
sociologists will have the opportunity to use the hundreds of hours of available
film clips as a video database to investigate in detail the discovery of
gravitational waves as a case study of large scale collaborations ("Big
Science"). Videos highlighting the cutting edge technological advances brought
about by Advanced LIGO and their impacts on other fields of science and
technology may prove effective for educating officials and policy makers on the
benefits of fundamental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of the
project, a series of professionally made video shorts will be produced for the
LIGO Laboratory and LSC for education and public outreach purposes through
distribution on LIGO Laboratory, LSC web sites, and the LIGO YouTube Channel.
Through an extensive series of film shoots, XPLR Productions will work with the
LIGO Laboratory and the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) to capture key
moments as LIGO scientists work to achieve Advanced LIGO's design sensitivity
and carry out a series of observing runs over the next two years. The team will
produce a series of video shorts explaining the important scientific and
technological concepts and issues of Advanced LIGO by the scientific experts who
create them. In the longer term, footage will used to produce either a feature
length documentary film or a twelve-part series on television entitled 'LIGO'
chronicling the discovery of gravitational waves and the exploration of exotic
high-energy astrophysical phenomena such as colliding black holes. Intended for
broad distribution through cinema or television, 'LIGO' will bring science to
life for a wide audience.