* 1607481
* Observation and Control of Coherent Processes Involving Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Robert Jones, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 489,158.00

This project will study the fundamental response of individual atoms to external
stimuli, such as the presence of other atoms or very brief pulses of bright
laser light. The experiments will use "Rydberg atoms" (those in which at least
one of the negatively-charged electrons has much more energy than normal and
moves in a large, slow orbit around the positively-charged nucleus). Because the
electric forces between the nucleus and the distant electron are so weak in
Rydberg atoms, they are very sensitive to their surroundings. This sensitivity
will be exploited in the experiments, magnifying the atom's response to its
environment and making it easier to change the electron's motion or manipulate
the forces between atoms in controlled ways. Some of the experiments could have
direct applications in quantum computing because Rydberg atoms might serve to
store and process information. In other cases, the experiments will provide
insights to problems involving more complex systems, for example energy transfer
in light harvesting systems, or the use of very brief laser pulses to view
electron motion in molecules over extremely short time intervals (the so-called
"attosecond" regime, which is a million-trillion times smaller than 1
second).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will utilize ultrafast and cold
atom techniques, separately and in combination, exploiting intense ultrashort
terahertz pulses and controlled interatomic couplings to manipulate electron
dynamics and/or atom-atom correlations. These systems are rich with
opportunities for exploring novel aspects of few- and many-body quantum
mechanics at the interface between ultrafast/strong field physics and cold atom
physics. The problems to be addressed represent real challenges as the spatial
and temporal scales relevant to the dynamics span many orders of magnitude, from
electronic motion within individual atoms to correlations involving multiple
atoms. One set of experiments will seek to further characterize the novel
ionization behavior of atoms exposed to intense, true single-cycle pulses.
Another will attempt to use such pulses to induce both ionization and
recombination, coherently shuttling bound electrons from atoms to their
neighbors. A third line of experiments will utilize efficient laser excitation
of atom pairs into, and out of, Rydberg states at prescribed interatomic
distances, toggling strong repulsive interactions between atoms to manipulate
the position correlation of cold atoms in a magneto optical trap. Possibilities
for producing self-ordered arrays of atoms without an explicit external
confinement potential will be pursued. Lastly, controlled dipole-dipole
couplings between atoms will be used to entangle electronic wavepackets on
neighboring atoms, resulting in the transfer of coherent electronic wavepacket
motion from atoms to their neighbors, at distances of several microns. New
insights obtained from the proposed experiments have the potential to impact
several other scientific areas including condensed matter physics, chemical
physics, quantum information, quantum control, and attosecond science.