* 1607396
* Development of Next-Generation Atomic Clocks and Their Application in Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 304,274.00

This research is focused on developing the next generation of ultra-precise
atomic clocks, and using these clocks for fundamental physics applications. It
is expected to advance the frontiers of modern time-keeping technology.
Historically, the exquisite precision of atomic clocks has enabled both
foundational tests of modern physics, e.g., testing hypothetical variations of
fundamental constants, such as the strength of electromagnetic interactions, as
well as practical applications, such as the construction of the Global
Positioning System. This research program will also investigate the use of
precision devices, such as atomic clocks and atom interferometers, to probe the
nature of dark matter. Revealing the microscopic nature of dark matter, which
has been discovered through astrophysical observations on a galactic scale, is
one of the grand challenges of modern physics. This theoretical and
computational program will be conducted by the Principal Investigator in
collaboration with a Research Assistant working toward a doctoral degree,
thereby contributing to graduate education. Additionally, the research will be
carried out in Nevada, a state which is historically underrepresented in the
scientific enterprise.

Virialized ultralight scalar fields are cold dark matter candidates which, if
detected, could also solve the hierarchy problem of the Standard Model of
elementary particles. Detecting such fields requires using low-energy precision
measurement devices such as atomic clocks and matter wave interferometers
primarily developed by the atomic physics community. The goal of this work is to
analyze the sensitivity of precision measurement tools to virialized ultralight
scalar fields and to identify dark matter signatures, with a specific focus on
atomic clocks and matter wave interferometry. Another goal is to reach the next
level of accuracy in atomic time-keeping by exploring atomic properties of
highly-charged ions. As previously shown by the Principal Investigator, suitable
candidate ions must satisfy criteria set by experimentalists. This research will
use tools of theoretical and computational physics, including relativistic
atomic structure codes and various techniques from atomic physics, quantum
optics, quantum field theory and cosmology.