* 1607139
* Density Response and Electron Pairing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Warren Pickett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education to enhance our understanding of the
relationship between how electrons respond to changes in their environment and
their tendency to form pairs rather than to remain relatively independent.
Pairing of electrons in solids lies at the root of several of the most
interesting and useful properties of solids, with superconductivity and
inhomogeneous magnetism being two important examples.

The 2016 discovery of superconductivity with a critical onset temperature (Tc)
above 200 K (-85 F) in trihydrogen sulfide has established a new record for Tc,
promoting hydrogen-rich materials as the new frontier in this area of research.
This revolution in high-temperature superconductivity comes at the expense of
requiring an enclosed pressure cell to provide the two million atmospheres of
pressure that induces superconductivity. For progress, theory and simulations
must play a much larger role if higher Tc or lower pressure examples are to be
discovered. Existing simulations for several candidate hydrides reveal the need
to understand at a basic level the interaction of the metallic conduction
electrons with a vibrating proton (hydrogen nucleus). This project will use this
materials platform to address the fundamental question of why some hydrides are
spectacular superconductors, while seemingly similar others are not. Analogous
simulations will be applied to other peculiar superconductors (viz. single
layers of iron selenide) where a related type of pairing is the best candidate
for promoting impressive enhancements of superconducting critical temperatures.
The principal investigator will extend and apply relevant theory, and write
computer codes for calculations necessary in the study of this problem.

By edging its way into technology, superconductivity is achieving broader
impacts beyond enhanced fundamental understanding. Examples of applications
include strong superconducting magnets in medical magnetic resonance imagers
(MRI), the Large Hadron Collider ring used for elementary particle study, ultra-
sensitive superconducting quantum interference detectors,
superconducting/magnetic technology levitating the world's fastest trains, and
demonstration projects for power transmission to residential areas through
superconducting cables. Further developments in superconducting materials and
properties promise to accelerate the transition of innovations to public use. In
addition to research, this award will support the training of young scientists
for career paths in science & technology research, development, education, and
administration areas.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The theory of high-temperature superconductivity has been at the forefront of
theoretical condensed-matter theory for six decades. The discovery of a new
class of high-Tc superconductors moves the field to another, different level.
One way it does so is by readjusting the basic scientific paradigm, which has
been: experiment leads and stimulates theory. For these hydrides, theory
(primarily, Ashcroft's work) appeared well before high-pressure techniques
became able to test predictions. The electron-phonon mechanism for hydrogen
sulfide and related hydrides might be claimed to be reasonably understood, but
the most fundamental quantity -the perturbation caused by a moving proton and
how it effects pairing of electrons on the Fermi surface, specifically the
matrix element- is hidden inside sophisticated computer simulations without
providing any understanding that would enable prediction and design of
outstanding superconductors at higher temperature or lower pressure.

This project proposes to complete this understanding by calculating and
analyzing this scattering atom-by-atom of electrons at the Fermi surface by
complementing the conventional theory of electronic linear response with
numerical evaluation of the linear response. The added understanding will
promote rational material design, versus Edisonian discovery, and a real
prospect of even better superconductors by revealing the "genome" of the
electron-phonon matrix element. Advances will be applicable to other
superconducting materials challenges, especially that of single-layer iron
selenide, where it is widely suspected that electron-phonon coupling enhances
the underlying, magnetically based, pairing mechanism. Additionally, the very
high Tc of hydrogen sulfide together with the electronic fine structure, an
important feature that makes it special, presents new challenges in the
simulation and basic understanding of behavior (electronic response) that
extends beyond the conventional theory of this type of electron pairing. The
results of this project are expected to impact the prediction, design, and
control of new materials with transport properties required for specific
applications, including semiconductors and semimetals, thermoelectric materials,
and optimized magnetoelectronic coefficients. In addition to research, this
award will support the training of young scientists for career paths in science
& technology research, development, education, and administration areas.