* 1607031
* Black-Hole Spin Precession and its Astrophysical Implications
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Michael Kesden, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2022
* USD 134,869.00

Gravity is one of the four fundamental forces of nature and is described by
Einstein's theory of general relativity. One of the most extreme predictions of
general relativity is the existence of black holes, compact objects whose
gravity is so intense that not even light can escape from them. Investigating
gravity in such an extreme regime provides one of the most promising
opportunities to learn more about this fundamental force. Another prediction of
general relativity, that binary black holes emit gravitational waves that
stretch and squeeze spacetime, was recently confirmed by the NSF-funded Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). Black holes are fully
described by their masses and spins, but the spins of binary black holes are
generally misaligned with their orbital plane, much like the 23 degree
misalignment between the Earth's rotation axis and its orbit about the Sun
responsible for the seasons. General relativity causes black-hole spins to
change direction or precess; this precession leaves detectable signatures in the
gravitational waves observed by LIGO. This award supports studies on black-hole
spin precession and the extent to which it can be constrained by gravitational-
wave detectors like LIGO. This work helps scientists to interpret LIGO
observations and thus better understand gravity and the astrophysical origin of
black holes responsible for their spin misalignments. The PI and collaborators
will also develop an interactive virtual-reality simulation of precessing black
holes and the gravitational waves they emit which will be available free online
and presented at local public libraries and museums through existing outreach
networks of the University of Texas at Dallas. These simulations help the public
virtually experience the effects of gravitational waves and enhance public
interest and support for science research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this proposal is to provide a
comprehensive picture of the origin and implications of misalignments between
binary black-hole spins and their orbital angular momentum. Population-synthesis
codes will be used to explore how initial spin misalignments depend on various
aspects of astrophysical black-hole formation like mass transfer, tidal
alignment, and supernova recoils. The spin distributions generated by these
codes will be evolved from black-hole formation until they begin to emit
detectable gravitational waves using the PI's newly developed technique for
efficiently calculating spin precession on the inspiral timescale. Once the
binaries enter the sensitivity band of ground-based detectors like LIGO,
publicly available codes in the LIGO Algorithm Library Suite will be used to
generate waveforms and analyze how well the binary black-hole parameters that
determine spin precession can be estimated for realistic signal-to-noise ratios.
The PI and collaborators will also perform and analyze numerical-relativity
simulations to assess the reliability of post-Newtonian predictions for spin
precession in the final orbits before black-hole merger. This research provides
the basis for astrophysical model selection, combining constraints on spin
misalignments from many events to distinguish astrophysical models of black-hole
formation, such as dynamical formation in a globular cluster (for which spins
should be isotropic) versus formation from stellar binaries (which should
exhibit a tendency towards aligned spins). The final project will consider how
spin precession between black hole formation and merger affects predictions for
final black-hole masses, spins, and gravitational recoils. This project has
implications both for the stellar-mass black holes observed by LIGO and
recoiling quasars spatially or kinematically offset from their host galaxies
sought in galaxy surveys.