* 1607096
* Experimental Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stephen Schnetzer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,442,932.00

Particle physics is focused on the search for the most basic building blocks of
the Universe and the rules that bind them. The recently discovered Higgs boson
is an excitation of a Higgs field that permeates all of space and gives mass to
the other fundamental particles in the Universe. Other fields, such as those
that carry the electromagnetic and nuclear forces, interact with this Higgs
field, and studying these interactions gives important insight into the
properties of the Higgs field. Ironically the interaction of gravity - the force
we are most familiar with in our daily life - with the Higgs is hardly
understood at all, due to the vast difference in strength between gravity and
the other known forces. The Higgs field may also interact with the mysterious
material which gravitationally binds our galaxy together, and other as yet
undiscovered constituents of nature. The CMS detector at the Large Hadron
Collider functions as the world's most powerful and sophisticated camera,
observing collisions of protons at the highest energies humanity has yet
achieved; recording the outcomes for detailed study by CMS experimentalists. The
members of the high energy physics group at Rutgers University have been crucial
to the construction, maintenance, and continued improvement of the device
itself. They have initiated and guided several studies of the data collected,
including ones that led to the discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012. The data
being gathered now and in the coming years will allow a greater understanding of
the basic structure of nature, perhaps including insights into the huge
difference in the strengths of the fundamental forces. The Rutgers high energy
physics group will continue to be at the forefront of these
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers high energy physics group is
carrying out several projects at the cutting edge of hadron collider physics
with the CMS experiment at CERN, studying proton-proton interactions at a
center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV, the energy frontier. They continue to innovate
and implement new data analysis techniques in searches for new physics
signatures with leptons, photons, jets and missing energy. The group has a
history of leadership in CMS, including service as co-conveners of major
analysis groups and leading efforts on detector construction and operations.
They work closely with theorists to bring forth new ideas and a rich program of
physics analyses and interpretations has originated from their efforts. They
plan to continue this innovation and leadership to further improve the
capabilities of the detector and data analyses. As the CMS detector ages,
upgrades will need to be designed and implemented. This award will allow the
Rutgers group to create an improved version of front-end electronics they
designed for the pixel detector, as well as helping test and install the
electronics for the hadron calorimeter. They are also performing R&amp;D work on
longer-term upgrades, specifically the Outer Tracker and a fast Track Trigger.
They plan to host a production and testing facility for the upgrades. The
Rutgers group hosts a large number of outreach activities which have a broad
impact on the community. Through the Rutgers QuarkNet program they run summer
workshops at Rutgers for high-school teachers and students. Students and
teachers from across New Jersey analyze LHC data and build cosmic-ray
telescopes. They mentor undergraduate students from Rutgers and the NSF REU
program, as well as qualified high school students. These students work closely
with the group's students and postdocs and contribute to ongoing studies and
analyses. To combat the underrepresentation of women in STEM fields, they are
helping develop programs to provide research opportunities to collegiate and
pre-college women, and working to increase the participation of women in
science. They are active in promoting particle physics programs in India and
Sub-Saharan Africa. After feedback from high school physics teachers, they are
developing instructional programs for New Jersey high school physics teachers
who need help teaching university-level physics courses. They are initiating
outreach to the broader community with the Liberty Science Center in New Jersey
to prepare particle physics related exhibits. They continue to convey the
excitement of particle physics with frequent talks at local high schools,
libraries, and other venues.