* 1607648
* Many-Body Physics of Fermions in One Dimension
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 540,303.00

The electronic devices we use on a daily basis are primarily constructed from
materials in which electrons - the negatively charged particles which carry
electric current - move around independently inside the material as though the
other electrons are not present. However, certain materials exist in which the
electrons behave collectively rather than individually and this collective
behavior typically gives rise to exotic and technologically useful electrical or
magnetic properties (e.g. superconductivity - the flow of electric current
without resistance). To foster the development of new types of electronic
devices, there is significant interest in developing a fundamental understanding
of the collective phenomena that can emerge in exotic materials. Of particular
interest are one-dimensional (1D) systems where the motion of electrons is only
allowed along one spatial dimension. In 1D, collective behavior is the rule
rather than the exception - arbitrarily weak interactions between the electrons
should always give rise to collective phenomena. In stark contrast to the
typical behavior seen in higher-dimensional systems where independent electrons
each carry an electric charge together with an intrinsic angular momentum known
as spin, the transport of spin and charge in 1D is decoupled. Remarkably, spin
and charge are transported in 1D by waves which propagate at different speeds.
Indirect evidence for this has been observed in systems such as carbon nano-
tubes and quantum wires. The goal of this experimental research project is to
directly observe spin charge separation and related phenomena in a 1D gas of
ultracold atoms. The atoms are confined to 1D by a waveguide formed from laser
light and precisely imitate the behavior of electrons if the mass density of
atoms is understood to play the role of the charge density of electrons. The
advantage of studying the atomic rather than electronic system is that
parameters such as the density, temperature, and interaction strengths are
widely tunable. Furthermore, the atomic system allows for a direct visualization
of the propagation of spin- and mass-density waves in real time. Thus, atomic
systems are amenable to systematic studies which aim to elucidate the role that
finite temperature, finite system size, and strong interactions play in 1D
electronic systems. Such studies will aid the development of "spintronic"
devices based on carbon nanotubes and quantum wires.

Ultracold fermionic atoms confined in a two-dimensional optical lattice will be
used to systematically explore the exotic properties of 1D interacting Fermi
systems, verify longstanding predictions for their behavior, and test the extent
to which spin-charge separation persists at high temperature and with strong
interactions. The direct observation of spin-charge separation in real space
will be accomplished by two methods. First, low-lying normal modes of the system
including spin-dipole, density-dipole and density-quadrupole modes will be
excited and their oscillation frequencies measured as a function of interaction
strength. Spin-charge separation will manifest itself as a relative
insensitivity of the density-dipole and density-quadrupole mode frequencies on
interaction strength in contrast to a significant reduction in frequency of the
spin-dipole mode with increasing interactions. Alternatively, spin-charge
separation in real space can be observed by locally ejecting a small number of
atoms from one of the spin states and thereby injecting holes into the system.
The injected holes will subsequently break into spin and charge excitations
which propagate at different velocities depending on the interaction strength. A
second hallmark feature of interacting 1D Fermi systems - that their correlation
functions exhibit non-universal power law decay - will also be observed through
quantum noise correlations in the momentum distribution of clouds following
expansion along the 1D tubes.