* 1607358
* GOALI: Achromatic Visible and Near Infrared Full Stokes Imaging Polarimeter
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Neal Brock, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 361,109.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;Conventional color
camera uses small color filters, such as red, green and blue color filters, to
measure color information at different pixels. In order to image the
polarization state of light, a polarization camera can use small polarization
filters with dimension equal to the size of the pixel. Our research involves the
development of new optical filters that can operate at different color and
polarization states. The optical filters have dimension of a few microns and are
put directly on top of an image sensor to create a polarization camera. The
polarization camera will allow us to accurately image polarization states and
enable novel imaging applications in optical sciences and engineering. The
project supports multidisciplinary research and education in materials sciences,
chemistry and optical sciences to both undergraduates and graduates
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of this proposal are (1) development of the design, material and
fabrication process of achromatic micropolarizer and microretarder using liquid
crystal polymer and dichroic dyes for the visible and near infrared spectrum,
(2) construction of polarization sensitive focal plane array using the optical
filters and (3) applications of the focal plane array to material
characterization and classification. The proposed research will enable the
realization of linear, circular and elliptical polarization filters that have
high spatial resolution, broad bandwidth, low loss and high extinction ratio.
This type of arbitrary patternable filter currently does not exist and our work
will advance the fundamental design know-hows and fabrication of polarization
optical filters and the construction, calibration and testing of a novel class
of polarization sensitive focal plane array. By understanding the fundamental
properties and processing of thin film polarization filters, our efforts will
lead to advancement of novel and next generation high performance optical device
and component. Educational outreach will be performed to encourage and recruit
local science talents for advanced research and educational purposes. The
results of this program will be communicated through undergraduate and graduate
curriculum and make available through websites, public colloquiums, journal
articles, class materials and patent disclosures. The collaboration with local
industry will accelerate the commercialization of this technology. The outcome
of our research will broadly impact several of the NSF programs such as
chemistry (CHEM), materials (DMR), along with engineering directorate such as
the division of electrical, communications and cyber systems (ECCS).
Specifically, within the scope of ECCS, the areas of opto-electronic, micro/nano
photonics, display technology, and photonic devices and integration will be well
represented and served.