* 1607943
* Thermodynamic Measurements of Binary and Ternary Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Philip Nash, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 02/29/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract

Compounds based on metals are important functional materials that provide many
properties of value to society and are part of a class of "smart materials".
Their properties can, for example, provide energy harvesting through conversion
of waste heat to electricity, efficient refrigeration through the elimination of
moving parts, mechanical positioners operated by heat or magnetic field and
medical devices such as stents for circulatory problems, braces for
straightening teeth and micro-robots for treatment of eye diseases. The
development of these materials requires a knowledge of what scientists call
phase equilibria, which means what structure an alloy composition consists of at
a particular temperature, so that suitable processing can be developed and so it
can provide possible multi-functionality. A knowledge of the structure is also
necessary as this determines the properties which may be tuned by modifying the
structure through adjustment of composition and process heat treatments. This
project is focused on the determination of the phase equilibria, structure and
properties of a class of compounds based on metals. The work involves both
experimental and computational research into the nature and properties of these
compounds. For device manufacturers, the results of this research will enable
them to incorporate these materials into existing devices as replacements for
current materials or enable them to develop new devices for the benefit of
society.

Technical Abstract

Intermetallic compounds such as Heusler type X2YZ and "half-Heusler" compounds
of type XYZ, where X and Y are transition metals and Z is a group III-V element
and Laves phases are of great interest for their properties such as shape
memory, thermoelectric, ferromagnetic and spin polarization effects which could
lead to new mechanical and electronic devices. In this project the thermodynamic
properties, crystal structures and phase equilibria of these compounds will be
systematically determined. Using drop calorimetry the standard heat of formation
and heat capacity as a function of temperature of the compounds will be
determined. Phase equilibria and crystal structures will be determined using
differential scanning calorimetry, energy dispersive x-ray analysis and x-ray
diffraction. The data will be used to benchmark first-principles calculations
for these compounds and to assess the general accuracy of DFT predictions. The
database will be expanded to include DFT structural and energy results as
validations for experimental data as well. Although potentially there are
thousands of compounds, rapid screening of composition space will be performed
using systematic analysis of phase diagrams and high-throughput first principles
calculations. The thermodynamic data obtained will be incorporated into an on-
line database for access by the scientific community directly for use in alloy
development and computational materials design. The data will be incorporated in
thermodynamic Gibbs energy descriptions of the compounds for use in predicting
phase equilibria using the Calphad approach. The experimental data will provide
a unique opportunity for the DFT community to assess the accuracy of their
calculations. DFT defect calculations for non-stoichiometric intermetallics
performed in this project will provide the community with a greater
understanding of the effect of constitutional defects on structural stability.
The project involves a substantial international collaboration with researchers
in China, Czech Republic, and Austria. The thermodynamic database is publicly
available for all to access via the web.