* 1607640
* Surfaces of Secondary Organic Aerosol Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Regan Thomson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2020
* USD 780,000.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Science Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Franz Geiger and Regan Thomson of Northwestern
University and Professor Scot Martin of Harvard University are developing new
methods to investigate the surfaces of atmospheric aerosol particles formed from
plant emissions over the world's tropical and boreal forests. The surface of
aerosol particles is the first species encountered by molecules approaching the
particles from the gas phase in processes leading to particle growth and
subsequent cloud formation. The particle surface is a challenging region of
matter to access experimentally because it is thin and very reactive. The team
specifically probe aerosol particle surfaces, the particle bulk, and the gas
phase and then focuses on identifying chemical compounds residing at the
boundary between the gas and particle phases of atmospheric aerosols. The team
also determines how these surface compounds promote or disrupt particle growth
and their propensity to form clouds. The synthesized compounds are available to
the research community, enabling new collaborations that cross traditional
disciplinary boundaries. The field of atmospheric chemistry requires a workforce
trained in crosscutting disciplines. The collaborative training provided by the
project addresses that need through interdisciplinary research activities. The
proposed activities are also integrated with a meaningful focus on diversity.
Rigorous training and mentoring experiences for graduate students includes
research rotations at Northwestern and Harvard Universities, formal training in
grant proposal writing, cross-disciplinary training in synthetic chemistry and
spectroscopy, aerosol sample collection and analysis, and participation in
community outreach programs. The proposed activities are fine-tuned by regular
assessment and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project tests the
hypotheses that the growth of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) particles and
their propensity to act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) can be significantly
influenced by surface chemistry. The hypotheses is tested by synthesizing both
deuterated and unlabeled isoprene and รก-pinene and their oxidation products in
pure forms, preparing SOA particles from these precursors, and (3) obtaining
through measurement surface- and bulk-specific spectroscopic, chemical, and
mechanistic information for determining how the surface-localized species
contribute to SOA growth and CCN activity. The research includes new synthesis
and measurement approaches that reveal unique physical insights of how particle
surface chemistry matters for particle growth under varying conditions of
relative humidity and particle size. The following overarching five science
questions are addressed: Which organic species partition to the surface of SOA
particles? What are the residence times of the surface-localized species, and to
what extent does diffusion of the interfacial species occur into the bulk
particle phase? Do gas phase species adsorb reversibly or irreversibly to the
surfaces of SOA particles? Which surface species increase CCN activity by acting
as a surfactant pool? Do some surface species present a barrier (attractor) to
further particle growth and thereby inhibit (spur) further particle growth?