* 1607603
* Towards Precision Measurements of Atomic Parity Violation Using Two-Pathway Coherent Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Daniel Elliott, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 592,004.00

The four fundamental forces of the physical universe are gravitational,
electromagnetic, weak (responsible for radioactive decay of particles), and
strong (the binding force that holds the nuclei of atoms together). A great deal
about these forces has been learned over the years, and a theoretical model that
unifies and summarizes our understanding of three of these forces
(electromagnetic, weak, and strong), known as the Standard Model, has been
extremely precise in many of its predictions. There still persist, however,
several very important open questions that cannot be explained within the
Standard Model, or which fall outside the energy range in which the Standard
Model is expected to be valid (such as conditions that existed during the very
early stages of the universe). One of these is the existence and properties of
dark matter: matter within our universe that we know exists (because of the
slowing expansion of the universe), but which does not interact with regular
matter in the universe through any means that we have been able to detect.
Another is the possible existence of particles that are so massive that they
have not yet been generated or observed at the large high-energy particle
accelerators (such as the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland). Yet a third
area in which to search for physics beyond the Standard Model is to look for the
indirect influence of the proposed extensions on extremely precise measurements
of weak optical transitions in atoms. This is the focus of this research effort,
which can help guide the answers to these fundamental questions about the
universe.

The principal investigator and his team will carry out new, higher-precision
measurements of weak-force-induced transition amplitudes in atomic cesium. This
atom was the focus of prior measurements by the group of Carl Wieman in Boulder
in the 1990's, and these measurements of the parity violating amplitude are
still the most precise reported for any element. There exists, however, a need
to carry out atomic parity violation measurements at an even higher precision.
Such a measurement will allow a more precise determination of the weak charge of
the nucleus, and from that, an improved determination of the electroweak mixing
angle at low momentum transfer. The energy dependence (or "running", as it is
called) of this mixing angle, as measured through scattering measurements at
various energies, places important constraints on conjectured massive bosons in
theories that extend the standard model. These measurements also guide searches
for dark matter candidates. Atomic parity violation measurements can also be
used to determine the anapole moment of the atomic nucleus. This moment,
resulting from weak interactions within the nucleus, provides the leading
contribution to the nuclear spin dependence of the parity violating amplitude.
To date, the Boulder group's measurement of the anapole moment of cesium is the
only successful measurement in any element. Since this result is about twice as
large as expected, and its magnitude is still not understood, there is a need
for a new measurement to either verify or refute its magnitude. The goal of the
present project is to return to cesium for a set of new, high-precision
measurements that will address these goals. The principal investigator will
apply a two-pathway coherent control technique to these measurements. One set of
measurements are centered on the 6s - 7s transition, visited previously by
Wieman, while a second set will examine similar effects in the ground state
transition between hyperfine components.