* 1607439
* GOALI:  Synchronously Pumped NMR Oscillator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Larsen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 482,567.00

This project, an Industry-University Collaborative Project between the
University of Wisconsin-Madison and scientists and engineers at Northrop-Grumman
Corporation, studies a new approach to making extremely precise and sensitive
measurements using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). NMR forms the basis for the
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) that a medical patient might receive, and for
various types of chemical analysis. This project will investigate a new NMR
method designed for use as either a compact, high precision gyroscope for
navigation, or for a tool to search for evidence of previously unobserved types
of forces between matter and nuclear spins. Any new forces so observed would
likely give important information on the properties of so-called "dark matter"
which is believed to make up most of the universe but which has never been
directly observed. Even if such forces are not detected, the project will place
constraints on theoretical models which seek to go beyond the so-called
"standard model" of particle physics. The applications of the new method for
navigation involve a possible means to make compact quantum-based measurements
of rotation with unprecedented sensitivity and accuracy. As a collaborative
effort between university researchers and industrial scientists and engineers,
the project will promote practical applications of nuclear spins for such
measurements, promote technology transfer between university and industry, and
expose young researchers to an industrial research and development laboratory.

The underlying principles rely on the application of NMR bias magnetic fields in
the form of sequences of short pulses of well-defined areas that act, in concert
with time dependent optical pumping, to allow alkali atoms and noble-gas nuclei
to precess at the same frequency despite having magnetic moments that are
different by 3 orders of magnitude. Both species can then be polarized and
precess entirely transverse to the bias field. This greatly suppresses the
dominant systematic errors that are known to affect traditional designs of such
instruments, but retains the benefits of ultrasensitive readout of the NMR
precession using the embedded alkali magnetometer. Estimates of technical noise
indicate the system has a potential frequency noise level of better than 10
nano-Hertz per square-root Hertz bandwidth, with fundamental limits that are
much better. The system will be used to set new stringent limits on the
potential couplings of axions to nuclei. The basic physics principles of this
approach have now been demonstrated in the laboratory and the key systematic
errors have been shown to be suppressed by at least a factor of 2500. The next
steps are to realize the high sensitivity promise in dual-species experiments
that promise exceptionally good magnetic noise and drift suppression. In this
context the system will be tested as a precision NMR gyroscope, of great
interest to the industrial partners, and will be used to set new mass and
sensitivity limits in searches for axion-like particles.