* 1607869
* Instrument Development: A nanoscale, unbleachable  orientation and position sensor for biophysical imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paul Wiggins, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 390,785.00

With support from the Divisions of Chemistry (Chemical Measurement and Imaging)
and Biological Infrastructure (Instrument Development for Biological Research),
Drs. Kai-Mei Fu and Paul Wiggins and their groups at the University of
Washington are looking to build on a generation of single-molecule techniques
enabling visualization of biochemical processes one molecule at a time. These
methods facilitate a mechanistic understanding of the fundamental biology,
chemistry and physics underlying many of the most important biological processes
in the cell. Specifically, the team is developing a novel sensor for biophysical
applications that can simultaneously measure the three-dimensional position and
orientation of a nanoparticle probe. The proposed Magnetic-Probe-Imaging
platform (MagPI) is expected to be widely-applicable to a range of biophysical
problems where orientation and position are both of significance to biological
function. Research results will be disseminated broadly through local, national,
and international conferences, publications, and laboratory research websites as
well as through an advertised technical workshop on the method to facilitate its
adoption by the chemical, biological, and biomedical research communities. This
work will also support graduate and undergraduate student training in a rich,
interdisciplinary environment that combines physics, chemistry, engineering, and
biology. It will provide support for a focused unit on "Biosensing and the Five
Senses" that will be developed for an elementary-school science outreach
program, with lesson plans available to the public through the outreach website

The research addresses three specific aims: (i) the targeted development of a
MagPI to complement commercially-available pre-functionalized nanoparticles for
ease of adoption; (ii) the integration of this platform into a Tethered-
Particle-Motion (TPM) assay to demonstrate platform tractability in biophysical
contexts; and (iii) a demonstration of the potential for this platform by
detecting expected interconversions between distinct transcription-factor-DNA
complex conformations in TPM assays. The MagPI probe is unbleachable and
unblinking and therefore is ideally suited to applications where precision
tracking of probe 3D-position and orientation could provide significant new
insights, but long-timescale and high-temporal resolution imaging is required
which precludes the use of single-molecule fluorescent probes. The probe and
sensor is complementary and compatible with existing contrast generation
mechanisms, including brightfield, scattering, and fluorescence. Orientation and
position sensing are performed by imaging the magnetic dipole field generated by
the nano-particle probe. The physical mechanism for magnetic-field imaging is
the B-field-induced shift of the photo-luminescence intensity of nitrogen-
vacancy centers in a diamond sensor.