* 1607336
* A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO: Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* James Brau, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2019
* USD 920,000.00

With the discovery of gravitational waves in September 2015, the LIGO
collaboration is beginning a new scientific adventure by the exploration of the
cosmos with gravitational waves. The Oregon group played an important role in
the discovery. It is responsible for the large array of sensors which measure
potential underlying terrestrial contributions to the gravitational wave
signals, for example from ground motion, ambient magnetic or radio-frequency
fields, acoustic noise, etc. This work will continue to be crucial over the next
three years of this award, as LIGO expects to detect many gravitational-wave
signals, perhaps arising from a wide variety of astrophysical sources. In fact,
the other key contribution of the Oregon group is the search for one class of
such sources - those associated with gamma-ray bursts. The discovery sparked
tremendous public interest, reflecting the public appetite for the exploration
of our universe. The publication of the scientific results from this research
program has already contributed to advancement of other scientific disciplines,
most notably astronomy. Finally, the education of the graduate students and
postdoctoral associates working on the project will advance the technical
workforce.

The Oregon group has been a key player in developing the readiness of the LIGO
detectors and its associated scientific program. Starting with the earliest data
taking with initial LIGO, the group has made key contributions in the areas of
characterization of detector background noise and in the data analysis
techniques involving associated astrophysical signals. Specifically, on the
instrument side, they have learned how to characterize the coupling of all known
sources of environmental disturbances with gravitational-wave detection, and to
monitor these couplings. Here, "environment" corresponds to any external
influence other than gravitational waves. This allows LIGO to make clear
statements about the potential contributions of such disturbances to putative
gravitational-wave detections. On the data analysis side, the Oregon group has
pioneered the science program which searches for transient gravitational-wave
signals associated with astrophysical events which are well localized in time
and sky position, and which are potential GW sources. These external "triggers"
include gamma rays from GRBs, x-ray bursts from magnetars, and neutrinos from
core-collapse supernovae.