* 1607796
* ECCS-CDS&amp;E: Predictive modeling of atomically thin multifunctional semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Emmanouil Kioupakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 342,333.00

Atomically thin two-dimensional materials are promising for novel electronic and
optoelectronic device applications. Most work on two-dimensional materials
focuses on graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides. This work focuses on
materials that contain elements with lone-pair electrons such as tin selenide,
which crystallize in layered structures and simultaneously display many
interesting functional properties. The project will use state-of-the-art
predictive materials simulation algorithms to uncover the fundamental materials
physics and functional properties of these novel two-dimensional materials and
identify promising candidates for electronic and optoelectronic device
applications. The proposed work also involves the development and application of
innovative simulation algorithms and high-performance computing tools for the
high-fidelity predictive modeling of novel materials and devices in order to
advance the current frontiers in electronics. This project will also advance the
education, training, and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students in
materials physics, electronic and optoelectronic devices, computational
techniques, and high-performance computing. The proposed work also will produce
open-source computer codes that will be shared with the educational and research
communities. The research findings will be incorporated in the undergraduate
curriculum and communicated to the general public through outreach
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
understand and predict the structural and functional properties (structure,
thermodynamics, band structure, vibrational properties, electronic and thermal
transport, optical response, strain effects, band alignments) of freestanding
and substrate-deposited atomically thin layered semiconducting materials with
predictive calculations based on density functional theory and related methods.
Materials to explore include SnSe and GeSe, which contain cations with lone-pair
electrons. These materials crystallize in layered structures and display an
array of unique functional properties, such as anisotropic spin transport and
unusually strong optical absorbance in the visible range. A genetic algorithm
will be applied to identify promising new materials that simultaneously exhibit
multiple functionalities for novel electronic, spintronic, and optoelectronic
device applications. The findings of the research project are expected to
advance the development and manufacturing of novel electronic and optoelectronic
devices with functionalities that are limited by current materials availability.