* 1607092
* GOALI: SusChem: Organocatalysis: A Platform for Sustainable Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* James Hedrick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 631,000.00

Polymers are highly useful modern materials for clothes, furniture, electronic
devices, household products and appliances, food packages, and medicine. Polymer
properties are controlled by the chemical structures of its building blocks. The
preparation of polymers with new or improved properties requires the use of new
blocking blocks, and the economical manufacturing of these polymers requires the
development of efficient synthetic approaches to link the new building blocks
together. In this project, Professor Robert Waymouth of Stanford University and
Dr. James Hedrick of IBM Almaden Laboratories are developing a broad and
versatile platform of methods to enable the synthesis of new building blocks and
well-defined biodegradable polymers with novel structures, properties and
function. This project provides a model academic / industrial collaboration
between Stanford and IBM Almaden Laboratories under the auspices of NSF's GOALI
program (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liason with Industry). It engages
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in a highly interdisciplinary and
collaborative effort. The unusual educational environment embraces both academic
and industrial perspectives on the translation of basic science into technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry program of the Chemistry Division focuses on the simultaneous
development of new science and technologies. Specifically, this project aims to
develop 1) new organocatalysts that are active and selective for ring-opening
polymerization, 2) new strategies for the synthesis of new monomers
(functionalized lactones and cyclic carbonates) that can be enchained to elicit
novel properties and function for macromolecular materials, 3) a novel
depolymerization reaction; and 4) new classes of "smart" water-soluble
copolymers whose structures and properties can be modulated by changes in
external environment. Central to the scientific approach is an emphasis on
mechanistic and theoretical investigations to illuminate the mechanistic details
of organocatalytic polymerization reactions, both to test evolving hypotheses on
organocatalytic strategies and to provide clear scientific rationales for both
the advantages and limitations of these synthetic strategies.