* 1607214
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: SusChEM: New Molecular Receptors to Complete the Loop on Nitrogen/Phosphorus Fertilizer Use and Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Darren Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 675,000.00

Nitrogen and phosphorus compounds are the main ingredients of fertilizers used
to increase crop yields on farms. While nitrogen and phosphorus are helpful
plant nutrients in low dosage, excess fertilizer can cause environmental
problems when the same compounds are washed by rainwater from the soil into
streams and rivers. There is a pressing need to develop sensors able to measure,
in real-time, accurate concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations.
These measurement inform decisions on fertilizer management in agriculture and
wastewater treatment. Such measurements can be used to maximize fertilizer
benefits while minimizing environmental impacts. With the support of the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professors Michael Haley and Darren Johnson, and their students at the
University of Oregon are designing improved sensors for fertilizer management
and environmental protection. This project provides interdisciplinary training
to graduate and undergraduate researchers. The broader impacts of this project
also include industrial internships of graduate students at local and regional
companies and continued involvement of undergraduates in chemical research via
programs that promote participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research aims to design and synthesize
molecular probes that are selective for environmentally relevant components of
fertilizers. The long-term goal is to produce molecular receptors with improved
precision and accuracy for the agriculture industry. The researchers design and
synthesize two new families of molecular receptors for binding and sensing
important anions such as nitrite and dihydrogen phosphate. The first family is
based on aryl-acetylene scaffolding and the second is based on the facile
synthesis of highly fluorescent phosphaquinolin-2-ones. This research employs a
combination of methods (including calorimetric, NMR, and spectrophotometric
titrations) to determine the binding properties of the supramolecular receptors
and to gain a better understanding of how structural changes influence their
binding affinity, selectivity, and optoelectronic properties. In addition, the
team develops high throughput assays to efficiently identify receptors for
nutrient sensing. The studies provide the researchers with broad experience in
organic synthesis, physical organic chemistry, computational chemistry, x-ray
crystallography, and the interplay between electronic structure and molecular
architecture. Industrial internships at local and regional companies are
available for graduate students. Undergraduate chemical research opportunities
promote participation of underrepresented groups.