* 1607968
* Collaborative Research: Speleothem records of permafrost thaw and paleoclimate in the North American Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* William McGee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 108,531.00

Given the possibility of substantial greenhouse gas release from thawing
permafrost in a warmer future, as well as the threats to infrastructure from
thawing permafrost, understanding the response of permafrost to past warmth is
of fundamental importance. Speleothems (stalagmites and stalactites) only are
expected to grow in Arctic caves when the overlying permafrost has thawed and no
longer presents an impermeable barrier to seepage from the surface into the
cave. This project will develop a record of when speleothems grew in Arctic
caves and, consequently, under what past climatic conditions continuous
permafrost thawed. The principal investigators will develop a website designed
to educate lay audiences on how speleothems are used to study past climate. They
will participate in the Cambridge Science Festival?s Science on the Street
program, which provides an outlet for scientists to engage with public audiences
attending community events on their research. This project will contribute to
STEM workforce development by helping launch the research programs of three
early-career scientists, as well as supporting the training of two graduate and
three undergraduate students.

The propose a novel approach to reconstruct past episodes of permafrost thaw ?
dating cave speleothems from now-frozen areas, which require liquid water to
grow and thus imply thawed ground conditions when they were deposited. Their
work will take advantage of advances in uranium-thorium geochronology and use
existing speleothem collections from three remote areas of Canada spanning 17°
of latitude and isolated to continuous permafrost zones to document the extent
of speleothem growth, and thus permafrost thaw, across variable interglacial
conditions of the past 600 kyr ? some of which were warmer than today. They will
also apply uranium-lead dating to a selection of samples to extend the dating
range to millions of years. Well-dated, high-resolution records of terrestrial
paleoclimate are also rare in the Arctic, though critical for understanding the
response of this region to radiative forcings and determining the climate
forcing that drove past changes in ice sheets, permafrost, sea ice, and
vegetation. Therefore, they will measure stable isotope records along the
speleothems to reconstruct climate variability over the intervals during which
they grew. While likely fragmentary and confined to warm periods, these records
will essentially provide underground extensions of the Greenland ice core ä18O
record to numerous past interglacials.