* 1607441
* US-French Collaboration: Collaborative Research: Neuro-Computational Models of Natural Language
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* John Hale, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 569,758.00

Our society is built upon shared ideas, ideas that get from one person to
another via language that is "understood." But how do brains give us the ability
to understand a stream of spoken words? This is a grand challenge question in
computational neuroscience. This project addresses it using mathematical models
of the language understanding process. These models reflect insights from
computer science as well as linguistics. They allow investigators to ask: which
process model best accounts for the signals from a particular brain region, at
particular moment in time? The signals come from people listening to French and
English versions of the same book.  By comparing across models and across
languages, the project seeks to differentiate between aspects of the
understanding process that are language-specific and aspects that might be
common to all humans. Increasingly precise modeling of this sort paves the way
for future work with individuals who have trouble using language, such as those
with Autism Spectrum Disorder. It could also lead to better computer systems,
ones that use language in a brain-inspired way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing
together computational linguists and cognitive neuroscientists, this project
pursues two specific questions: (1) what aspects of sentence structure determine
our expectations for upcoming words? and (2) what is the detailed balance
between memorization and composition in natural language? Using
electroencephalography (EEG) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
the PIs examine participants' neural responses to the spoken recitation of a
literary work. These neural signals are fitted by time series predictors,
themselves derived from linguistically plausible grammars and other language
models. The project explores a family of such models, varying the size of
grammatical units as well as the propensity for such units to be simply
memorized as opposed to built up, step by step. Via information-theoretical
complexity metrics, these theories derive quantitative predictions about the
moment-by-moment neural responses of a person hearing a story.  The approach as
a whole leads to computationally explicit process models that are grounded in
human brain responses to naturalistic text across two
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
French National Research Agency (ANR).