* 1607849
* Collaborative Research: Building Social Infrastructure for Achieving Change at Scale
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Karlin, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 12/31/2017
* USD 131,457.00

The emergent field of engineering education research is a necessary lever to
make systemic and sustainable changes in the way we educate and develop
engineers to meet current and future national priorities and global challenges.
There is a great deal of variation in the strength of the social infrastructure
used by engineering education researchers to collaborate and build research
projects of sufficient depth and diversity for true systemic change. In this
project, relative social infrastructure strength is grouped as follows: those
researchers who are connected to a department of engineering education; those
who are connected to a center or other non-department, formalized group on their
campus; and those who have neither connection. Any combination of access types
may be present on a single campus. The purpose of this project is to discover
and implement evidence-based social infrastructure elements that meet the needs
of the third group while maintaining the integrity of the department- and
center-based infrastructure. These researchers are often located in their
universities in capacities that are highly intertwined with the practice of
engineering education; finding better ways to network and support them creates
stronger ties between research and practice, facilitating systemic and lasting
change.

Using the social movement organizing methodology of relational meetings, the
investigators will conduct a series of interviews with engineering education
researchers who are connected with centers or departments those who are not, and
their practitioner colleagues to identify areas of common concern, resources
each can contribute to change agent networks, and opportunities for strategic
intervention around which the engineering education change movement can build
power. Through two phases of the research root cause analysis will be applied to
the problems of faculty reward structures and diversity in engineering; working
at the level of structural economic forces in higher education in the first
case, and racism, sexism, ableism, and other forms of structural inequality in
the second case, will guide strategies and interventions to produce lasting,
significant change and address problems at their source. This approach will
further the research on change in engineering education by understanding faculty
behavior as grounded not only in personal motivation and institutional reward
structures but also in current economic and policy frameworks for higher
education. The results of this project will identify mechanisms to strengthen
engineering education networks. Of particular importance are those researchers
currently working in the field who are not strongly connected to those networks.
Broad-based and widespread change will occur through modifications to
communities' infrastructure and leadership development that support both the
engineering education researchers and practitioners.