* 1607391
* Probing Fundamental Physics with Gravitational Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,640,000.00

In Modern Physics there are two very well accepted theories that describe all of
nature. One is the 'Standard Model' which describes all material properties. The
Standard Model contains all the quantum particles. The other theory is 'General
Relativity', Einstein's theory that describes gravitation. Despite some
similarities, these two theories are very different and there is no verified
theory or experimental evidence connecting the two, even though most physicists
think that there must be a connection. This group specializes on measuring very
small forces to conduct ultra-precise tests of gravity. In all the tests carried
out by the team, they try to find ever so small deviations from ordinary
gravity. If such deviations are found, it would mean that there is more to
general relativity, or that this is hint of a third fundamental theory, or that
this is a hint of how to unify the Standard Model and General
Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the group is specialized in
developing and using torsion balance instruments to&lt;br/&gt;1) Test the
equivalence principle (EP): It is almost certain that any connection between
General Relativity and the Standard Model violates the EP. The torsion balances
utilized by the group provide the most precise EP tests to date. The
measurement's sensitivity will be doubled, or more, through technical
innovation: introducing fused silica fibers and by applying two new methods to
track ambient gravity gradients. The experiment's generality and relevance to
cosmology will be enhanced by probing the EP with hydrogen-bearing test
masses.&lt;br/&gt;2) Search for spin-coupled forces and hints of Lorentz
violation: Intrinsic spin is fundamental to the standard model interactions but
apparently not to general relativity. Leveraging the group's spin-polarized
experimental results, constraints will be placed on an emerging class of ultra-
light dark matter candidates.&lt;br/&gt;3) Test Newton's Inverse-Square (ISL) at
short distances: The group's experiments hold the record for the shortest
distance at which gravity has been observed, constraining gravity-strength ISL
deviation to act over distances less than 42 microns. The group will commission
existing upgrades to their 120-fold-symmetric ISL apparatus and press onward to
yet smaller distances.&lt;br/&gt;4) Advance the frontier of low-frequency small-
force technology: Innovative and challenging technology development has
underpinned the group's success. Looking to the future of the field, the group
will continue to refine both an ultra-low noise cryogenic torsion balance and
highly-sensitive, but user-friendly, optical angle-sensing instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;The creative technical advances required for gravitational strength
force measurement at low frequency have had and will have impact on related
fields, including gravitational-wave detection. With NSF investment, the group
has built up a strong world-leading laboratory with unique expertise and
infrastructure in position to address these experimental challenges with
efficiency and rigor.