* 1607645
* Physics of Centrosome Reorientation during Signaling Activation in Immune Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Garegin Papoian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

The immune system is an important defense mechanism against infections and
cancer. T cells are central effectors of the adaptive immune response. They
recognize molecules on the surface of cells, and initiate signaling that results
in the immune response. An essential step during this process is the
reorientation of the T cell microtubule-organizing center (centrosome). Proper
positioning of the centrosome is required for normal signaling through the T
cell receptor and the directed release of lymphokine molecules in T helper cells
or cytotoxins in cytotoxic T cells. While the signaling pathways between T cell
activation and centrosome positioning have been well studied, the physical
mechanisms underlying asymmetric centrosome positioning are not understood. The
PI will combine quantitative imaging and biophysical measurements with molecular
dynamics simulations to unravel the role of cytoskeletal forces in centrosome
positioning. The PI will develop a course on Biophysics of the Cell covering
topics ranging from cytoskeletal forces to mechano-chemistry of signaling.
Research results from the proposed projects will be used to develop a novel
laboratory component. The PI and co-PI will offer a beginning undergraduate
course focused on introducing students to concepts of critical thinking and
research practice using hands on research experience on relevant themes such as
cellular force generation. The PI and co-PI will mentor graduate and
undergraduate student research and encourage minority students and high school
students from the area to participate in research. The PI will organize a week-
long biophysics lab demonstration as part of the Summer Girls Program in the
Physics Department to encourage participation of female high school students in
science. The co-PI will develop user friendly educational software modules
teaching how complex cytoskeletal dynamics emerges from simple molecular
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies, using an integrated
experimental and computational approach, will lead to fundamental understanding
of centrosome positioning which is critical in many cellular functions in many
cell types. The group will use state-of-the-art imaging techniques to
quantitatively analyze the 3-dimensional shape and dynamics of microtubules. In
parallel, they will develop a computational model of centrosome movement driven
by MT dynamics and motor activity. Model parameters will be set by comparisons
with experimental observations (Objective 1). The PI will investigate the
interactions between the acto-myosin cytoskeleton and the MT-dynein systems and
their respective roles in centrosome positioning. The PI will also extend the
model to include both actin and microtubule cytoskeletons and associated motors,
their mutual couplings and systematically model perturbations carried out in
parallel experiments (Objective 2). This research will unravel novel physical
principles involved in the collective dynamics of two distinct but interacting
force-generating biopolymer filament systems and associated motors. The
development of the mechano-chemical model will be applicable to many other
phenomena in cell biology and hence a valuable contribution to the field. More
broadly, this work will provide novel insights on the principles of self-
organization in highly complex active matter systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Cellular Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences.