* 1607878
* Curvature gradient driven assembly of trapped and reconfigurable structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kathleen Stebe, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 427,509.00

Non-technical Abstrat The ability to organize microscale particles into well-
defined structures lies at the heart of our ability to design new soft,
reconfigurable materials. Often, external electrostatic or magnetic fields are
used to guide particles into positions where they can interact and form
structures. This work studies fields that have not been widely appreciated or
used in the past. Particles on fluid interfaces deform and increase the area of
the interface around them. The product of surface tension and this area increase
is an energy field that depends on the curvature of the fluid interface, so
particles move along curvature gradients. Through this simple but remarkable
fact, the geometry of the interface itself can be used to direct assembly. Here,
these fields are studied to identify new ways to form structures difficult to
form by conventional means to make new materials whose properties are explored.
Graduate and undergraduate students are trained in the course of performing the
proposed research, including students in the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program, the Advancing Women in Engineering Program and the UPENN
MRSEC REU program. New knowledge developed will be incorporated in a graduate
course on interfacial phenomena.

Technical Abstract This research seeks to establish new strategies for directed
assembly of micron and sub-micron scale particles to go well beyond the usual
close packed assemblies. Particle trapped at fluid interfaces interact and
migrate along interface curvature gradients via capillarity. These energies
drive formation of complex structures strongly correlated with the interface
curvature field, influenced by particle-particle interactions. Since soft matter
is inherently deformable, such interactions are a natural route to form
reconfigurable, tunable assemblies. Different classes of structures are studied
using optical microscopy to observe structures, lithographically defined vessels
to mold fluid interfaces and magnetic and other probes to perturb the structures
and to guide their reconfiguration. Kinetically trapped structures are studied
to form colloidal monolayer membranes with voids, dense regions and oriented
structures which respond to changes in interface shape. Equilibrated structures
are studied to form structures aligned along principle axes of the interfaces
and to study their reconfiguration upon interface perturbation. The (dynamics
of) structure formation is observed by optical microscopy for particle shapes
and sizes selected for the scale of capillary interactions that they excite and
their ability to form oriented structures with associated anisotropies in the
structural response to perturbation. For both limits, particle positions/
orientations are compared to and correlated with the interface curvature.
Observations are compared to appropriate prediction based on, for example,
Stokesian Dynamics simulations for trapped structures and Monte Carlo
simulations for equilibrated structures.