* 1607913
* Examining the role of nanoparticles in the formation and degradation of methylated mercury in the ocean
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation, Professors Robert Mason and Jing
Zhao of the University of Connecticut examine the role of nanoparticles in
controlling the reactions between various forms of mercury in the ocean.
Specifically, in contrast to freshwater environments, dimethylmercury is found
in all ocean waters where measurements have been made. There is little
information on its formation mechanisms. The investigators have preliminary
evidence to indicate that it may be formed by reactions that involve
nanoparticles and other surfaces. It is known that methylmercury, an organic
form of mercury found in the ocean, is mostly formed by bacteria that react with
inorganic mercury. Reactive surfaces are also be important in the degradation of
methylmercury. The project trains a graduate student in diverse aspects of
environment chemistry, and engages undergraduates and high school students,
providing avenues for research, teaching and outreach. The investigators
incorporate the research into ongoing outreach programs. They use the
information generated from the project in developing their graduate and
undergraduate teaching curricula. The results are published in the peer-reviewed
literature, with the graduate student as the lead author.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators conduct laboratory experiments with both
commercially manufactured and natural nanomaterials to examine the potential
importance of metal nanoparticles in forming metallic and organic forms of
mercury under conditions applicable to the ocean. Techniques used in these
experiments include UV-visible and fluorescence spectroscopy, electron
microscopy and mass spectrometry. Mercury analyses require instruments that are
specifically designed for measurement of the different forms of mercury at low
concentrations. The results of this research enhance our understanding of the
processes that form methylated mercury in the ocean which, when bioaccumulated
into seafood is an important human health concern. Professors Mason and Zhao
incorporate their findings into their outreach communications with managers and
regulators interested in mitigating the impacts of anthropogenic mercury
emissions on the biosphere through such treaties as the Minamata Convention.