* 1607991
* Functional Carbon Surfaces for Stable Passivation of Sodium-Ion Battery Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Maureen Tang, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 321,738.00

Non-technical Description Intermittent renewable energy sources like wind and
solar require large-scale, cost-effective methods for energy storage. There is
currently no technology that could provide this amount of energy storage with
acceptable safety, lifetime, and cost. Rechargeable sodium-ion batteries are
more promising than lithium-ion batteries for large-scale storage based on their
earth-abundant resources and lower raw material cost. However, the lifetime of
current sodium-ion technology is limited by inefficient interfaces between solid
and liquid materials inside the battery. With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this project will develop better understanding of
this interfacial chemistry. The results will allow researchers to design
materials that last longer and to predict the lifetime of those materials much
faster than traditional methods. The educational benefits of the project include
graduate and undergraduate researcher training in electroanalytical chemistry,
battery science, microfabrication, and reactor design. The PI has also partnered
with a local high school's chapter of Girls Who Code to introduce high school
students to electronics and engineering design.

Technical Description Insufficient passivation from the Solid Electrolyte
Interphase (SEI), a surface film at the electrode/electrolyte interface, limits
the lifetime of sodium-ion batteries. Even basic understanding of how the SEI
forms, grows, and transports charges is severely lacking. This work will apply
an innovative combination of microfluidic reactors, electrochemical generator-
collector experiments, and redox mediator studies in order to develop methods
for critical insight into the form and function of the SEI. Reducing reactor
volume mimics the surface:volume ratio of a real battery while the well-defined
convection field is still amenable to transport and kinetic analysis. This
unconventional approach controls the residence time of the electrolyte
degradation reactions and can be used to map passivation efficiency to the
concentration and chain-length of solubilized oligomers. The microflow reactor
also permits electrochemical generator-collector experiments to amperometrically
detect reaction products. Such four-electrode measurements are not possible in a
normal battery and will permit the amperometric detection of soluble degradation
products and mediator studies of charge transport and reaction in the SEI.
Patterned carbonaceous electrodes in model geometries will be synthesized by
controlled oxidation of pyrolyzed photoresist. These electrodes will be
characterized spectroscopically and microscopically in order to relate their
electrochemical performance to the nature of the carbon surface. The results of
the study will impact both existing and emerging materials for sodium-ion
batteries by determining how carbon surface chemistry can be used to control
both the catalysis of desirable SEI products and their effective precipitation
into stable films.