* 1607398
* CDS&amp;E: Stochastic Isogeometric Analysis by Hierarchical B-Spline Sparse Grids
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,912.00

A great many complex materials and engineered structures are plagued by
variability, that is, uncertainty, due to imprecise knowledge of operating
environment, insufficient information about material properties, and intrinsic
randomness in manufacturing processes. Conventional modeling and simulation
procedures rely on heuristically derived safety factors and do not
quantitatively account for the statistical variation of a system response.
Consequently, the resulting predictions are either too conservative and
overcompensate for uncertainty, or unknowingly risky due to unresolved
ambiguities. This project will conduct fundamental research on modeling and
simulation of complex systems subject to uncertainty; in other words, new
computational methods will be developed to quantify the effect of uncertainty on
system response. By addressing uncertainty head-on, effective measures to manage
and mitigate uncertainty can be devised. Potential engineering applications
include microstructure-property relationship in advanced materials, fatigue and
fracture of engineering structures, and design of nanoelectromechanical systems,
among others. Beyond engineering, the results from this research will benefit
the U.S. economy and society through application in areas where uncertainty
quantification plays a vital role, such as energy sciences--nuclear energy,
carbon sequestration; statistical physics--medicine, quantum mechanics;
geosciences--seismology, reservoir modeling; and bioinformatics--drug delivery,
agriculture. This research is multi-disciplinary, involving engineering, applied
mathematics, and statistics, and will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research as well as positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to advance the
theory of isogeometric analysis, accompanied by robust numerical algorithms, for
uncertainty quantification of a high-dimensional response from complex materials
and structures. The effort will involve: (1) new randomized non-uniform rational
B-splines (NURBS) for the stochastic matrix equation and NURBS-based random
field discretization for a material body; (2) new stochastic isogeometric
methods entailing the hierarchical B-spline sparse grids for high-dimensional
function interpolation; and (3) new formulae and scalable algorithms for
predicting the statistical moments and probability density functions of a
complex structural response. The research will bridge geometric modeling, stress
analysis, and stochastic simulation by interacting natively upon the same
mathematical building blocks, forming a seamless uncertainty quantification
pipeline of the future. Due to innovative formulation of the sparse grid
interpolation, the resulting stochastic method will be efficiently implemented
regardless of the size of an uncertainty quantification problem. New
computational algorithms will be generated for efficiently estimating the
statistical moments and probability density function of a structural response,
including error estimates that will result in a rigorous assessment of the
sparse grid approximation. The overall effort will effectively integrate
research, education, training, and outreach.