* 1607137
* EAPSI: Investigating Specific Immune Response Genes Induced by a Cell-To-Cell Signaling Molecule
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Allen Washington, Washington              Allen
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Over the past few decades, advances in immunology have led to efficacious immune
therapies for cancer, recognized as the "Breakthrough of the Year" by Science
Magazine in 2013. Previously incurable cancers are now responding to immune
therapies. Despite these compelling results, much can be learned by more basic
research studies on anti-tumor immunity. In particular, it is not well known how
emerging aberrant cells are initially detected and prevented from proliferating
further through the interaction between the surrounding cells and the immune
cells. We have previously identified the cell-to-cell signaling molecule that
recruits immune cells into tumors. The identified molecule, interleukin-17D
(IL-17D) is known as a signal molecule that carries out inflammation against
pathogens in fish and also in invertebrates such as oysters. This project will
investigate the impact of IL-17D on the gene activation and gene modification in
cells of mammalian origin. In collaboration with Hiroyuki Sasaki, MD, PhD, an
expert on epigenetics at Kyushu University, the project will uncover new
insights into how IL-17D signals to mediate immune cell activation.

The project will advance the knowledge in the field of immunology by
characterizing the genes induced by a conserved secreted protein involved in
inflammation. This research will be carried out at Kyushu University under
Professor Hiroyuki Sasaki. The project investigates the global gene expression
and epigenetic modifications in cells stimulated with IL-17D using RNA-seq and
bisulfite sequencing analyses. The project investigates 1) the immune response
genes induced in response to IL-17D and 2) epigenetic changes from prolonged
IL-17D stimulation in differentiated versus transformed cell types. Successful
completion of this project will lead to detailed understanding on how IL-17D
signals to mediate surveillance of transformed cells. Results from this project
will contribute towards the basic research needed to develop efficacious immune
therapies.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.