* 1607862
* Magic-size nanoclusters as low-temperature precursors to nanocrystal and bulk semiconductor films
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* William Buhro, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

The research pursued in this project advances semiconductor nanoscience for
potential use in solar-energy technologies. As atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
levels currently threaten the global ecosystem and human well-being, the
development of clean-energy technologies is a major societal necessity.
Professor Buhro is providing new methods to prepare more-efficient solar cells
and the economical, scalable semiconductor processing required for widespread
access to solar electricity. One aspect of the project is to develop
semiconductor-nanocrystal films having optimized structures for charge transport
in the solar-absorber layers of solar cells. This may increase the performance
of the cells. The key to this strategy is the shape of the nanocrystals, which
are plate-like or ribbon-like, and stack together compactly. These shapes are
capable of transporting charge over large distances. A second aspect of the
project is the low-temperature deposition of semiconductor films using solution
chemistry. A major drawback to the wider implementation of solar electricity is
the high cost of making the semiconductor components of solar cells by the
current gas-phase and vacuum-based technologies. Professor Buhro is contributing
to the development of much more economical solution-based processing methods.
Both aspects of the project rely on so-called "magic-size semiconductor
nanoclusters" as key chemical intermediates and precursors. The magic-size
nanoclusters are small, discrete molecular units that have the same compositions
as the target semiconductor phases, and that produce crystalline semiconductors
from solution at low temperatures. By increasing the ability to transport charge
and the economy of semiconductor-film fabrication, this research may have broad
societal impact as it promotes the availability and practicality of solar-energy
technology. Additionally, Professor Buhro is a mentor to a large number female
Ph.D. scientists. He works to retain women in STEM fields by incorporating
active-learning strategies in introductory courses.

In this research project, Professor William Buhro of Washington University in
St. Louis is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
(MSN) program to employ stoichiometric magic-size semiconductor nanoclusters and
flat (2D), colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals in the advancement of low-
temperature, solution-based semiconductor processing and nanocrystal solar
cells. Solid-state quantum-dot (QD) solar cells have emerged as a third-
generation photovoltaic technology that promises economical, scalable
production, and the necessary solar-conversion performance for real-world
application. Flat (2D) semiconductor nanocrystals (quantum belts and quantum
platelets) have optical properties and interfacial characteristics comparable to
colloidal quantum dots. They also have at least one extended length dimension.
Professor Buhro is now investigating their use in nanocrystal solar-absorber
layers. The architectures of 2D-nanocrystal films consist of bundled semi-
ordered domains oriented in three dimensions. The larger lateral nanocrystal
dimensions relative to QDs are expected to increase the carrier mean free paths
and minimize hopping. The overall film architecture may provide conduction
pathways percolating in all three dimensions. These materials may minimizing
carrier recombination and increasing the photon-conversion efficiencies of solar
cells. A second component of this project addresses molecular semiconductor
inks. Ideal molecular inks for semiconductor fabrication should possess
stoichiometries matched to the target semiconductor, kinetically labile ligands,
and the capacity for low-temperature semiconductor crystallization. Professor
Buhro is investigating the newly isolated, stoichiometric magic-size II-VI
nanoclusters for this purpose. Strategies for employing such nanoclusters as
low-temperature precursors to bulk, polycrystalline semiconductor films are
under study. Efforts to complete the structural characterization of these
stoichiometric, amine-passivated, magic-size II-VI nanoclusters, and to explore
their chemical reactivities and physical properties are also underway. The
research pursued in this project is expected to fundamentally advance
semiconductor nanoscience impacting solar-energy technologies. Additionally,
Professor Buhro mentors a large number female Ph.D. scientists, and is working
to retain women by incorporating active-learning strategies into introductory
STEM courses.