* 1607868
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* John Perdew, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2020
* USD 440,202.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division contribute funds to this award that will lead to more accurate computer
modeling of molecules, chemicals, and materials. To do this the PI will focus on
the "glue" that binds one atom to another to form molecules and materials which
has the technical name exchange-correlation energy. Making this energy smaller
strengthens the "glue" because electrons avoid close approaches to other
electrons which have the same electric charge. The density of electrons
determines the exchange-correlation energy, but the exact formula is not known.
Nevertheless, it is possible to use a computer to predict what molecules and
materials can exist, and with what properties, by using an approximate formula.
The PI has developed approximate formulas that lead to good predictions of the
properties of many materials and molecules as compared with actual experiments.
In this research the PI will develop even more accurate approximations for the
"glue" that still lend themselves to efficient simulation of molecules, and
materials on a computer. The PI's most recent approximate formula is called
SCAN. As a feature, it shares all the attributes of the exact formula that are
known from fundamental principles of quantum mechanics that are possible for an
approximation like SCAN. Nevertheless, no formula of this type can be exact;
approximations of this type introduce a spurious interaction of an electron with
itself. A major goal of this project will be to develop a widely-useful
correction to overcome this source of error for SCAN. The development of more
accurate approximations for the "glue" that holds atoms together leads to better
predictions for the properties of chemicals, molecules, and materials. These
predictions can lead to the discovery of new materials with desired properties
for a wide range of applications from building and construction, to
sophisticated electronic devices, to biomaterials for medical applications, and
more. This research enables better computer modeling of materials with potential
impact on the Materials Genome Initiative. This award also helps support the
PI's efforts to develop better ways to help educate more high-school physics
teachers,and to involve undergraduate students in the research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division
contribute funds to this award that supports research in Kohn-Sham density
functional theory, the most widely-used method to calculate ground-state
energies or energy differences, equilibrium nuclear positions, and electron
densities in atoms, molecules, and solids. The theory is exact in principle,
although in practice the density functional for the exchange-correlation energy
must be approximated. In the preceding award period, the Perdew research group
developed SCAN, a "strongly constrained and appropriately normed" functional
that is more accurate for diversely-bonded systems than comparably-efficient
approximations. Satisfying all 17 known exact constraints that a semilocal
functional can, the SCAN meta-generalized gradient approximation could replace
the widely-used Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation.

In the current award period, extensive tests will be made for SCAN and for SCAN
with a long-range van der Waals correction. These tests would include the
formation energies which determine relative stabilities of molecules and solids
from the elements in their standard states, large reference-data sets for sp-
bonded and transition-element-containing molecules, the polyacetylene chain, the
ground-state crystal structures of solids that have proven challenging to get
correct for , fundamental band gaps of solids, surface energies and work
functions of metals, and adsorption energies for molecules on surfaces, A
refined self-interaction correction to SCAN would seek to preserve the excellent
SCAN description of equilibrium bonds for weakly-correlated systems while
improving the description of stretched bonds, charge transfers, and strongly-
correlated systems. A SCAN-like additive correction to the fully-nonlocal random
phase approximation would be developed. Proof would be sought for a hypothesized
tight lower bound on the exchange energy of any spin-unpolarized density.
Finally, exchange-correlation energy differences for selected systems would be
analyzed in a way that could lead to a better understanding of electronic
systems and their properties, and of the successes of SCAN. The development of
more accurate approximations for exchange-correlation functions will result in
better predictions for the properties of atoms, molecules, and materials and can
lead to the discovery of new materials with desired properties for a wide range
of applications from building and construction to sophisticated electronic
devices to biomaterials for medical applications and more. This research enables
better computer modeling of materials with potential impact on the Materials
Genome Initiative. This award also helps support the PI's efforts to develop
better ways to help educate more high-school physics teachers, and to involve
undergraduate students in the research.