* 1607295
* Laser-Cooling Cadmium for Optical Atomic Clock, Cold Collisions, and Quantum Gas Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Kurt Gibble, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2022
* USD 559,452.00

This project will develop experimental techniques needed to develop an atomic
clock that is based on the element cadmium. The small differences in
frequencies, or tick-rates, and the short time intervals that atomic clocks can
measure have wide-ranging applications, including the Global Positioning System
(GPS), secure financial transactions, and official U.S. and international time.
Scientific applications of atomic clocks include tests of fundamental physics
(such as Einstein's theory of general relativity), geodesy, long baseline
interferometry, and metrology. Atomic clocks can help address questions such as
whether the fundamental constants of the universe (like the ratio of the mass of
an electron to the mass of a proton) change in time. The attractiveness of
cadmium atoms for highly accurate clocks stems from the ability to make them
relatively insensitive to the disruptive influence of thermal radiation from
room-temperature surroundings, a limitation for many atomic clocks presently. An
additional practical aspect is that the lasers needed to make a cadmium clock
are expected to be more reliable than for other clock species with small thermal
sensitivities. Cadmium also has a wide variety of isotopes (8 versions of the
atom with different numbers of neutrons at its center), each of which collides
with each other in different ways, opening up more possibilities to make a
better clock and providing an interesting variety of fundamental physics
studies. Lasers will be used to probe and control the cadmium atoms in order to
better understand and quantify the aspects mentioned above and pave the way to a
better atomic clock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate laser-
cooling and trapping of fermion and boson isotopes of cadmium, particularly
using the 65 kHz wide 326 nm 1S0-3P1 transition. To enhance the scattering rate
in order to increase the number of trapped atoms, anticipated approaches include
quenching the 3P1 state with a 350 nm laser excitation to 1D2 or using a
metastable magneto-optical trap based on the 361 nm 3P2-3D3 transition. The
326nm 1S0-3P1 transition will directly yield atoms at microKelvin temperatures,
which can be loaded into a far off-resonance dipole trap and subsequently loaded
into a magic-wavelength optical lattice. The magic wavelength will be determined
and cadmium-cadmium collisions can be studied in the dipole trap. More broadly,
the project is expected to support collaborations with clocks groups around the
world, for example, to evaluate the accuracies of primary atomic clocks that
contribute to International Atomic Time (TAI).