* 1607135
* Nanochemical Control of Polymorphism in Transition Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2019
* USD 445,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Many useful and important technologies rely on materials
that contain compounds formed by combining transition metals with sulfur,
selenium, or tellurium. The properties of these so-called metal chalcogenides
depend on their crystal structures, or the arrangements of the atoms that
comprise them. Some useful metal chalcogenide systems can form several closely
related crystal structures, and even small differences in how the atoms are
arranged can dramatically influence their properties. Therefore, in order to
control and tune the properties of metal chalcogenides, it is important to
understand how to control their crystal structures. With the support of the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the research team is investigating
chemical methods that precisely target the formation of one particular crystal
structure in metal chalcogenide systems where multiple crystal structures are
known. Nanoscale crystals of metal chalcogenides have unique characteristics
that enable these studies, including the ability to facilitate chemical
reactions that manipulate important features of their crystal structures. The
knowledge gained from this project is useful for producing new materials that
are relevant for applications in catalysis, electronics, and magnetism. This
project is providing a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students with
multi-disciplinary training in research, communication, project management, and
outreach. A formal collaboration with an undergraduate research group further
expands both training and research opportunities. In addition, the entire
research team is engaged in the development of news clips and social media
content for showcasing to the general public the diversity of materials-focused
research and researchers.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Transition metal chalcogenides comprise an important class of
inorganic solids that enable a wide range of applications, particularly as
nanoscale materials. Underpinning their applications is the ability to
synthetically achieve precisely controlled features, including crystal structure
and morphology, that directly impact properties. In this project, the research
team is identifying and understanding the reaction parameters, reaction
pathways, and materials characteristics that lead to the predictable and
selective formation of stable and metastable metal chalcogenide polymorphs. The
primary materials systems being studied include cobalt, iron, and manganese
sulfides and molybdenum tellurides made using both direct synthesis methods and
nanoparticle chemical transformation reactions. This new knowledge is being used
to overcome significant chemical bottlenecks in the formation of several high-
value materials targets for emerging applications. This project is providing a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students with multi-disciplinary
training in research, communication, project management, and outreach. The
project includes a formal collaboration with an undergraduate research group and
also engages students in the development of news clips and social media content
for showcasing to the general public the diversity of materials-focused research
and researchers.