* 1607299
* CAREER: Towards Robots that Learn from Everyday Users
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Sonia Chernova, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 209,756.00

The development of robots that work cooperatively with people is of critical
importance for industries as diverse as manufacturing, medicine, healthcare,
military, and consumer products. Key to this goal is the development of robotic
technologies that are adaptable to changing task and user needs. As usability
demands change - whether due to modifications in the manufacturing process, the
introduction of a new patient, or the relocation to a new home - users with
limited technical skills must have the ability to customize the functionality of
robotic systems. This project will contribute new theoretical models, techniques
and open source implementations that will enable users to effectively
communicate high level task knowledge to robots without programming.

Intellectual merit: The project will leverage human-robot interaction to improve
the efficiency of object recognition, feature selection and policy learning
algorithms, as well as develop new techniques for data reuse and algorithm
evaluation. Hypotheses will be validated through the development of an
innovative dual-reality framework for Internet-scale rapid evaluation and
testing. Theories will be tested in two robotic applications areas: home
assistance and manufacturing. The outcome of this project will be a domain
independent interactive learning framework capable of adaptive object
recognition, feature selection and policy learning from brief interactions with
a single, non-expert user.

Broader impact: The long term goal of this research is to one day make personal
robots accessible to everyday people. This research will contribute new
theoretical models, techniques and open source implementations that will
accelerate the development and adoption of robots that work alongside people.
The resulting theories and methodologies for adaptive interactive systems will
have potential societal impact beyond robotics, in software systems such as
personal computers and mobile devices. To promote research in this area, the
investigator will make all developed software components available as open
source. The research will also be integrated into courses at the undergraduate
and graduate levels, as well as into outreach activities for middle and high
school students. The web-based evaluation framework will provide a unique
opportunity to educate the general public by providing access to cutting-edge
robotic technology and empowering them to contribute to its development.