* 1607173
* OP: Terahertz Lasers Using Intersubband Transitions in non-polar III-nitrides
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Michael Manfra, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 320,000.00

Title: Novel compact terahertz lasers utilizing polarization-free nitride
semiconductors for sensing and imaging

Abstract Non-technical description: This project investigates a new class of
compact, efficient laser light sources operating in the long-wavelength spectral
range between the infrared and the microwave ranges, known as the terahertz
(THz) gap. Due to fundamental limitations of commonly used semiconductors, this
range is currently inaccessible with any other semiconductor lasers. This
project exploits the unique properties of nitride semiconductors. However, the
nitrides also present some unique challenges related to their atomic structure
and built-in electric fields. To overcome these challenges the researchers
employ sophisticated modeling tools to design new laser structures. The
materials are then grown using molecular beam epitaxy, a technique that allows
control of the nitride thicknesses at the nanoscale, and characterized with
structural and optical techniques. Finally, laser devices are fabricated and
tested to study their performance under different operating conditions and to
further refine the design parameters.These novel lasers have the potential to
impact a number of technological applications with broad benefits to society.
The applications loosely fit into one of two main categories: THz spectroscopy,
and THz imaging. THz spectroscopy is currently used in fields ranging from
astronomy, and atmospheric science, to plasma fusion diagnostics and bio-
chemical weapons detection. THz imaging has broad applications from airport
security to medical imaging. This research program also provides unique
interdisciplinary research opportunities to a diverse group of students at
Purdue University. Special attention is given to providing hands-on research
experience to under-represented students, especially women. Outreach activities
will increase the awareness and exposure of Grade 7-12 students and teachers
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds in Central Indiana to the scientific
content and methods of photonics.

Technical description: This project develops and studies a new class of far-
infrared semiconductor emitters for the 1-10 THz range, specifically operating
in the reststrahlen band of GaAs (30-40 micron wavelength). These lasers utilize
intersubband transitions in the conduction band of non-polar III-nitride
heterostructures and employ the general operating principles of quantum cascade
lasers. The technical approach involves using low Al-composition, non-polar
nitride heterostructures (AlInGaN/GaN) grown on high quality free-standing
m-plane GaN substrates to mitigate material quality and design issues that have,
so far, impeded progress of nitride intersubband devices. The choice of
polarization-free m-plane heterostructures has the tremendous advantage of
eliminating the effect of built-in electric fields at hetero-interfaces. The
research effort is interdisciplinary in nature and involves material design and
growth, structural and optical material characterization, waveguide design and
fabrication, and finally device testing.This research will enable a novel
compact, coherent, tunable THz light source with power output suitable for
technological applications (milliwatt level). In addition to broader wavelength
flexibility, the THz nitride lasers are expected to have superior performance in
terms of operating temperature and efficiency at the longer wavelengths
currently accessible with GaAs THz quantum cascade lasers. The research focuses
on THz lasers using non-polar nitrides, but the knowledge acquired is also
relevant to nitride optoelectronic devices operating in other spectral ranges
such as the near-infrared (telecom) range. Moreover, the acquired knowledge is
valuable for other types of devices, such as transistors, and to other material
systems. This research program also brings about important contributions to the
physics of optical transitions and vertical charge transport in nitride
materials. Elaborate modeling tools and techniques are developed to predict and
explain real device behavior. Moreover, this project considerably advances
knowledge regarding molecular beam epitaxy of III-nitride materials with the
atomic-layer precision and exact reproducibility necessary for complex infrared
devices.