* 1607588
* Theoretical Atomic Attosecond Spectroscopy: Monitor and Control of Electron Correlation in Real Time
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Luca Argenti, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,062.00

This project is aimed at the development of new, non-standard computational
tools for representing the interaction of poly-electronic atomic systems with
ultra-short "attosecond" light pulses. These ultra-short pulses act like high
speed cameras capable of imaging the motion of electrons within atoms and/or
molecules. They accordingly provide a unique picture of the complex dynamics
associated with electron motion, and may also provide an opportunity to control
the outcome of ionization and other fragmentation processes, even within
complex, highly-correlated materials. The severe computational challenge of
representing the motion of electrons on such short time scales derives from the
uncertainty principle, which indicates that atomic and/or molecular states
spanning a broad energy range will need to be accurately described, including
high energy states in which two or more electrons are simultaneously excited.
The project should accordingly shed light on the role of multiply-excited states
in fragmentation processes induced by the absorption of attosecond radiation
pulses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical description of the dynamical
regimes triggered in atoms by ultrashort laser pulses is challenging because it
entails the representation of several electronic states, across a wide energy
range, that decay by emitting photoelectrons. The electrons liberated to the
continuum interact strongly with the parent ion they leave behind, as well as
with the dressing laser pulses commonly employed in attosecond pump-probe
experiments. To tackle these difficulties, this project will merge parallel
simulation techniques for the time-dependent Schrodinger equation of general
poly-electronic atoms in the presence of arbitrary external fields, with state-
of-the-art numerical methods to compute stationary bound states, multichannel
single-ionization scattering atomic functions, and Siegert states, represented
in terms of a multi-configuration Hartree Fock B-spline close-coupling approach.
The numerical tools developed in the project will be applied to study unexplored
aspects of driven multi-electron attosecond dynamics in rare gas atoms, with a
special focus on the role of autoionizing states, which constitute the best
approximation of a persistent reference onto which building coherent-control
schemes for photo-fragmentation processes. In particular, the project will
explore the creation, imaging and tailoring of transiently bound wavepackets, by
means of both optical and photoelectron attosecond interferometric pump-probe
schemes. The project will study how transient coherences can be used to control
branching ratios, angular distributions, and residual-ion coherence in
photoionization events. Properties of laser-driven autoionizing states, such as
their ac-Stark shift, their tunnelling rate, and the electric susceptibility of
dressed atoms in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV) range, will be charted. The
affect of electron correlation on these properties will be studied, and this
information will be used to help control population transfer within the system
as well as the spectrum and shape of the XUV light transmitted through the
target.