* 1607104
* Seismic imaging of the interplate boundary and deformation within the overriding Aegean lithosphere at the Hellenic subduction zone west of Crete (Greece)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Anne Becel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

Most of the world's great earthquakes occur at subduction zones, or
"megathrusts". These events pose significant earthquake and tsunami hazards to
densely populated coastal areas. This project focuses on the Hellenic subduction
zone in Eastern Mediterranean, which is the most seismically active region in
Europe. This subduction zone presents an apparent paradox in that the megathrust
appears to be weakly coupled at present, rupturing in events with maximum
magnitudes of ~6, but this system has been capable of producing M&gt;8
tsunamigenic earthquakes in historical time such, as the 365 AD M 8.3 events
south of western Crete which is the largest event ever reported in Europe. This
project will help resolve this paradox by improving our knowledge of the
geometry and properties of the plate interface and other faults in the Hellenic
subduction zone. Better constraints on the deep architecture of this subduction
zone are essential for assessing hazards for the densely populated Mediterranean
coastal regions. The study of the Hellenic subduction zone will also benefit
studies of other subduction zones, such as the US Cascadia and Alaska margins.
This project involves a strong international collaboration with French and Greek
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding supports a multichannel seismic survey
of the volcanic arc of the Hellenic subduction zone. Acquiring these data takes
advantage of a unique opportunity to image the seismogenic part of this
subduction zone. The data will be acquired with the deep penetration reflection
seismic capabilities of the R/V Marcus Langseth along a 220-km-long profile west
of Crete, across the inferred rupture area of the AD 365 earthquake. These data
will provide important missing information on the overall geometry of the plate
boundary including the thickness of sediment subducting along the plate
boundary, interplate roughness and possible downdip variations related to
changes in the properties of the interplate, as have been observed elsewhere,
allowing a much-improved understanding of the subduction dynamics and processes
in this area. The data will be analyzed and interpreted together with co-located
ocean bottom seismometer wide-angle reflection-refraction data acquired in 2012
by French partners of this project. Seismicity studies indicate one or more
active features in the overriding plate, and some authors recently suggested
that past great earthquakes might have occurred on a splay fault rather than on
the main plate boundary. The seismic reflection profile will image features in
the overriding plate and their relationship to the megathrust and will allow us
to distinguish between active faults and relic structures from previous tectonic
events. The geometry of these features will provide important constraints on the
tsunamigenic potential of these features. In addition to international
collaborations, broader impacts include support of an early career female
scientist and enhancement of research infrastructure through the first test of
the new R/V Marcus Langseth long-offset streamer.