* 1607417
* Collaborative Research:  ADMX-HF Extreme Axion Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Karl van Bibber, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2020
* USD 421,332.00

In this era of precision cosmology, measurements suggest that ordinary matter
represents only a fraction of the total matter density in the Universe. The
rest, whose presence we only infer gravitationally, is unknown in its nature,
and is termed Cold Dark Matter, for which a particle called a light axion is a
well-motivated candidate. Should axions constitute the dark matter of our Milky
Way halo, they may be detected through their conversion into a narrow Radio
Frequency (RF) signal in a microwave-cavity resonator permeated by a magnetic
field. The experiment being performed at Yale, ADMX-HF (Axion Dark Matter
eXperiment - High Frequency), was designed to serve both as an innovation test-
bed to develop and transition new cavity designs and quantum-limited photon
detection schemes, and as a pathfinder to take first data in the 10-100 micro-
electron Volt mass range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R&amp;D on superconducting thin-
films, and squeezed-state and single-photon detection in quantum electronics
will produce unanticipated spin-offs. ADMX-HF has proven to be a great attractor
for young talent. This award can be expected to extend this record. In addition,
it is planned to establish a permanent exhibit on dark-sector science at the
Chabot Space and Science Center, or the Oakland Museum of California, utilizing
prototypes and artifacts from many of the historic dark matter, dark energy and
cosmic microwave background experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC Berkeley and U.
Colorado/JILA are assisting Yale by taking the lead on cavity and amplifier
development, respectively. The three universities have successfully delivered on
ADMX-HF, which recently performed its first data run. This represented the
inaugural use of Josephson Parametric Amplifiers (JPAs) in the microwave cavity
experiment, and operation with a dilution refrigerator. With this award,
Berkeley and Colorado plan two lines of R&amp;D: (i) Berkeley will pursue
boosting the cavity Q by incorporating multilayer structures of thin-film
superconductors into the cavity design, as well as exploring Photonic Band Gap
(PBG) structures as practical resonators for higher frequency operation; and
(ii) Colorado/JILA will focus on reducing amplifier noise below the Standard
Quantum Limit (SQL), initially by incorporating a JPA-based squeezed-vacuum
state receiver. This would be only the second application of a squeezed-state
receiver, beside the GEO/LIGO gravity wave interferometers. Later, photon
detector systems based on superconducting qubits inside of a cavity will be
developed and deployed. Technical deliverables anticipated are to (a) extend the
mass range of the search to 12 GHz (~50 micro-eV), and (b) deliver an
improvement in power sensitivity by an order of magnitude, and thus approach
sensitivity to Dine-Fischler-Srednicki-Zhitnitsky (DFSZ) axions. This will
dramatically improve the discovery potential of the axion search in the most
promising mass region.