* 1607644
* Analysis of IceCube Data at UW-Madison 2016-2019
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* John Gallagher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,720,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena. This award provides funding
for the scientists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for the scientific
analysis of data taken with the IceCube neutrino detector. The study of neutrino
oscillations and the ongoing correlation studies between the arrival directions
of cosmic neutrinos and high-energy photons are only two of a large range of
current analyses, illustrating that discoveries are at best in initial
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mystique of the South Pole environment and the
compelling science of IceCube are an alluring mix. IceCube results have already
enhanced scientific and technological understanding on many levels and have
inspired the innovative capacity of a new generation of American scientists and
engineers. The Madison group will continue to make IceCube science and resources
available to existing education and outreach programs with a proven record of
success. The group is also a partner of a new program, called "El Universo es
Tuyo" (the Universe is Yours), to engage the Hispanic community in and around
Madison in learning about research and STEM careers in astronomy and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DeepCore, a densely instrumented infill array
in the bottom half of the IceCube detector, has lowered the sensitivity
threshold to 10 GeV. The Madison group participates in the development of
analysis techniques that specialize to DeepCore data. They will result in
improved measurements of the atmospheric oscillation parameters. The
accumulating cosmic neutrino events indicate an enhancement of the flux below
100 TeV that may hint at another component in the cosmic neutrino spectrum.