* 1607126
* Particle Physics at CMS in the High Luminosity Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Anders Ryd, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,870,000.00

Particle physics is the study of Nature at its most fundamental level. Great
strides have been made in recent decades, elucidating the key structure of
matter and the forces that govern most of the familiar world. Yet more remains
unknown and unexplained, and the modern theory of matter and forces, despite its
remarkable successes, is thought to be but an approximation to some broader,
deeper theory as yet undiscovered. The dark matter that holds the universe
together is unexplained; the masses of fundamental particles are unexplained;
even the existence of matter itself is unexplained. This project will both use
and extend the capabilities of the large "Compact Muon Solenoid" (CMS) particle
detector, which operates at the Large Hadron Collider at the CERN Laboratory in
Switzerland, to seek evidence of a larger, more encompassing understanding of
the universe and its contents, and in so doing, further the progress of
fundamental science. Much of the research work is done by students, both
graduate students and undergraduates, and the education and technical training
they receive in this process ensures they can make robust contributions to
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing and new data produced by the CMS
experiment will be studied for possible indications of dark matter production,
new heavy bosons, and supersymmetry, as well as for refined measurements of
known particles, particularly the top quark, and measurements of as-yet-
unobserved processes such as the production of a Higgs boson in conjunction with
two top quarks. To extend CMS capabilities, research and development for
upgrades to the silicon pixel tracking devices and the trigger will be
conducted. Detector upgrades are needed to exploit the full potential of the
next accelerator upgrade, known as the High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider.
Detectors and electronics, together with supporting software and firmware, will
be prototyped and studied to establish both the design and construction
techniques for the upgrade and to solve the myriad technical challenges that are
anticipated.