* 1607024
* RUI: MCB: the effect of stretch on giant cytoskeletal protein structure/function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Nathan Wright, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 291,621.00

Cells live in a world full of motion and physical strain, and therefore they
must have mechanisms to react to these stresses. One platform cells use to sense
and respond to stretch is the cytoskeleton. This meshwork of multiple different
proteins gives a cell its shape, yet is constructed in a way that allows
flexibility and motion. This research is focused on the role that the
cytoskeletal protein obscurin plays in stretch response and recognition.
Obscurin acts like a tether, connecting far-away segments of the cell to each
other. Due to its shape, obscurin has the capacity to expand and contract. There
are two possibilities of how obscurin could move like this. Obscurin could
behave like a rope, and only resist stretch when significantly elongated, or
obscurin could behave like a spring, and resist an ever-increasing amount of
force as it is stretched. Obscurin also can propagate biochemical signals, and
there is circumstantial evidence that this function could be activated by
stretch. The PI will test both facets of obscurin function - stretch response
and signaling. Together, these studies will provide insight into how cells
passively and actively respond to physical stretch. This work will be conducted
primarily by undergraduate students, in an effort to train the next generation
of scientists. The data accrued here will be incorporated into a free education
website, where others who do not have access to significant research support can
also learn the technical skills of how to do this kind of research.
Additionally, the PI will develop a scientific ethics curriculum for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigator will study
how obscurin reacts to physical stretch using both cellular and in vitro models.
Obscurin is composed of multiple stand-alone domains. Many of these individual
domains have been characterized extensively. In Aim 1, the PI will characterize
how these domains act in groups of two or three. Using protein NMR techniques,
the cross-talk between neighboring domains will be measured. Small angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS) provide a dynamic model of obscurin's overall shape. These
experimental approaches will be complimented through computer simulations to
test how these multi-domain systems respond to stretch. Together, these
experiments will detail how obscurin resists force. In Aim two, the PI will test
what effect obscurin has on the whole cell when the cell is stretched. Cells
with and without obscurin will be stretched, and the biochemical consequences of
obscurin's presence in these conditions will be analyzed. Together, these two
aims will help define how obscurin behaves as a stretch resistor, and will
answer the question of whether or not obscurin is a mechanosensor.