* 1607555
* Radio Detection of the Highest Energy Neutrinos with a Ground-Based Interferometric Phased Array
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Abigail Vieregg, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 481,230.00

Ultra-high-energy neutrinos are unique astrophysical messengers as they interact
only weakly with intervening matter and can therefore be used to probe the
distant universe. A small but observable flux of these ultra-high-energy
neutrinos are expected to be produced in interactions between high-energy
"cosmic ray" charged particles traveling through the Universe and Cosmic
Microwave Background photons. Observations of these cosmogenic neutrinos probe
the structure and evolution of the Universe and test physics at energies beyond
the standard models. Utilizing the large volume of radio transparent ice,
several pioneering efforts to detect these high energies neutrinos have been
implemented in Antarctica. Ultra-high-energy neutrinos traveling through the
dense Antarctic ice generate cascades of particles that emit observable radio
waves. This award will support the development of a new method for detecting
this signature of neutrino interaction based on radio interferometry. The
University of Chicago group will develop, deploy, and test a ground-based
interferometric phased array to measure the neutrino-induced radio emission.
This array will be integrated with the existing Askaryan Radio Array (ARA)
experiment located at the South Pole. The award will also support public
outreach efforts in partnership with the Adler
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Chicago group will design
and fabricate beam-forming trigger hardware for the phased array, integrate the
new array with the existing ARA station hardware in their local laboratories,
and then deploy the instrument to the South Pole and perform in situ tests. With
data from the integrated stations, they will evaluate the detector design and
acquire scientific data to help develop this technology for a larger-scale
experimental deployment.