* 1607323
* Black Hole Perturbations and Gravitational Self Force Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Bernard Whiting, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 139,477.00

This award supports research that will have a broad impact upon our
understanding of the applications of General Relativity to extreme astrophysical
systems, upon science education, and upon understanding and appreciation of
science by the public. The detection of gravitational waves, either on Earth or
in space, is opening a new window on the universe. Such detections will allow
new tests of our current theory of gravity when applied to the most extreme
systems imaginable. Likely sources of these waves include binary systems of
black holes and neutron stars and solar mass objects orbiting and eventually
spiraling into very large black holes - one thousand to ten billion times the
mass of the Sun. These sources include some of the most surprising objects in
the universe. New analysis is being developed to more efficiently describe the
spacetime dynamics of systems of compact objects, such as rotating black hole
binaries, which evolve through the emission of gravitational waves. The
experimental effort leading toward the detection of gravitational waves and,
ultimately, the analysis of the source characteristics will directly benefit
from accurate theoretical prediction of the orbital
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue this work, the exploration of
gravitational self force effects will continue. A new comparison between
numerical and analytical (post-Newtonian) results will be made once second order
numerical data becomes available from the self force community. This work is
carried out in collaboration with colleagues at the Institute of Astrophysics in
Paris and with a postdoc at UF. Confidence in the regularization required for
both self force and post-Newtonian calculations will be increased, as will
understanding of the post-Newtonian expansion itself. New gauge invariant
quantities, with second and higher order derivatives acting on the metric, will
be systematically investigated for perturbations of the Schwarzschild and Kerr
black holes, and equations which they satisfy will be sought. This latter effort
will be carried out in collaboration with a colleague in Southampton University,
and with several mathematical colleagues with ties to the Albert Einstein
Institute in Golm, Germany. The similarities and differences between problems in
the Schwarzschild and Kerr geometries will be carefully analyzed with a view to
making self force calculations in the Kerr spacetime background more efficient.