* 1607779
* Electron and Nuclear Spin Interactions in Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Vanessa Sih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2019
* USD 528,103.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;Electrons are fundamental particles that have spin,
mass, and charge. The understanding of electronic energy levels has been crucial
to understanding chemistry and the development of solid-state materials, such as
semiconductors, which have enabled technologies such as computer chips, light-
emitting diodes, and solar cells. The logic elements in today's computer chips
rely on controlling electron charge and encode information as the presence or
absence of charge currents and voltages, but encoding information using electron
spin polarization has applications for quantum information processing and
potential advantages for improving the speed, efficiency, and energy consumption
of logic devices. Electron spins, however, also interact with nuclear spins, and
this can be an undesirable source of noise or, if we can understand it better, a
pathway for controlling electron spin polarization. The PI will use optical
measurements with pulsed lasers to characterize how these spin interactions
depend on material strain and other parameters. This research will improve the
scientific understanding of these interactions and help us figure out how to
control them. The results of this research have the potential to advance
multiple scientific and technological areas, including semiconductor physics,
device engineering, materials science, magnetism and quantum information. The
research will provide valuable training to student researchers in a wide range
of techniques, including semiconductor device design and fabrication, optical
and electrical measurements, data acquisition and analysis and communicating
results through scientific presentations and publications. The proposed outreach
and education activities will seek to increase public engagement with recent
developments in science and technology and to encourage the participation of
underrepresented groups in scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
investigate electron and nuclear spin interactions in low-dimensional
semiconductor heterostructures. Controlling the interactions between electron
and nuclear spins is of great importance for applications such as classical and
quantum information processing, but the understanding of the coupled electron-
nuclear spin system is incomplete. Recent experiments on strained quantum dots
have revealed unexpected phenomena, including nuclear spin locking, nuclear
magnetization at zero magnetic field, and the anomalous Hanle effect. These
phenomena have been variously attributed to the effects of quantum confinement,
mesoscopic size, and strain, but it is difficult to separate these effects in
quantum dots and establish the underlying physical mechanisms. The proposed
measurements on strained and unstrained quantum wells will elucidate the role of
quantum confinement, carrier localization, reduced symmetry and dimensionality,
and spin-orbit effects on electron-nuclear spin interactions. The nuclear
polarization will be monitored using ultrafast pump-probe and spin noise optical
techniques capable of sensitively measuring small changes to the nuclear spin
polarization. The proposed research will advance scientific understanding of the
physical origins of recently-observed phenomena in strained quantum dots and
address open questions about the coupled electron-nuclear spin system and its
interaction with light.