* 1607795
* Hybrid Materials by Integration of Semiconductor Nanowires and Layered Crystals: Chemical Transformations and Functional Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Eli Sutter, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this project explores the creation of new classes
of hybrid materials by solid-state reactions that partially transform
semiconductor nanowires into layered crystals. Such transformations force the
integration of structurally dissimilar nanomaterials, which is expected to give
rise to novel and unique properties that are distinctly different from those of
the constituents. To study this solid-state chemistry, miniature reactor cells
are being developed that, when loaded with the component materials and
introduced into an electron microscope, provide the possibility to initiate and
directly observe complex materials transformation and integration processes down
to the atomic level. This novel approach has the potential to become a
transformative tool for developing synthesis and processing strategies for high-
technology materials. In addition to the targeted technical advances, the
project provides far-reaching educational and training opportunities for the
involved graduate and undergraduate students. It includes dedicated outreach
efforts to high-school students from rural areas and Native American populations
that give student-teacher teams the opportunity to participate in hands-on
activities related to the research. Under the guidance of the research team the
students prepare new science learning materials, which they bring back to their
school to share their experience with their peers and to help build excitement
for careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project is dedicated to studying the creation of novel
classes of hybrid nanomaterials by integrating crystalline semiconductor
nanowires with layered metal chalcogenide crystals via solid-state chemical
transformations. Partial conversion of nanowires into a layered structure forces
the integration of crystallographically and topologically dissimilar materials,
which presents a compatibility challenge that the system needs to overcome by
finding the energetically preferred or kinetically most accessible hybrid
configuration. Novel membrane reactor cells - miniature analogues of tube
furnaces that are widely used for materials synthesis and processing in research
and in industry - are developed as platforms for in-situ transmission electron
microscopy experiments at the single nanowire level that provide unprecedented
insight into the atomistic reaction pathways, mass transport, and phase
nucleation and growth kinetics of the targeted solid-state transformations. The
primary model systems are chalcogen (S, Se, Te) induced reactions of homogeneous
Ge, Si1-xGex alloy, and axially segmented Ge-AuGe nanowires and their
transformations into layered Ge-chalcogenides. Generalization of the approach is
used to study other hybrid systems, such as those integrating GaAs or GaN
nanowires with GaS/Se layered crystals. The structure and morphology of the
obtained hybrid materials is correlated with their optoelectronic properties via
cathodoluminescence at resolution below the exciton radius, complemented by
charge transport and electrochemical measurements, to determine the role of
interfaces and defects on bandgaps, exciton binding, as well as carrier, charge
and energy transfer between the different components of the hybrids. Overall,
the research effort is expected to advance the fundamental understanding of the
integration of dissimilar materials into hybrid nanostructures via solid-state
reactions, and of the emerging optical and electronic functionalities of these
complex systems.