* 1607246
* EAPSI: Engineering a Cytoskeleton to Probe the Properties of Cell Membranes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Mary Gertrude Gutierrez, Gutierrez               Mary Gertrude  L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The structure and functions of the living cell are highly dependent on the
plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton. Understanding the intricate relationship
between these two cellular features is challenging and traditional methods only
focus on one or the other. In collaboration with Professor Shoji Takeuchi at the
University of Tokyo, Japan, this research aims to engineer a cytoskeleton within
artificial cells made from model membranes to form a single platform to
investigate both cellular features. This collaborative effort will leverage the
expertise in direct laser writing (DLW), tissue engineering, and state-of-the-
art characterization instruments and techniques at the Takeuchi Laboratory. Cell
membranes will be made of giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) and will encapsulate
DLW structures and will be a cell-free platform allowing for investigating
plasma membrane biophysics in response to a cytoskeletal network.

The award will exploit the ease of hydrogel-assisted bilayer membrane
fabrication to encapsulate a cytoskeletal network made of submicron
proteinaceous DLW structures. DLW structures will be formed from protein
polymers and bioresponsive materials that will be encapsulated within
phospholipid bilayer vesicles in the form of GUVs. This model platform allows
investigation on the effects of internal cytoskeletal stress and tension on
bilayer membranes and will illuminate changes in membrane properties such as but
not limited to shape, permeability, tensegrity response to osmotic gradients,
and formation of lipid raft domains due to the cytoskeleton. The successful
engineering of a biomimetic cytoskeleton can be extended to investigation of
membrane protein functions and further serves as an in vitro artificial cell
system to uncover complex cellular interactions. Such investigations will
further elucidate crucial cytoskeletal-related function and pathologies such as
chromosome separation during mitosis and cellular shape and structuring during
intracellular signaling.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.