* 1607429
* Precision Measurements with the CHIP-TRAP Mass Spectrometer for Tests of Special Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Redshaw, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,078.00

The goal of this project is to perform a very precise measurement of mass
difference between two types of chlorine atoms: Chlorine-35 and Chlorine-36.
These two isotopes have the same number of protons and electrons, so they have
the same chemical properties, but chlorine-36 has one extra neutron, so they do
not have the same mass. However, the mass difference is not simply the mass of
the neutron. This is because, according to Einstein's famous equation, E = mc2,
some of the mass of the extra neutron is given up as nuclear binding energy.
Hence, by measuring the mass difference between chlorine-35 and chlorine-36, and
accounting for the mass of the neutron, the chlorine-36 neutron binding energy
can be determined. The mass difference measurement gives the right hand side of
Einstein's equation and can be compared with other, independent measurements of
the neutron binding energy that give the left hand side of Einstein's equation.
These other measurements use precise spectroscopy techniques to measure the
energy of gamma-rays (high energy electromagnetic radiation similar to x-rays)
that are emitted just after a chlorine-35 nucleus captures a neutron to become
chlorine-36 and releases the excess energy. The comparison of the mass
difference and gamma ray energies then provides a direct test of E = mc2.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use high-precision Penning trap mass
spectrometry to determine the mass difference between chlorine-35 and
chlorine-36 by measuring the ratio of cyclotron frequencies of singly-charged
ions containing these isotopes in the 12 Tesla magnetic field of the Central
Michigan University High Precision Penning Trap (CHIP-TRAP). The cyclotron
frequency will be determined using the image charge detection technique in which
the image currents induced in the trap electrodes by the oscillating ion are
detected and amplified with low noise cryogenic circuits. CHIP-TRAP will consist
of a novel, double measurement trap structure that will enable the two ions
whose mass ratio is to be determined to be simultaneously stored for long
measurement times. Ultimately, the cyclotron frequency measurement for the two
ions will be performed simultaneously, greatly reducing the effect of temporal
magnetic field fluctuations. This technique should enable a precision in the
mass ratio of 10 parts per trillion or less to be reached. Ions will be produced
outside of the Penning trap using either a laser ablation ion source or a plasma
ion source, and will be transported to a capture trap before being transferred
to the precision measurement traps. This will reduce the amount of the long-
lived (300,000 year half-life) chlorine isotope required for the experiment.