* 1607821
* Fluxional macromolecular pi-electronics via rational manipulation of aromaticity and spin
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,05/31/2020
* John Tovar, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professors John D. Tovar and Arthur E. Bragg.
Professors Tovar and Bragg are faculty members in the Department of Chemistry at
Johns Hopkins University. They are developing new electrically conductive
plastics with adjustable electronic properties. Most electronic devices are
manufactured from non-carbon materials such as silicon. Carbon-containing
plastics are much easier to process, allowing them to be fashioned into
lightweight, large area, and even flexible devices. Applications for these
plastic devices range from portable photovoltaic cells, light-emitting displays
and paintable electronics to new biocompatible medical materials. Researchers
working in Professor Tovar's group gain valuable training in the design and
construction of electronically active plastics, while Bragg's students learn to
investigate and analyze the properties of these new plastics using lasers. The
interaction between the two groups fosters cross-fertilization of ideas in
chemistry and physics. The collaboration provides broad training to students
working on this project. The Tovar and Bragg groups promote increased exposure
to chemistry research among high school, undergraduate and graduate-level
students within Baltimore City and beyond. Underrepresented minority students at
all levels participate in this research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates pi-conjugated oligomeric and polymeric organic
semiconductors that are derived from tunable aromatic segments positioned along
the conjugated main chain backbone. Non-benzenoid aromatic building blocks that
depart from the classical six pi-electron aromatic nuclei of benzene, thiophene,
pyrrole, etc. are used. Fundamental issues of aromaticity, torsional strain and
disorder in conjugated polymers are investigated with the goal to optimize and
regulate the resulting effective conjugation lengths. The conjugation lengths
are measured using electronic absorption and photoluminescence, coupled with
computational and charge carrier studies. A new polymer design is proposed that
decouples the photochemical switching event from polymer macromolecular
conformational changes, thereby enabling rapid and efficient tuning of
electronic properties as a function of an applied photochemical stimulus.
Electrical properties of these polymers are assessed through electrical
measurements before and after photoinduced switching events, and their
electronic structures are probed using sophisticated ultra-fast laser
spectroscopy in order to capture possible fleeting structures. The ultra-fast
spectroscopy is used to characterize photophysical mechanisms underlying their
functional responses and to unravel how these depend on molecular structure. The
broader impacts include outreach to local high schools to introduce them to the
properties of electronic materials.