* 1607124
* 2016 Crystal Engineering GRC/GRS:Advancing the Design of Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Adam Matzger, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 10/31/2016
* USD 16,480.00

NON TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;Crystal Engineering is a contemporary area of chemical
research and is central to many fundamental problems that are currently facing
society. Developments in this rapidly developing field may meet societal demands
that cannot be addressed by more conventional approaches in synthetic chemistry
and materials science such as the rational design and construction of materials
for use in storing hydrogen for vehicles and efforts to control drug
polymorphism. This Gordon Research Conference (GRC) will seek to aggressively
recruit graduate students, postdocs, and junior level professionals to attend
the GRC and enable them to not only learn from the talks and discussions, but
allow them to make important contacts for their future development. This unique
conference format will foster the formation of new collaborations and ideas that
would not otherwise occur if not for these important conferences. NSF funding is
crucial to the success of this endeavor. The GRC Chair and Vice-Chair will
actively recruit underrepresented groups with the goal of increasing diversity
in the Crystal Engineering community, making it more reflective of the general
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;With partial support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the 2016 Crystal Engineering
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) follows on the three highly successful previous
GRCs on Crystal Engineering (2010, 2012 &amp; 2014) with numerous student and
international participants. Crystal engineering is the design and synthesis of
functional solid-state structures (e.g., new organic molecular crystals and
metal-organic co-ordination polymers and other organic and inorganic framework
solids (MOFs), based on a bottom-up approach from smaller building blocks such
as neutral organic molecules, and organic or inorganic ions. Typical design
strategies use hydrogen bonds and coordination bonds, which define sub-
structural units that are called respectively, supramolecular synthons and
secondary building units. This subject cuts across the traditional divisions of
organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry, making for a very eclectic blend of
ideas, techniques, and strategies. The field has developed to a stage that
cross-fertilization between topics is expected to promote significant
advancements in a general quest to afford functional materials. The topics cover
both fundamentals and applications of Crystal Engineering that have relevance to
important areas such as organic synthesis, pharmaceutics, and energy storage.