* 1607415
* Investigating Large Scale Structures and Galactic Plane Morphologies at TeV Energies with the HAWC Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Petra Huentemeyer, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/29/2020
* USD 510,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high-energy
gamma-rays. This award supports scientists at Michigan Technological University
doing research with HAWC. In addition to hardware and service activities to
support HAWC operations, the group will analyze HAWC data to study the origin of
cosmic rays. The group will engage in education and outreach activities,
including the University's Summer Youth Program for high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy gamma-rays are produced when cosmic rays
interact with their local environment, interstellar matter and radiation fields.
As neutral particles these gamma-rays can be traced back to their origin and
used to provide critical information on the origin of cosmic rays. The Michigan
group will perform detailed studies of point, extended, and diffuse Galactic
gamma-ray source emission, including studies of the morphology and spectral
energy distributions to study the origin of cosmic rays. The results using data
from the HAWC Observatory will complement and can be combined with measurements
by other space and ground-based gamma-ray observatories.