* 1607468
* CRCNS: Bayesian Modeling of Interacting Time Series to Discover Cortical Networks Associated with Auditory Processing Dysfunction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Emily Fox, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 800,000.00

Despite receiving normal audiological assessments, some listeners still complain
to clinicians that they struggle to hear, particularly in noisy or crowded
environments. However, systematic investigations into how the brain processes
sound (and how it can go wrong) are lacking. The goal of this funded project is
to apply novel statistical approaches to study patterns of activity in the brain
while it processes sound in complex situations like when listening in a multi-
talker environment.

A wide variety of behavioral and electrophysiological responses will be
collected under several different types of auditory stimulation. Behavioral data
and physiological measures of brainstem response will be used to characterize
individuals' hearing health in both monaural and binaural pathways, providing
complementary information to their cortical magneto- and electroencephalography
(M-EEG) responses during similar auditory tasks. Auditory attentional network
connectivity will also be analyzed, to account for the neural underpinnings of
aspects of auditory dysfunction such as the inability to maintain or switch
attention between speakers. Using computationally-driven statistical approaches,
flexible graphical model-based representations of high-dimensional time series
will be learned, in order to characterize the auditory attentional network based
on collected M-EEG data. Specifically, two computational aims will be tackled:
1) Construct Bayesian models to characterize dynamical cortical interactions at
different spatial resolutions and 2) Develop models that infer connectivity
structure at different canonical cortical rhythmic bands. This research program
leverages the complementary expertise of the two investigators, bringing
together auditory behavioral and systems neuroscience, with flexible and
scalable statistical time series modeling approaches. Temporal structure is
often ignored in big data analyses as well as in systems neuroscience, and this
funded research will directly address this shortcoming by using a high-
dimensional set of temporally continuous neural data. The cortical network
discovered by this approach will enable neuroscientists to better understand the
variability inherent in the auditory attentional network across both task types
and individual differences in listening abilities.