* 1607277
* Atom-resolved microscopy of exotic superfluids in spin-imbalanced Fermi gases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Waseem Bakr, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 476,555.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors, materials that have electrical
currents that flow without losses, have important applications in building
powerful electromagnets, sensitive sensors of magnetic fields and magnetic
levitation devices. Understanding the behavior of superconductors in magnetic
fields is crucial to building better superconducting devices. While large
magnetic fields usually suppress superconductivity, they have also been
predicted to lead to exotic superconducting phases of matter under the proper
conditions. One such phase was proposed over fifty years ago, but has never been
directly observed in any material. This research effort aims to discover this
phase of matter in a gas of atoms cooled to very low temperatures. On the
educational side, the project trains undergraduates, graduate students and a
post-doctoral researcher in the techniques of ultracold gases. To complement the
experimental effort, the principal investigator is developing and teaching a
graduate course in ultracold atom physics, focusing on experimental techniques
and potential applications. The course serves to train graduate students from
the PI's lab in teaching through guest lecture opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The competition between
superconductivity and magnetism can give rise to exotic phases of quantum
matter. Over fifty years ago, Fulde, Ferrell, Larkin and Ovchinnikov (FFLO)
predicted a quantum phase where the Cooper pairs of a superconductor in a
magnetic field condense at non-zero momentum. There has been indirect evidence
for the existence of this phase in layered organic superconductors, heavy
fermion materials and ultracold atomic gases, but a direct detection of its
defining signatures has been elusive. The goal of this project is the direct
detection of the FFLO phase in a superfluid atomic Fermi gas with spin
imbalance. The research team uses atom-resolved in-situ imaging of the gas to
search for its smoking gun signature: a spatial oscillation of the magnetization
and superfluid gap that depends on the polarization of the gas. The search for
this phase is conducted in a lower-dimensional lattice system where Fermi
surface nesting effects are predicted to enhance the region of the phase diagram
occupied by the FFLO phase. The team seeks to understand the low-temperature
phase diagram of spin-imbalanced two-dimensional Fermi gases, use quantum gas
microscopy to image imprinted solitonic lattices through the sharp variation of
their magnetization and local density of states and apply these imaging
techniques to search for FFLO in a thermal equilibrium state.