* 1607145
* Design and Evolution of Inorganic Reactivity in Supramolecular Protein Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Faik Tezcan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 640,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division is supporting Dr. F. Akif Tezcan and his research group to design,
engineer and evolve supramolecular protein assemblies with metal-based catalytic
sites, for hydrolytic and redox transformations. Proteins are nature's premier
building blocks for constructing complex biological machines that carry out
normally challenging biochemical reactions. Examples are the light-driven water
oxidation in photosystem II and nitrogen fixation in nitrogenases. The ability
of chemists to control the assembly of proteins or to use them as synthetic
building blocks has been limited. This research capitalizes on a protein design
strategy developed previously in the Tezcan Lab (Metal-Templated Protein
Interface Redesign). The project is designing and synthesizing protein
assemblies, containing zinc and copper, with significantly improved enzymatic
function. This project provides an expansive training ground for postdoctoral,
graduate, undergraduate, and high school researchers in inorganic coordination
chemistry, molecular biology, protein biochemistry, biophysical methods and
computational protein design. The PI is undertaking outreach efforts on several
different fronts, including active recruitment of members of underrepresented
groups for research, recruitment of high school students through various self-
initiated and campus-supported programs and involvement in science fairs at
local elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an integration of
inorganic chemistry principles, protein engineering and molecular biology to
study and control protein self-assembly and inorganic reactivity. Protein
building blocks are properly designed to assemble into prescribed supramolecular
assemblies with interfacial metal centers. Physical, biochemical and catalytic
properties of these assemblies are characterized by a large suite of techniques
including protein crystallography, solution biophysical methods, enzyme activity
assays, and various methods in inorganic spectroscopy. The enzymatic activities
of these assemblies are fine-tuned and optimized by rational re-design as well
as directed evolution. The proposed studies establish the viability and scope of
proteins as building blocks for synthetic chemistry, and help elucidate how
nature may have evolved proteins to utilize and harness metal reactivity.