* 1607199
* Astrophysics and Neutrino Physics With IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Spencer Klein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena. This award will fund this UCB
group to use IceCube data to better characterize this astrophysical neutrino
flux. They will measure the flux at higher energies than has currently been
done, testing for the presence of a high energy cutoff.

IceCube's discovery of an astrophysical neutrino flux has attracted great
attention from students at all levels and from the general public and garnered
much media attention. This group will educate undergraduate and graduate
students and postdocs who are attracted to this important question. The award
will fund a broad spectrum of outreach activities targeted at the general public
and younger students, through classroom and public presentations and popular
writing.

This group's study will extend IceCube measurements of the energy spectrum both
upward and downward in energy, through two searches. The first will use the data
for a more accurate measurement of the neutrino flavor ratio: the relative
proportion of electron, muon and tau neutrinos in the astrophysical flux. The
second study will employ a fit to the energy and zenith angle distributions to
separate conventional and prompt atmospheric neutrinos and astrophysical
neutrinos. This fit should allow a sufficiently accurate measurement of the
atmospheric pion:kaon ratio to constrain air shower models. It will also detect,
for the first time, diffractive neutrino interactions, and will also provide
constraints on parton distribution functions and nuclear shadowing at high
energies.