* 1607250
* Development of scanning optofluidic cell lasers for highly sensitive cellular and tissue analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 454,313.00

Title: Development of scanning optofluidic cell lasers for highly sensitive
cellular and tissue analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project:
Develop a novel laser based scanning microscope to study cells and
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
traditional microscope relies on fluorescence to study cells and tissues.
However, any small change in cellular activities and tissue structures may not
be picked up by the microscope. The proposed project is aimed to develop a
laser-based microscope in which laser emission instead of fluorescence is used
for detection. Laser emission is much more sensitive than fluorescence.
Therefore, small changes in cellular/tissue activities will cause large signals
in laser emission, which allows us to study cell and tissues at a more detailed
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a new, powerful,
and sensitive platform technology complementary to conventional fluorescence
based methods for cell/tissue analysis. The detection principle developed
through the project can broadly be applicable to any types of laser cavities and
bio-species. The proposed research will further provide in-depth understanding
of how light interacts with living organisms and biological materials, which
will be significant for the development of novel photonic devices. The students
in the project will receive interdisciplinary training in optofluidics,
photonics, nano/microfabrication, biochemistry, cell biology, and biosensing.
The outreach program will educate the general public and train students/teachers
from local high schools and non-research-intensive
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is to systematically investigate the biofunctional scanning
optofluidic cell laser technology platform and apply it in highly sensitive
cell/tissue analysis. The optofluidic laser is an emerging sensing technology
that integrates microfluidics, optical microcavity, and gain medium in liquid
environment. It employs laser emission as the sensing signal. A small modulation
in the gain medium induced by a small change in the underlying biological
activities can result in a significant change in the laser output due to optical
feedback provided by the laser cavity. Thus, the optofluidic laser based
detection is orders of magnitude more sensitive than the fluorescence
counterpart. The proposed scanning optofluidic laser is based on a high-
performance laser cavity and cells/tissues containing gain media. The laser
output will be recorded for detailed understanding of cellular/tissue
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a new,
powerful, and sensitive platform technology complementary to conventional
fluorescence based methods for cell/tissue analysis. The detection principle
developed through the project can broadly be applicable to any types of laser
cavities and bio-species. Furthermore, study of the optofluidic cell lasers will
provide in-depth understanding of how light interacts with living organisms and
biological materials, which will be significant for the development of novel
photonic devices. The students in the project will receive interdisciplinary
training in optofluidics, photonics, nano/microfabrication, biochemistry, cell
biology, and biosensing. The outreach program will educate the general public
and train students/teachers from local high schools and non-research-intensive
colleges.