* 1607935
* A New Approach to Explore the Semiconductor-to-Metal Phase Transition in Two-Dimensional Crystals Using Ionomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 496,272.00

Non-technical description: As the number of electronic devices continues to
increase, so does the need for energy to power these devices; therefore,
decreasing computing power requirements could significantly impact global energy
consumption. In this study, a novel device concept based on new materials is
being explored to replace traditional silicon-based transistors, with the goal
of lowering the operating power. Specifically, a new type of polymer electrolyte
(i.e., ion conducting polymer) is designed to induce strain in a two-dimensional
(2D) semiconductor when an electric field is applied. The 2D semiconductor has a
thickness of only one molecule. The strain changes the electrical properties of
the 2D semiconductor, which can then be sensed to perform logic operations. The
change is predicted to occur at voltages lower than ones used in conventional
transistors, and therefore the power required to operate the device is lower. In
addition to applications in nanoelectronics, this research advances new
materials for phase change devices that respond to electrical, chemical or
strain stimuli, with potential application in brain-inspired computing, and
artificial synapses. The postdoctoral scholar, graduate and undergraduate
students who work on this project benefit from an interdisciplinary project that
combines chemistry, polymer science, inorganic materials science and device
physics with the goal of engineering low-power transistors. The research
component provides educational case studies to be used in the classroom, and
interdisciplinary training of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: A new approach to strain 2D
crystals is being explored using a field-effect transistor (FET) with a
suspended MoTe2 channel for which the gate oxide is replaced by a custom-
synthesized ionomer (i.e., single-ion conductor). Gate bias induces an
electrostatic imbalance in the ionomer that strains the 2D crystal and induces a
semiconducting to metallic phase change. The phase change is detected by the
current-voltage characteristics of the FET, and is expected to occur at sub-volt
gate bias with nanosecond switching times. This approach offers a gate control
architecture that is similar to conventional CMOS architecture but with new
materials and new physics. The research addresses both a fundamental and a
practical challenge for dynamically controlling the phase behavior of 2D
crystals. The fundamental challenge is achieving strain in 2D crystals that is
sufficiently large to induce the phase transition; here, electrostatic control
via ions is used to address this challenge. The practical challenge is building
an electronic device that can exploit this phase-change property for low-power
transistors, brain-inspired computing, or the development of artificial
synapses.