* 1607242
* Probing Film Morphology and Ionic Transport in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 446,213.00

Nontechnical description: Polymers that simultaneously conduct both electrons
and ions are of technological interest as signal transducers that can interface
biological systems with the world of modern digital electronics. The project
uses unique microscopy tools to provide a fundamental understanding of how the
processing and structure of these polymers affects their ability to conduct
ions, and how the transport of ions in turn affects the conduction of electrons
through the material. The scientific knowledge from this project impacts
technological applications for improving the materials performance of polymers
in bioelectronics, and also stands to benefit broader applications such as
polymer binders for use in electrochemical energy storage, and potentially also
electronic materials for energy harvesting applications. This project
additionally builds on the strong track record of the principal investigator in
education by developing distinct scalable outreach materials as part of a
recently created ambassadors project that trains students to conduct outreach.
The project includes direct support for undergraduate research, and addresses
pipeline issues facing under-represented groups in the sciences by cementing a
successful partnership the principal investigator has undertaken with the
Rainier Scholars organization.

Technical description: The scientific goal of this project is to gain a
fundamental understanding of the relationship between film processing, local
structure, and ion transport in conjugated polymer thin films, with an emphasis
on understanding the role of local heterogeneity. Conjugated polymers have
recently emerged as promising materials for transducing signals at the interface
between the biological and digital environments. This project explores
fundamental structure/function properties of these materials as relevant to such
applications by applying a unique set of scanning probe microscopy methods.
Specifically, the project employs electrochemical strain microscopy to make
local measurements of ion motion in conjugated polymer films. In addition, local
scanning probe potentiometry of planar device structures doped with ions enables
better understanding of structural origins of dispersive ionic transport.
Finally, the unique capabilities of time-resolved electrostatic force microscopy
are exploited to study electronic, ionic, and structural relaxation dynamics
occurring over more than 6 orders of magnitude in time, but with sub-diffraction
resolution. Importantly, the project studies the coevolution of structure and
function using in situ imaging with environmental (temperature, solvent, dopant,
bias) control to understand how structure and function correlate in mixed ionic
/ electronic transport materials properties in real space.