* 1607280
* Collaborative Research: Opening a Quantitative Window into the Mind and Communication of Dolphins
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Marcelo Magnasco, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 447,592.00

The cognitive and communication prowess of the large-brained, highly gregarious
bottlenose dolphin is legendary and has captured the interest and imagination of
scientists and the public at large. Notably, dolphins are one of a handful of
species that are vocal learners; thus the dolphin presents us with a unique and
alternative model to songbirds to advance our understanding of the processes
that underlie vocal learning and communication in a large-brained mammal showing
high social and behavioral complexity. Despite decades of research on dolphin
vocal communication, the constituent elements, the sequential and temporal
organization of the elements, and the nature of vocal transactions between
dolphins remain enigmatic. In order to decipher dolphin communication and
further elucidate these issues, the PIs will use observational approaches in the
wild and in an aquarium as well as two experimental approaches in an aquarium. A
first approach studies how dolphins coordinate their behavior in the face of
novelty: How do dolphins synchronize their behavior when requested to present
novel behaviors in tandem? How do they succeed in working as a team when
confronted with a new challenge? In a second approach, the researchers will
provide dolphins with a two-way, interactive touchscreen and audio system. Their
proclivity for vocal learning and their other cognitive processes will be probed
by giving them choice and control over the interactive system and observing and
documenting how they use and respond to the contingencies of their interactions,
which shall be obtaining novel acoustic signals temporally paired with objects,
interactions or activities. The aquarium studies are particularly conducive to
outreach efforts and informal science education since the dolphin-related
activities will be conducted in an open amphitheater environment at a leading
aquarium. The exhibit has changed from dolphin shows to more educational
demonstrations about animal care, behavior, and conservation. The research
activities will take place concurrently with visits of the public and field
trips of school children and therefore, the research endeavor will be
communicated to the public in real time. Virtually all the activities proposed
can, with modest effort and cost, be made into an open exhibit at the National
Aquarium in Baltimore, instructing visiting schoolchildren on the research
process and on collaborative research across scientific boundaries. The field
trips to the research sites are organized jointly with undergraduate and
graduate courses in field research for Hunter College students and are excellent
opportunities to showcase and engage actual cutting edge research to these
students. This tightly-knit interdisciplinary collaboration between the labs of
animal cognitive psychologist and marine mammal scientist and physicist,
computational neuroscientist and bio-acoustician, seeks to and extend high-
throughput settings to dolphin communication studies in
captivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key intellectual merit of this proposal is to
address these fundamental questions in the field of animal cognition and
communication through powerful methods drawn from statistical mechanics, machine
learning, and signal processing. Central technical problems in "decoding"
dolphin communication are the difficulty in sound localization and attributing
the detected vocalizations to specific individual dolphins, the lack of
automated behavioral analysis methods, and the crucial step of creating an
integrated picture of attributed vocal and behavioral transactions or
"conversations" that can be subjected to high-through analysis. Another
technical problem is the design and deployment of an advanced two-way
interactive system consisting of an underwater touchpad and real-time audio
input/output, plus the associated set of interaction interfaces. Finally, this
project also addresses important technical problems in the deployment of aerial
and aquatic drones for field studies.