* 1607034
* Non-Enzymatic RNA Replication
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jack Szostak, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry, and the Genetic Mechanisms and Systems and Synthetic
Biology Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life is thought to have emerged on the early
earth as a consequence of the chemistry of the young planet. Subsequently, there
was assembly into simple cells that could grow, divide and evolve. Such cells
were probably composed of a cell membrane that enclosed a primitive version of
RNA that could store useful information and also carry out simple cellular
functions. At present, there is a lack of a full understanding of how genetic
materials such as RNA could have been copied before the evolution of enzymes.
This project involves a series of experiments aimed at achieving fast and
accurate non-enzymatic copying of short RNA strands. The ability to copy RNA in
a purely chemical manner is an essential step towards the goal of assembling
simple living cells from inanimate chemicals. This in turn would contribute
greatly to our understanding of the origin of life on the early earth, and to
assessing the likelihood that life might exist on other planets. Since the
Origin of Life and the search for life in the Universe are topics of great
public interest, this work contributes to public engagement with science as well
as to the training of many young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves experimental studies aimed at attaining a better understanding of the
chemical reaction mechanisms involved in non-enzymatic template-directed RNA
replication. The methodology involves modern structural methods such as X-ray
crystallography and NMR spectroscopy, together with reaction kinetics and
molecular modeling. In addition, modified nucleotides that may have been present
on the early earth and that may lead to faster and more accurate copying of RNA
templates are being synthesized and characterized. The project also includes
investigations of high energy chemical compounds that could have supplied the
energy needed to drive RNA replication. The ability to chemically replicate RNA
molecules that are long enough to encode ribozyme catalysts would help in
understanding how very simple living cells could be reconstituted from
individual chemical components.