* 1607273
* 1D and 2D Cross-Linking of Patterned Monolayers: From Molecules to Reactive Templates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Matthew Zimmt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 489,399.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professor Matthew Zimmt in the Department of
Chemistry at Brown University. Professor Zimmt is developing methods to prepare
patterned molecular films. Each patterned sheet is used as a high-resolution
template to assemble objects, polymers, and biological molecules into a
patterned array. This process generates fields of molecules regularly
distributed across a surface. The potential uses of these surfaces include
converting solar energy into electricity. Research students involved in this
project receive broad training in interdisciplinary science. The public is
engaged through the production and circulation of animated videos that introduce
self-assembly and its relevance to modern life. Undergraduate art majors and
science majors, the Brown Science Center, and Brown faculty collaborate to
produce these videos, which are distributed through various
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zimmt is investigating strategies for
preparing patterned, multi-component, self-assembled monolayers with unit cell
repeats extending to 40 nanometers (nm), and with spatially patterned chemical
reactivity on a less than 10 nanometer length scale. Methods to cross-link and
stabilize these films are developed. In order to study these films, laser
desorption-ionization, time-of-flight mass spectrometry is developed as a tool
to investigate the assembly, composition, and reactions of physisorbed self-
assembled monolayers on graphite and other conductive surfaces. Professor Zimmt
integrates the research outcomes into the education of undergraduate and
graduate students at Brown University. Through collaboration with the Brown
Science Center, the project team produces an animated video introducing self-
assembly and its relevance to daily life. This self-assembly video is being
distributed online and through other media platforms.