* 1607610
* External Field Control of Ultracold Atom-Molecule Mixtures: Quantum Collision Dynamics, Chemical Reactions, and Sympathetic Cooling
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,897.00

This project aims at the development of a new, rigorous, and computationally
efficient quantum scattering methodology for the theoretical description of low-
temperature atom-molecule collisions and chemical reactions in the presence of
external electromagnetic fields. A new methodology is needed in order to expand
the number and variety of molecular species that can be cooled to the ultra-cold
temperatures at which quantum phenomena become dominant. Until recently, the
range of molecular species available for experiments in the ultra-cold domain
has been limited to those diatomic molecules which can be produced by laser-
induced binding of ultra-cold alkali-metal atoms. Expanding this range to
include more complex molecular species requires the adoption of appropriate
cooling techniques, especially so-called sympathetic cooling, by which elastic
atom-molecule collisions within an ultra-cold alkali-metal atom "bath" serve to
reduce the temperature of the participating molecules. The process of
sympathetic cooling is effective providing that inelastic collisions which could
internally heat the molecules, or which might expel them from the trapping
environment, can be suppressed. The computational requirements for the accurate
description of the relevant collisional processes are stringent, because the
molecules involved are highly anisotropic, and because the trapping field
environment of the molecule is also generally anisotropic. This project will
provide much needed theoretical support to experimental groups honing the
sympathetic cooling technique. If the technique is successful, it will
drastically extend the range of molecular species available in the ultra-cold
regime, with far-reaching implications for ultra-cold molecule-based quantum
information processing, quantum simulation, controlled chemistry, and
fundamental symmetry tests.

As a basis for the improved methodology, the total angular momentum
representation of molecular scattering states will be used. The methodology will
be applied to elucidate the prospects for sympathetic cooling of the
experimentally relevant polar molecules CaH, SrF, and SrOH with the alkali-metal
atoms Li and Rb in magnetic and magneto-optical traps. The scientists will also
explore new scenarios for controlling atom-molecule chemical reactions via
tuning molecular Zeeman states, inducing vibrational Feshbach resonances, and
applying superimposed electric and magnetic fields. The graduate students
supported by this project will get extensive training in quantum scattering
theory, molecular physics, numerical analysis, and computer programming, which
will allow them to engage in collaboration with leading experimental groups, and
gain international recognition for their research. The proposed work connects
the fields of atomic and molecular physics and physical chemistry, thereby
enhancing research collaborations between the Physics and Chemistry Departments
of the University of Navada, Reno.