* 1607899
* Advanced Membrane Technology Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Isabel Escobar, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,000.00

PI: Escobar, Isabel C.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1607899 &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests $49,000 to partially defray conference costs for up to 30
graduate&lt;br/&gt;and post-doctoral students to participate in the Engineering
Conferences International Meeting&lt;br/&gt;on Advanced Membrane Technology VII
in September 2016. The meeting will have 13-14 technical&lt;br/&gt;sessions
covering recent advances in membrane research, development and applications.
Some &lt;br/&gt;examples include the nexus of nanotechnology, biotechnology and
membrane separations, as well&lt;br/&gt;as wastewater reclamation, gas and
liquid separations and purifications, and energy issues.&lt;br/&gt;A poster
session is also an integral part of the meeting. Supported students will be
asked&lt;br/&gt;to present at the poster session. The meeting will feature a
number of internationally renowned&lt;br/&gt;and up and coming researchers. The
anticipated attendance for the meeting is 100 membrane&lt;br/&gt;researchers
from all parts of the world representing industry, government and academic
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;Membrane technology is an important part of the separation
technology. Topics were selected&lt;br/&gt;based on providing an update from the
previous meeting, marking specific areas for special&lt;br/&gt;attention, and
showcasing recent advancements related to water production, the
environment&lt;br/&gt;and special needs. The conference will highlight the
following four topics:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Environmental engineering through sessions
that will highlight the use of membranes to&lt;br/&gt;remove emerging
contaminants, such as endocrine disruptors and algal toxins (e.g.
microcystin,&lt;br/&gt;as the issues facing Lake Erie and numerous world
countries). Another session will have presentations&lt;br/&gt;on lowering
membrane fouling.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Sustainability through two sessions that will
discuss sustainable water treatment, such&lt;br/&gt;as water reclamation and
recycling; and will discuss membranes for energy applications,
such&lt;br/&gt;saline water gradient.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Advances in nanotechnology
for membranes, which will highlight the use of metal
nanoparticles,&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotubes, graphene and other nanomaterials for
the improvement of membrane operation.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Scalable nanomanufacturing
of membranes, which will highlight the mechanisms that can&lt;br/&gt;lead to
failure during the scale up of nanocomposite membranes.&lt;br/&gt;Given the
scope of this meeting, its more intimate meeting structure and diverse
internationally&lt;br/&gt;renowned attendees, the ECI Advanced Membrane
Technology VII Conference provides an exceptional&lt;br/&gt;intellectual
training opportunity for graduate students and young faculty.&lt;br/&gt;The
potential to improve advanced membrane technology rests on our continuing
ability to harness&lt;br/&gt;results from basic science and engineering, of the
kind supported by