* 1607339
* Novel Chemistries for Nanoscale Surface Functionalization by Molecular Layer Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Stacey Bent, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Organic-based thin films, those containing carbon atoms, serve as important
building blocks for many modern technologies, such as microelectronics,
biomedical materials and energy devices. Adding an organic-based film onto a
solid surface provides a method to control the electronic, chemical, or
mechanical properties of the solid to suit the task at hand. One emerging method
for depositing the organic-based film is molecular layer deposition (MLD), in
which organic-based films ranging from a single molecular layer to thousands of
molecular layers in thickness are applied in a highly controlled fashion. In
this project, Professor Stacey Bent develops new chemical reactions to perform
MLD, and also studies the bonding within the resulting films. She is
investigating a new MLD process for making molecular films that combine both
organic materials and inorganic (non-carbon containing) materials. These hybrid
films have interesting structures that mix both two- and three-dimensional types
of bonding. The research has broader impact in the field of materials chemistry
and the fundamental understanding gained from this work helps introduce a new
tool-kit for attaching thin films with useful and tunable properties to solid
materials. Professor Bent trains both graduate and undergraduate student
researchers, and hosts high school teachers in her laboratory for broader
impacts in education and outreach to her local community. She actively promotes
the participation of a diverse group of students in her research group and
maintains an interdisciplinary research environment. Professor Bent also is
expanding an undergraduate summer internship program, which she helped initiate,
to provide opportunities for undergraduates in science, technology, engineering
and math fields to gain hands-on experience in small, energy-related
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Professor Stacey Bent
of Stanford University is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop new chemistries for carrying out
molecular layer deposition (MLD) of nanoscale organic-based thin films, and to
study the chain orientation, packing and structure in these MLD systems. With
its layer-by-layer precision and control, MLD provides a useful platform to
address fundamental questions about interfacial supramolecular assemblies,
including inter- and intramolecular bonding and structure-property
relationships. The studies are carried out through three principal efforts:
investigating new MLD coupling chemistries to form organic interfacial films,
introducing a novel MLD process to make hybrid films combining 2D metal
chalcogenides with 3D organic interlayers, and studying the role of
intermolecular and interfacial bonding on film morphology, structure, and
properties. The research has broader impact in the field of materials chemistry
and the fundamental understanding gained from this work helps introduce a new
tool-kit for attaching thin films with useful and tunable properties to solid
materials. Professor Bent trains both graduate and undergraduate student
researchers, and hosts high school teachers in her laboratory through outreach
programs at Stanford University for broader impacts in outreach to her local
community. She continues to promote the participation of a diverse group of
students in her research group and maintain an interdisciplinary environment.
Professor Bent also is expanding an undergraduate summer internship program,
which she helped initiate, to provide opportunities for STEM undergraduates to
gain hands-on experience in small, energy-related companies.