* 1607633
* Studies of Lattice-Based Atomic Quantum Systems with Engineered Dissipation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dominik Schneble, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 605,662.00

The goal of this project is to understand and control the damping of small
quantum systems coupled to an environment. Quantum mechanics is reversible, that
is, a hypothetical movie of a quantum system looks the same if it is played
forward or in reverse. So how can damping, something non-reversible, emerge in
quantum physics? This project aims to engineer a simple model system consisting
of an "atomic quantum dot" (an artificial atom) coupled to an empty vacuum, the
simplest of all environments. This tunable experimental system, which emits
matter waves rather than optical radiation, will allow for precise investigation
of damping as the structure of the environment is changed. It should be possible
to build laser-like sources using a large number of regularly spaced atomic
quantum dots, and to exploit the coupling to the environment for a novel form of
quantum tunneling, which may find use in quantum simulation of solid-state
phenomena. While this first set of experiments sheds light on the nature of
quantum mechanical damping, a second set of experiments will investigate whether
such damping due to a large environment can be avoided. Here, the model system
considered will consist of an atom moving through a one-dimensional atomic gas
in a tube-like geometry. Collisions should slow down the atom and damp its
motion completely, but it may be possible to harness quantum mechanics to shield
the atomic motion by rendering the environment effectively transparent, such
that damping is suppressed. Developing ways to control damping and dissipation
are of paramount importance for quantum simulation and quantum information
science, and the results of this project will be of relevance in addressing some
of the fundamental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to
the experimental study of novel dissipative systems in the context of ultracold
atomic physics, focusing on engineered atomic quantum dots and mobile impurities
coupled to a bosonic environment with controllable many-body character. The
implementation of such systems is made possible through the use of ultracold,
homonuclear atomic mixtures with hyperfine-state components that are
independently controlled with state-dependent optical potentials. The project
goals include an exploration of spontaneous and superradiant matter-wave
emission, of couplings induced by evanescent matter-wave fields arising from
coherent dressing, as well as couplings provided by phononic excitations of a
superfluid environment, with the prospect of realizing a dissipative quantum
Ising chain. Exploiting the coupling to one-dimensional Bose gases, the project
furthermore aims to investigate dissipative and coherent transport for
unconfined impurities near integrability, with the prospect of observing novel
many-body effects.