* 1607118
* Research on Quantum Fluctuation Phenomena and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Lawrence Ford, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

This grant supports investigation on large quantum fluctuations of energy
density and pressure and their physical effects. Recent work by the PI and his
collaborators has shown that these fluctuations are much less rare than
previously thought. Large pressure fluctuations may be able to push quantum
particles, such as electrons, over potential barriers at a rate which might be
observable and have technological consequences. Large energy density
fluctuations can cause the nucleation of bubbles of a new phase in the early
universe, which could play a role in the evolution of the universe. These
fluctuations can also alter the gravitational field and influence the
propagation of light rays. This is an effect of quantum gravity, and its study
will help to elucidate the relation between quantum theory and relativity
theory, which is one of the unsolved problems of theoretical physics. The
project will also study analog models for quantum gravity involving nonlinear
optics, and the results may lead to a deeper understanding of optics, as well as
quantum gravity. Both undergraduate and graduate students will participate in
the research. Some of the results of the project should help to illustrate
subtle concepts of quantum theory and relativity to students.

This research will focus on the probability distributions for spacetime averages
of quantum stress tensor operators. Past work on this topic has focused only on
time averages. Here the effects of spatial averaging will also be included. The
applications of the probability distributions to several systems will also be
investigated. These include the effects of stress tensor fluctuations in
enhancing the rates for quantum barrier penetration and in increasing the rates
of false vacuum decay, both of which could have significant applications. The
role of stress tensor fluctuations in driving spacetime geometry fluctuations
will also be studied. One effect of geometry fluctuations will be light cone
fluctuations. One approach to be used is an analog model in which squared
electric field vacuum fluctuations in a nonlinear dielectric cause light speed
fluctuations. This effect can give useful insights into quantum gravity effects,
and is of interest in its own right and might be experimentally observable. The
role of stress tensor fluctuation in cosmological models will also be studied.