* 1607285
* GOALI: Extreme Environment Microcontrollers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Heath Berry, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,852.00

Abstract GOALI: Extreme Environment Microcontrollers Project Objectives:

The market needs of extreme environment electronics encompass many commercial
applications such as integrated gate drivers in power industry, in-engine
sensing and control in automobile industry, well condition monitoring and
drilling assistance in oil/gas exploration, cryogenic high-field magnet creation
in medical imaging instrumentation, and many others like superconducting
computing and energy storage systems, laser industry, space exploration, in-
field distributed sensors, magnetic levitation transport systems, and infrared
systems.

Non-Technical Abstract: The extreme environments pose significant challenges to
electronics, especially for digital integrated circuits: for extreme temperature
environments, since the circuit speed is a strong function of temperature,
timing control becomes very difficult across wide temperature ranges; for
unstable energy source environment, the unstable or low power supply causes
large variations in circuit speed as well. In the prevailing clocked synchronous
digital integrated circuits, synchronized clocks are used to control and
coordinate the circuit operation, along with a set of timing constraints such as
setup and hold times. These critical timing constraints can be easily broken in
extreme environments due to the circuit speed changes, thereby inducing system
malfunction. Therefore, innovations are needed to solve these problems and
develop extreme environment electronics in order to make contributions to the
commercial industry discussed above in efficient and reliable sensing,
communication, control, and data processing subsystems. Technical Abstract

This GOALI project is a collaborative effort between the University of Arkansas
and Radiance Technologies to develop quasi-delay insensitive asynchronous
microcontrollers capable of operating reliably under extreme environments
without extra protection or control/adjustment. Quasi-delay insensitive
asynchronous logic like the NULL Convention Logic (NCL) uses local handshaking
protocols in lieu of global clocks to control the circuit behavior. Individual
gate delay has no impact on the correctness of the circuit's outputs. This
feature guarantees robust circuit operation under extreme environments, making
NCL a promising candidate for designing microcontrollers for such applications.
However, innovations in microcontroller architecture and NCL circuit design are
needed to improve performance, reduce overhead, and enhance the robustness: at
the architecture-level, the prevailing bus architecture is unsuitable for NCL
and needs to be replaced; the distributed storage mechanism is the weakest link
of circuit operation and needs to be reorganized; and the external interrupt
handling needs to redesigned as fully asynchronous. At the circuit-level,
transistors need to be resized to improve the reliability under extreme
environments; NCL logic gate design needs to be modified for low supply
voltages; and NCL logic transformation needs to be investigated to improve the
performance. With the industry-standard guidance, experience, and assistance
from Radiance Technologies, a prototype NCL microcontroller incorporating the
above innovations will be designed, fabricated, and tested. The results will be
analyzed for further improvements, dissemination, and technology transfer for
potential commercialization.