* 1607215
* Collaborative Research: Joint NSF-BSF Proposal: Nonlinear Dynamics with Gross-Pitaevskii Breathers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 134,153.00

The principle of energy conservation dictates that the total energy of any
closed system does not change with time. For most highly complex interacting
systems, energy is the only such conserved quantity, but there are exceptions to
this rule. In rare situations, even quite complex systems may have additional
invariant quantities whose existence constrains the possible physical
configurations of the system. These extra invariants generally arise when the
system possesses some degree of symmetry. The resulting constraints---the so-
called conservation laws---are responsible, for example, for the clock-like
regularity of the motion of Newton's cradle, for the existence of perfectly
straight stable ocean-shore waves, and for the simplicity of the shape of the
planetary orbits. The goal of this project is to learn to employ such non-
standard conservation laws as a tool to stabilize atom interferometers; quantum
mechanical devices used in ultra-sensitive detectors of gravitational and other
fields. In addition, the project may shed light on the manner by which complex
systems, once disturbed, return to equilibrium, and the time-scale required for
that relaxation. This work involves exciting certain highly stable modes, so-
called "atomic breathers", of an atom interferometer, and then studying the
relaxation of these modes as they encounter a potential barrier. The high degree
of sensitivity of the interferometer provides an opportunity for much more
careful scrutiny of non-equilibrium processes than has been possible previously.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There are three major components of the proposal: a study
of the relaxation dynamics of the breathers, including effects of symmetry-
breaking; the development of an experimental protocol for the creation of
highly-stable breathers; and an assessment of the stability of the breathers
against dissociation and decay. The group of four principal investigators
possess combine unique skill sets ideally suited for these tasks: it includes
experimental techniques for manipulating bosonic solitons (breathers made of
bosonic atoms), theoretical quantum, mean-field, and classical nonequilibrium
dynamics, Inverse Scattering Transform and nonlinear perturbation theory, and
applications of the Bethe ansatz. The tight coupling of theory and experiment is
a crucial aspect of this project and will be essential for its success.