* 1607543
* Geoscience Education Research: Community Synthesis and Planning Project
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Kristen St. John, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2017
* USD 93,633.00

The Geoscience Education Research (GER) Community Synthesis and Planning Project
will advance the production of a synthesis of GER to date and prioritize future
geoscience education research needs via community input. It responds to recent
calls for action in the geoscience education research community, and builds on
outcomes and needs identified in the 2012 National Research Council analysis of
discipline-based education research, and on a recent NSF-funded project
(#1513519 Shaping the Future of GER). The project will impact a wide cross
section of the geoscience education community, including geoscience education
scholars at 2-year and 4-year colleges and research universities, as well as
cognitive scientists and geoscience education practitioners. Project activities
will include digitization of past issues of the primary peer-reviewed GER
journal, the Journal of Geoscience Education; this digitization will increase
access to a valuable resource for current geoscience education researchers, as
well as practitioners, education researchers in other STEM disciplines, and
international scholars who are interested in geoscience education research and
curriculum and instruction scholarship. In addition, the project will seek and
compile input from the GER community via a broadly disseminated online survey
and a summer workshop on what is most needed to support current and future
geoscience education researchers. An online GER methods "toolbox" will also be
developed to begin addressing needs of those new to GER. Collectively, these
efforts will result in a synthesis of GER and a prioritization of the needs of
the GER community, and will support current and future geoscience education
researchers by offering forums for discussion and resources for their use. This
synthesis can be used to help prioritize the next steps in GER, to improve
research approaches and foster collaborations, and ultimately to improve
teaching and learning in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitizing
decades of past print-only articles in JGE will increase access to foundational
GER studies, and expand the timeframe and number of studies for inclusion in GER
literature reviews for a Journal of Geoscience Education theme issue on
Synthesizing Results and Defining Future Directions of GER. The online survey is
expected to reach most of GER researchers in the US, which will ensure broad
community input in developing a prioritized list of needs to support current and
future geoscience education researchers. The workshop at the 2016 Earth
Educators' Rendezvous will bring 40 geoscience education researchers together to
discuss survey results and GER findings, and share ideas for future research
projects and collaborations. By designing an online GER toolbox, the project
will develop a resource that will begin to address a GER community need. By
drawing from findings in the collections of theme issue papers, from results of
the broadly disseminated survey of geoscience education researchers and
practitioners, and from the 2015 and 2016 EER GER workshops, the project will be
able to identify important outcomes from GER, key research gaps, and critical
needs of the GER community of practice.