* 1607554
* Chemical Probes for Studying Plant Arabinogalactan Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Amit Basu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,193.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Amit Basu from Brown University to provide new tools to
aid in the understanding of plant cell walls. Plants and plant-derived products
provide food, construction materials, and energy. The plant cell wall is a
source of carbohydrate polymers all of which have broad commercial utility.
Despite their importance, the molecular details of how these biopolymers are
assembled together in the plant cell wall are not well understood. This
understanding is a prerequisite if scientists are to design and engineer plants
that are optimized for a specific desirable property e.g. increased drought
tolerance or tensile strength. This project is providing new chemical tools to
help address this need. Graduate and undergraduate students are also being
trained in a variety of chemical, biophysical and plant biology tools and a
variety of outreach efforts are providing local schools (students and teachers)
with opportunities to engage in research at Brown.

The plant cell wall is an intricate assembly of many complex polysaccharides
whose precise structural arrangements in the wall remain incompletely
understood. There is an urgent need for new tools for interrogating the
structure and function of cell wall polysaccharides. This project is focusing on
two approaches to provide useful additions to the toolkit for the study of
arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs). AGPs are proteoglycans which have been
implicated in a variety of cellular and physiological processes in plants. One
of the main tools for identifying and isolating AGPs from plant-derived sources
is the Yariv reagent a trivalent glycoconjugate that forms precipitates upon
complexation to AGPs. This work is providing insights into how the Yariv reagent
interacts with AGPs, and is working towards new analogs that can be used to
better understanding AGP biochemistry and biology. Additionally, this work is
building upon a new reaction that allows the one step assembly of complex
oligosaccharides as long as pentasaccharides. Application of this approach to
the synthesis of AGP fragments will result in the synthesis of well-defined AGP
fragments that can be used as probes to elucidate AGP structure and function.