* 1607138
* Hydrophilic Macroionic Solutions - the Roles of Counterions, Co-ions and Surface Water Layers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Tianbo Liu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Tianbo Liu of the University of
Akron explores the solution properties of macroions. These macroions are between
1 and 10 nanometers (nm) in size and represent a missing link between simple
ions and large colloids. The project aims to explore the microscopic features of
macroions and their interactions with local environments, that is, the
counterions, the co-ions, and the layered structures they make in water. These
interactions are being explored in order to unveil the fundamental reasons
behind the unique solution properties of the macroions such as their self-
assembly into blackberry-like structures. The blackberry formation process is
found to mimic the virus capsid formation process. This research could have
broad impacts on other fields, such as physical chemistry, supramolecular
chemistry, biochemistry, materials sciences and nanotechnology. The project
involves training graduate and undergraduate students, and encouraging high
school students to participate in national science competitions and scientific
careers. The research infrastructure is being enhanced through scientific
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three complementary
components. First, the macroion-counterion interaction is being characterized by
determining the radial distributions of counterions around macroions and the
stability of the macroions in the presence of an excess number of counterions.
Secondly, the effect of co-ions on the macroions are being examined,
particularly for the preferential interactions between chiral macroions and
chiral co-ions. Third, the detailed changes of surface water structures of both
counterions and macroions during their interaction are being studied. Relatively
simple models, mainly polyoxometalate clusters and metal-organic nanocages, are
employed for the study. The solution studies employ a combination of techniques,
such as static and dynamic laser light scattering, synchrotron small-angle X-ray
scattering, isothermal titration, nuclear magnetic resonance, electron
microscopy, and Zeta potential analysis. The conclusions are expected to be
universal and may be instructive for understanding more complex systems such as
polyelectrolyte and biomacromolecular solutions.