* 1607952
* Collaborative Research: Remotely Operated Vehicles for Engaging and Retaining STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jennifer Frick-Ruppert, Brevard College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 149,455.00

This is a collaborative project involving Brevard College (Award DUE-1607952)
and the Pisgah Astronomical Research Institute (PARI) (Award DUE-1607926). The
investigators will redesign "gateway" STEM courses at a small liberal arts
college around active-learning exercises and laboratories using technology, and
will examine the effects on the engagement and retention of students in STEM.
Specifically, over 400 students per year in introductory science classes at
Brevard College will control remote rovers with sensors in the exploration of a
200-acre plot in the Pisgah National Forest in western North Carolina. Using an
array of sensors, such as cameras, thermometers, soil moisture detectors, and a
drill for geology studies, the remote-controlled robots will probe the forested
environment. A submersible to study the water quality of stream-fed ponds is
also part of the robot group. Students will experience the excitement of
becoming researchers and guiding the rovers to explore. They will learn about
flora and fauna and develop 21st-century technology skills needed in the STEM
workforce. By using broadly applicable, state-of-the-art technology, the project
will engage and inspire undergraduate students and faculty, while creating a set
of institutional tools to share with peer institutions and informal science
education centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of engaging,
experiential approaches using the rovers will create a rich learning environment
in which students will see the connection between scientific theory and
practice. Freshmen-level courses that will be affected include chemistry,
biology, environmental science, geology, and physics. All students graduating
from the college take at least one of the science courses plus one mathematics
course. Instructors will incorporate the robotic manipulation, collection, and
interpretation of data into these courses, especially the laboratory portions.
By examining the rates of engagement and retention of students in STEM before
and after the robotic technology has been implemented, the investigators will
advance knowledge about the impact of innovative technology on undergraduate
STEM education. The forest habitat data that will be gathered will also be
valuable. A habitat map of a section of a national forest, which can be a
longitudinal study, is important for environmental scientists and ecologists.
Components of the project will be replicated and used at other colleges and
science education centers, beginning with PARI, where educators plan to expand
the project to summer and after-school programs, especially SciGirls and the
North Carolina Girls STEM Collaborative.