* 1607871
* Analysis, Geometry, and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Shing-Tung Yau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 623,000.00

Interdisciplinary research involving analysis, geometry, and mathematical
physics has been instrumental for recent progress in each of these subjects,
which have all witnessed major breakthroughs. Analysis is used as a major tool
to solve differential equations, especially the nonlinear partial differential
equations that arise in geometry and physics. Solution methods for those
equations in turn create new tools for answering deep questions in geometry and
physics. On the other hand, deep insights in geometry and physics help the
development of analysis. This research project investigates questions at the
interface of the three areas motivated by string theory. Results of the project
are anticipated to have important consequences in several directions, including
advances in algebraic geometry and number theory, enhanced understanding of
mirror symmetry, modeling of gravitational waves, and application of
differential geometry in discrete settings.

This research project explores the theory of duality between Calabi-Yau
manifolds based on the SYZ picture pioneered by Strominger, Yau, and Zaslow. The
relationship between complex geometry and symplectic geometry is very important
to understanding of holomorphic bundles and special Lagrangian submanifolds.
There are nonlinear equations governing the supersymmetric geometry behind
string theory. Some of the equations generalize Hermitian Yang-Mills equations,
although the questions under study in this project are more nonlinear. One of
the current investigations is intended to determine existence criteria for these
differential equations. Another project will explore symplectic cohomology as a
possible tool to study mirror symmetry. An ongoing collaborative project seeks
to describe quasilocal physical quantities in general relativity. Ideas of
analysis will also be applied to study graph theory.