* 1607360
* Imposing Stronger Constraints at the Submicron Range on Hypothetical Long-Range Forces
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ricardo Decca, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,727.00

Search for macroscopic forces outside predictions from the Standard Model of
cosmology have received particular attention by experimentalists in the last few
decades. Understanding the fundamental forces of nature has always been an
important part of physics. While the first such force studied was the
gravitational force and our understanding of this interaction is extremely
precise for relatively large separations among the interacting bodies, its
validity at short distances has only recently been tested. Furthermore, the
possibility of undetected light bosons, elementary particles governing the
interaction between spin polarized bodies, is very poorly constrained. The
groups plans to undertake an effort to gain a better understanding of these
issues. By combining sample development and very precise measurements of the
interactions between a source and a test mass, a much better knowledge of the
interaction strength and mass of potential light bosons will be gained. The PI
and co-PI will continue to attract undergraduate and high school students in
physics and engineering to participate in the proposed work. Graduate students
involved in the project will also have supervisory duties over undergraduate
students, improving their leadership skills. Both PIs are minority members, and
they will recruit students to participate in this research from underrepresented
groups in physics. In particular the PI will use his position as co-advisor of
the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science
(SACNAS)-IUPUI chapter to interest the Hispanic and Native American community in
Science careers. Graduate students will be trained in two sub-disciplines in
physics, precision measurements and magnetism. Demonstrations associated with
the principles of forces, their actions at a distance and the decrease of their
strength as the distance increases will be presented at community gathering
events (School of Science Freshmen Picnic Day, Open Houses) and recruiting
events and in the classroom environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
proposal will: i) extend existing constraints for unpolarized masses at
submicron range. This will be achieved mainly through a minor modification of
the system previously used, ii) develop spin-polarized masses with no net
magnetization. This development will be accomplished by the deposition of thin
films in the required geometry, (iii) use the grown spin-polarized, zero
magnetization films to constrain the existence of monopole-dipole interactions
at short ranges, and (iv) study the systematic effect of the residual
electrostatic forces present in the experiment. The ubiquitous problem
encountered in the measurement of small forces at short separations arising from
the effect of random electric potential on the surfaces of the test and source
bodies will continue to be investigated.