* 1607225
* Searching for Physics Beyond the Standard Model at the LHCb Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Mike Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,900.00

The search for new fundamental interactions of nature is at the heart of
experimental particle physics. The current Standard Model of particle physics
has been enormously successful at describing current measurements, but it is an
incomplete theory. All of the experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
operating at CERN near Geneva, Switzerland are focused on discoveries beyond the
Standard Model. This project and the LHCb experiment as a whole seek new
discoveries through precision measurements of particle decays produced at the
LHC. These measurements aim to answer questions stretching back to the Big Bang,
such as, why is our universe dominated by matter and not antimatter? Or what is
Dark Matter? The existence of dark matter has been inferred from the effects of
its gravitational interactions; however, little is known about the dark sector
itself. The possibility that dark matter may interact via as-yet-unknown forces
has motivated a dedicated worldwide effort to search for these interactions.
Discovering and characterizing dark matter particles and their interactions is
vital to advancing scientific understanding of the fundamental nature of the
universe and the work from this award could make a break-through discovery at
the LHCb experiment. Many compelling dark-sector force scenarios predict the
existence of particles that could be observed at the LHCb experiment at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, such as the so-called hidden-sector
theories. These theories predict a mixing between dark matter and the Standard
Model particles such as the dark photon. Discovering such particles would
provide humankind with its first window into the particle nature of the dark
sector. This grant supports pioneering work focused on searching for dark-sector
forces and dark-matter particles at LHCb. The focus will be on particular decays
of B quarks, which the LHCb experiment was designed to measure, that have
enhanced sensitivity to dark particles because of the decay channels involving b
quark to s quark transition.