* 1607263
* SusChEM:  Building Superior Sustainable Polymers with Bioaromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Stephen Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 464,640.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Polymer Program of the Division of
Materials Research, Professor Stephen Miller of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Florida is developing new types of degradable plastics made
from biorenewable sources (bioplastics), such as sugarcane waste. These new
types of plastics have shown some success in replacing commercial plastics made
from petroleum feed stocks. However, a major barrier to their adoption is the
inferior mechanical and degradation properties of most bioplastics relative to
the petroleum-derived plastics. Professor Miller and his research group are
studying ways to convert inexpensive agricultural wastes or forestry wastes into
feedstocks for making new types of bioplastics. Feedstocks derived from such
waste streams do not compete with agricultural food sources. They are focusing
on chemistry for making plastics that show desirable mechanical behaviors and
that degrade under the appropriate environmental conditions. Professor Miller is
also providing research training to graduate students and preparing them for
future careers in sustainability science and engineering.

Professor Miller is designing and synthesizing new classes of polyesters and
polyacetals based on the bioaromatics, vanillin and ferulic acid. Available in
large scale from a paper mill, corn stover, or sugarcane bagasse, these
bioaromatics are key structural components to achieving high glass transition
temperature materials with desirable thermomechanical properties. Strategies
being examined to control thermal properties and degradation behavior include
use of bioaromatics as polymer pendent groups, the creation of bioaromatic
polysilicon acetals, and the copolymerization of bioaromatics with chemically
recycled bis-hydroxyethylterephthalate, from post-consumer poly(ethylene
terephthalate) (PET). Nature also abundantly supplies isosorbide, ascorbic acid,
erythritol, itaconic acid, and dimethylsuccinyl succinate. Professor Miller is
also studying ways to prepare polyesters, polyacetals, or polyamides with cyclic
motifs present in the polymer main-chain from these bio-based molecules. The
resulting polymers are predicted to possess chain rigidity, higher glass
transition temperature, and programmable degradability.