* 1607733
* Quantum Superpositions of Free Electron Orbital Angular Momentum
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Benjamin McMorran, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 543,611.00

Electrons are the tiniest particle of matter, the smallest spark of charge, and
smallest bit of magnet. We power our cities with these small, charged, magnetic
objects, and use them to store, process, and communicate information. It was
recently discovered that an electron moving by itself in vacuum can possess an
additional, potentially useful, property: orbital motion. Individual free
electrons can also exist in combinations of these orbital states, and can even
be made to exhibit orbital motions in opposite directions at the same time. The
purpose of this project is to understand the fundamental nature of these new
electron states by creating such mixed orbital states in electron beams, such as
counter-rotating circular orbits, and to investigate new ways to measure the
different types of orbital motion present in a mixture. To do so, a commercial
instrument that is typically used for nanoscale imaging (transmission electron
microscope) will be used. The electron beam inside this instrument will be made
to pass through nanoscale gratings carefully designed with complicated patterns.
The effect on the beam will be measured using detectors downstream from the
gratings. If successful, this research will provide a new way to manipulate the
electron as well as measure this new quantum property, paving the way for future
technologies in quantum electronics and providing new ways to probe orbital
motion in matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like all quantum mechanical waves, the
wave function of a single free electron can be twisted on itself to form a
quantum vortex. The purpose of this project is to investigate the fundamental
quantum nature of these states by placing free electrons in coherent
superpositions of orbital states using nanoscale diffraction holograms and other
new electron optical devices. Electrons in superpositions of counter-rotating
circular orbits form an electron interferometer in free space, and it can be
used to probe geometric phases, spatial coherence, and orbital angular momentum-
dependent phase shifts of the electron wavefunction. In addition to experiments
preparing superpositions of orbital states, the project also develops ways to
nondestructively measure and sort them, potentially providing new information
from scattered electrons.