* 1607845
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: A Common Model of the Functional Architecture of Human Cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Haxby, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2020
* USD 502,259.00

The human brain is perhaps the most complex known object and is the vessel that
contains our thoughts, experiences, knowledge, and, collectively, our culture.
Although brains have similar anatomical components, differences in size and
shape and in fine structure make it difficult to discern how different brains
can contain similar thoughts and knowledge that can be shared and communicated.
A major challenge for brain science is to build a common model of the functional
architecture of the brain that captures these similarities that are shared
across brains at a fine scale. The research in this project is aimed at
developing a computational basis for such a common model. The model is based on
measurement of patterns of brain activity using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) while participants engage in everyday cognitive activities like
watching a movie, listening to a story, or free-ranging thought while at rest.
The model aligns the functional architecture of the brain at multiple scales,
from fine to coarse, and captures far more shared structure than is possible
with other methods that are based on alignment of brain anatomy. This model will
provide infrastructure that can be used by scientists who image the brain in
order to study a wide range of brain functions, from perception to social
interaction, emotion, and decision making, allowing them to describe the
mechanisms underlying these functions in a format that can be communicated
across laboratories with a level of detail and precision that will accelerate
discovery and application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alignment of brain imaging data
has relied on anatomical features that have a variable correspondence to the
underlying functional architecture. Moreover, such alignment methods do not
capture the fine structure of brain activity patterns that can be decoded using
modern pattern analytic methods. The research in this project is based on
aligning representational spaces across brains, rather than anatomical
topographies, and will identify the boundaries between patches of cortex with
distinct representational spaces. This innovation affords greatly superior
alignment of functional architecture across brains and the development of a
common model of the human brain. The research will develop computational
algorithms for transforming the idiosyncratic organization of individual brains
into the common representational spaces and for fine-tuning the description of
individual brains by projecting, or shrink-wrapping, the common model based on a
large number of individuals onto that individual brain. The development of these
computational algorithms and the model will be integral to the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. They will be made available as free
and open-source software, with large shared data sets, to be shared and used
freely by brain imaging scientists around the world, providing essential
research infrastructure to maximize the impact and benefit of this research
project.