* 1607059
* Nonequilibrium Quantum Mechanics of Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Aditi Mitra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The award supports research and education on the dynamics of complex systems
where both quantum mechanics as well as strong interactions between many
particles are important. This challenging regime has many open questions of
relevance for a new generation of experiments and quantum devices. The PI and
her research team will study how such systems evolve in time, whether their
collective temporal behavior can show some system-independent universal
properties, and under what conditions traces of their initial state disappear
completely. The projects will bring together concepts from diverse fields of
physics.

The award has a strong educational component that involves the active
participation of graduate and undergraduate students, and a postdoctoral
research scientist. The results of the projects will be presented at workshops
and conferences, and will be incorporated in a review article in a journal
widely read by the community. The project will lead to the development of new
theoretical approaches to study the dynamics of complex systems, and will
address fundamental questions of relevance to quantum information and quantum
computing. The PI will also participate in outreach activities that are part of
a continuing partnership between the NYU physics department and local schools.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The award supports research and education on nonequilibrium phenomena in
strongly correlated quantum systems. The focus will be to study quench dynamics
in closed and open quantum systems with applications to cold-atomic gases,
ultra-fast pump-probe spectroscopy of solid-state systems, and light-matter
coupled systems.

The project has several components:

a) The research team will build on their recent work where universal aging
behavior was found after a quantum quench to the critical point of an isolated
bosonic O(N) model, and explore similar universality in other kinds of bosonic
and fermionic models. Large-N and dimensional expansions methods will be used to
study the time-evolution, and to identify scaling behavior at intermediate
times, as well as light-cone dynamics.

b) The research team will also study the dynamics of entanglement entropy and
entanglement spectrum after a quantum quench. This study will be carried out for
quenches to the critical point, as well as for interacting one-dimensional
systems with strong disorder.

c) The research team has access to some exact results for the quench dynamics
coming from the large-N limit of interacting field theories. These exact results
will be used as a benchmark for developing time-dependent variational methods
based on tensor network states.

The goal of the projects will be to obtain general results not only on universal
dynamics after a quantum quench, but also on the dynamics of entanglement
entropy and entanglement spectra. Thus, results will be obtained on how fast
information travels after a quantum quench, and how this depends on how excited
the system is, its dimensionality, proximity to a critical point, range of
interactions, and how ergodic the system is. The project will also result in the
development of new methods to study nonequilibrium quantum systems.

The award has a strong educational component that involves the active
participation of graduate, undergraduate students, and a postdoctoral research
scientist. The results of the projects will be presented at workshops and
conferences, and will be incorporated in a review article on quantum quenches.
The award will lead to the development of new theoretical approaches to study
nonequilibrium phenomena. Moreover the PI's study of entanglement dynamics will
address fundamental questions of relevance to quantum information and quantum
computing. In addition, the PI will participate in outreach activities that are
part of a continuing partnership between the NYU physics department and local
schools.