* 1607838
* Diffraction-grating coupled surface emitting Terahertz quantum cascade laser source for high power, room temperature continuous wave operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Manijeh Razeghi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract Title&lt;br/&gt;Chip-based, High-Power Surface Emitting Terahertz
Source&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
terahertz (THz) radiation in the frequency range of ~1-5 THz has mainly unique
properties and applications in imaging, sensing, spectroscopy, communication,
and medical diagnosis. Most of these applications requires a sufficient THz
light power density so that the light can pass through materials and able to be
detected for analysis. This has fueled intense studies on the generation of high
power THz light in the past decades. The recent demonstrated THz source based on
nonlinear generation inside a mid-IR quantum cascade laser (QCL) is proved to be
the only room temperature semiconductor light source that delivers mW-level
power at room temperature in the 1-5 THz range. The main challenge for this type
of sources is to generate higher THz power up to tens of milliwatts with good
beam quality which is required by most of the real-world application. A novel
approach is proposed to develop a chip-based THz source with high power output
by extracting THz light from the entire cavity. This simple to use and compact
source will be an enabling technology which will allow easy access to THz
spectroscopy/ imaging for the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to demonstrate a room temperature, monolithic THz source
with sub-milliwatt level output power in continuous wave operation and tens of
milliwatt level in pulsed mode operation. In the previous demonstrations, edge-
emitting THz sources based on nonlinear generation inside a mid-IR QCL have
limited outcoupling efficiency (~6-10%) due to the limited outcoupling aperture
size regarding to the entire cavity. The approach in this proposed project is to
use a surface-emission scheme based on THz diffraction grating defined in the
semi-insulating InP substrate of a epi-down bonded THz QCL source for high-power
and efficient THz outcoupling. Unlike the traditional distributed-feedback (DFB)
grating which interacts with the guiding laser modes by providing the optical
feedback, the proposed THz diffraction grating simply diffract the incident
Cerenkov emission cone into the discrete directions. With an optimized grating
structure, surface emission from the entire cavity with diffraction efficiency
up to 90% is achievable. This will drastically increase the THz outcoupling
efficiency and power. In contrast to a THz sources based gas lasers, which is
bulky and expensive, the proposed THz QCL source offers a monolithic solution
that, once developed, has potential for cost-effective mass production using the
existing semiconductor laser fabrication infrastructure. This project is an
excellent example of a multidisciplinary approach used to circumvent existing
technological limitations. Solid state physics, material science, nonlinear
optics, and laser physics are all major components of the research plan, which
are all supported generally by NSF, and are used, in this case, together to
combine multiple functional elements into a single, compact, high power device.