* 1607989
* Modeling of Metal Organic Materials (MOMs): Force Field Innovations and Applications with Impact
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2020
* Brian Space, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Divisions of Materials Research
and Chemistry fund this award jointly. The award supports computational research
and education on the simulation and design of next generation metal organic
materials. This is an important class of solids, comprising upwards of 20,000
members, many of which have demonstrated porosity, i.e. the ability to
selectively absorb molecules from their environment. This project will lead to
the design of superior porous materials using a combination of computational
modeling and experimental efforts. Specific targets include materials for energy
and environmental applications with a focus on the capture, separation, and
storage of gases like hydrocarbons, nitrogen, hydrogen, and on the capture of
carbon dioxide, and nitrogen and sulfur oxides. Metal organic materials are
promising candidates for such applications, which can have an impact on the
nation's energy and environmental future. Understanding what essential features
are requisite for producing technologically effective materials is a critical
question. The interplay between the theory group and the experimental
collaborators will lead to progress in understanding what design features, e.g.
chemical composition and constituent arrangements, will in turn lead to
commercially viable materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
investigations will be carried out cooperatively with leading experimental
groups performing cutting-edge experiments, and will include undergraduate and
graduate student researchers. The developed codes and algorithms will be shared
with the scientific community, and will be implemented in existing simulation
codes with wide distribution. A database that catalogs the group's simulation
efforts will also be shared with the community facilitating the avoidance of
replication of effort and the reporting of
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry fund this award jointly. The award
supports computational research and education on the simulation and design of
next generation metal organic materials. A promising avenue of the research is
the construction of metal organic materials, which are an important class of
solids that require development. There already exist more than 20,000 of these
substances, many of which have demonstrated porosity, i.e. the ability to
selectively sorb molecules from their environment. Questions to be addressed by
this project are: i) how do you find the appropriate porous material for the
right application, and ii) can one model the pertinent interactions effectively
in order to provide microscopic explanations of the material's properties? The
researcher plans to directly pursue this goal by creating and exploiting synergy
between molecular modeling carried out in his group and domestic and
international experimental collaborations. In particular, the design and
application of next generation molecular force fields will be pursued. Specific
targets include materials for energy and environmental applications with a focus
on the capture, separation, and storage of gases like hydrocarbons, nitrogen,
hydrogen, and on the capture of carbon dioxide, and nitrogen and sulfur oxides.
Metal organic materials are very promising candidates for such applications,
which can have an impact on the nation's energy and environmental
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical investigations will be carried out
cooperatively with leading experimental groups performing cutting-edge
experiments, and will include undergraduate and graduate student researchers.
The developed codes and algorithms will be shared with the scientific community,
and will be implemented in existing simulation codes with wide distribution. A
database that catalogs the group's simulation efforts will also be shared with
the community facilitating the avoidance of replication of effort and the
reporting of failures.