* 1607091
* Geometry and Analysis of Differentiable Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paul Yang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 411,266.00

The problems investigated in this project concern various nonlinear differential
equations from geometry and physics. These equations are of the evolution type
and involve the curvature which measures how a space is curved. They play a
fundamental role in understanding the natural world through mathematical means
and are closely related to the study of the field theories in physics. They have
also found many deep applications in geometry and topology. A famous example is
Perelman's solution of the Poincare conjecture by using Ricci flow. The
resolution of the problems in this project will provide mathematical foundations
for some physical theories and have further profound applications to long-
standing mathematical problems such as the classification of algebraic spaces.
The most common phenomena of these equations are their singular behaviors due to
the nonlinearity of the equations. Such behaviors are reflected in the possible
break-downs in the evolution process and described in terms of singular
solutions to these equations which describe the evolution process. It is still
challenging to have a complete mathematical understanding of these singular
solutions. This project will address some basic problems on these singular
solutions and explore their applications to geometry and topology. The PI will
give lectures and teach graduate courses on topics directly related to this
project. He will also run a geometry working seminar with a goal of helping
students to gain research experiences and broaden their knowledge in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns curvature flows and
equations in Riemannian geometry. For Ricci flow, the PI will focus on (1)
Finite time singularity formation for its solutions in Kahler geometry; (2) The
interaction between the singularity formation and geometry of the underlying
spaces; (3) The long-time behavior of the solutions. For the Hermitian curvature
flow, the PI will develop new analytic tools to study how it forms singularity.
One of most prominent Hermitian curvature flow is the pluriclosed flow which is
connected to the renormalization group flow of the nonlinear sigma model with
B-field. The PI will further explore this connection and gives new mathematical
insights for the duality in the string theory on one hand, new understanding of
finite-time singularity on the other hand. For the symplectic curvature flow,
the PI intends to study how to characterize the maximal existence of the flow by
cohomological condition and how it develops finite-time singularity in dimension
4. The PI also intends to extend the compactness theory for Einstein metrics to
a more general class of Kahler metrics and 4-dimensional anti-self-dual metrics.
He also continues his study on fundamental problems in symplectic geometry which
involve certain gauge equation. The problems include constructing new
deformation invariants for symplectic manifolds which admit a Hamiltonian
S1-action and providing a mathematical theory for the gauged linear sigma model.
These problems are important in symplectic geometry and are inspired by the
topological field theories in physics.