* 1607260
* Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ralf Spatzier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 322,000.00

Dynamical systems and ergodic theory investigate the evolution of a physical or
mathematical system over time, such as turbulence in a fluid flow or changing
planetary systems. New ideas and concepts such as information, entropy, chaos
and fractals have changed our understanding of the world. Dynamics and ergodic
theory provide excellent mathematical tools, and have a strong impact on the
sciences and engineering. Symbolic dynamics for example has been instrumental in
developing efficient and safe codes for computer science. Tools and ideas from
smooth dynamics are used as far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry
is a highly developed and ancient field in mathematics of amazing vigor. It
studies curves, surfaces and their higher dimensional analogues, their shapes,
shortest paths, and maps between such spaces. Differential geometry had its
roots in cartography, starting with Gauss in the nineteenth century. It is
closely linked with physics and other sciences and applied areas such as
computer vision. Geometry and dynamics are closely related. Indeed, important
dynamical systems come from geometry, and vice versa geometry provides tools to
study dynamical systems. One main goal of this project studies when two
dynamical systems commute, i.e. when one system is unaffected by the changes
brought on by the other. Alternatively, these are systems with unexpected
symmetries Important examples of such systems arise from geometry when the space
contains many flat subspaces. Group theory finally enters both dynamics and
geometry by studying the group of symmetries of a geometry or dynamical
situation, or by investigating the dynamical and geometric behavior of the group
of symmetries acting on a space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on
problems between dynamical systems, group theory and geometry. There are two
main goals: First, establish exponential mixing properties for several different
systems in dynamics, in particular frame flows from Riemannian geometry and
solenoids coming from noninvertible systems. The principal investigator (PI)
will draw tools from dynamics, geometry and number theory to accomplish these
goals. Second, prove rigidity properties in geometry and in dynamical systems,
in particular when the system and spaces in question are "higher rank", e.g.
when spaces have flat subspaces or the dynamics has nontrivially commuting
elements. Such systems appear naturally in seemingly quite separate areas, for
example in number theory or in studying the spectrum of the Laplacian. The
investigator will work on rigidity properties of actions of higher rank abelian
and semi-simple Lie groups and their lattices striving to classify such systems
under suitable geometric or dynamical hypotheses. The PI will employ tools from
geometry, dynamics, Lie groups, and specifically exponential mixing properties.
The PI will also investigate discrete faithful representations of hyperbolic
groups in p-adic Lie groups, equilibrium states for partially hyperbolic
dynamical systems and spherical higher rank in Riemannian geometry.