* 1607547
* Collaborative Research:  Designing Organometallic Precursors for Focused Electron Beam Induced Deposition of Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lisa McElwee-White, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 319,763.00

As electronic devices such as smartphones become smaller but have more
capability, it is important to be able to create very tiny metal structures
whose physical and chemical properties can be tailored for specific
applications. This requires control over not only structure, size and shape but
also chemical composition. In this project, methods are being developed for
patterning metals into nanoscale objects by using chemical reagents and
electrons. Students involved in this project present their work at scientific
meetings and publish papers in peer reviewed journals. They also have the
opportunity to conduct experiments at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, broadening
their educational experience while enhancing opportunities for future career
placement. To communicate the excitement of science to the general public,
participants in the project are generating a series of 90-second "Tiny Tech"
radio modules and podcasts that feature real world applications of chemistry and
chemistry-based nanoscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focused electron beam induced
deposition (FEBID) is a promising nanofabrication technique that can create
metal-containing nanostructures for photonics, catalysis, sensing and
plasmonics. In this technique, electrons are used to induce local decomposition
of organometallic precursors adsorbed onto solid substrates in a vacuum
environment. FEBID combines the advantages of direct-write lithographic
processes (e.g., high spatial resolution, site-specificity, mask-less, resist-
less) with the flexibility to deposit materials on non-planar surfaces, allowing
creation of spatially and geometrically well-defined three-dimensional, metal-
containing nanostructures. For FEBID to emerge as a broadly applicable
nanofabrication technique, however, control must be exerted over not just the
size and shape, but also the chemical composition of the nanostructures. The
current practice is to use precursors designed for thermal processes, such as
chemical vapor deposition (CVD). These CVD precursors generally create FEBID
deposits with high levels of organic contamination, limiting potential
applications. This project is addressing the issue of contamination in FEBID
materials. This research synthesizes and evaluates new organometallic precursors
designed specifically for FEBID. The efforts are guided by mechanistic insights
from surface science. They are also improved by developing new purification
strategies for FEBID nanostructures. The results are improving the understanding
of FEBID by generating detailed mechanistic information on the electron-molecule
reactions. Careful design of the reaction chemistry allows control of the purity
while the ability to focus electron beams allows control of the size and shape
of the metal structure in a process analogous to 3D printing of plastic objects.