* 1607665
* Quantum Magnetism Beyond Spin Up and Spin Down
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Thomas Killian, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2022
* USD 860,662.00

Order arises spontaneously in complex systems, such as the motions of the
planets and the periodic structure of crystals. Understanding how such order
arises is a central pursuit of science. A great deal of this effort now focuses
on the behavior of electrons and atoms at temperatures near absolute zero, where
weak interactions can dominate and new states of matter emerge. These new states
are often exotic and unexpected, such as magnetic states that are characterized
by specific alignments of particles, or super fluids that flow through tiny
constrictions with no resistance because of a long-range synchronicity of
particle motion within a fluid. Such phenomena are originally investigated for
fundamental interest that satisfies a human drive to understand the world in
which we live, but they often lead to technological advances such as computer
hard-drives or superconductivity. The particular project funded by this grant
aims to improve our fundamental understanding of how order arises to produce
magnetism. At a microscopic level, a magnet sticks to a refrigerator because a
significant fraction of the electrons in the magnet are spinning or rotating in
the same direction. To understand magnetism, one needs to understand why the
electrons orient themselves, and what types of correlated motions they display.
Because these phenomena involve many interacting particles, a full understanding
of this problem has eluded us so far. This group is developing new methods to
understand problems like this. A powerful trend in physics research today is to
use ultracold atoms as analogs for electrons in solids in order to study
magnetism. Atomic gases are much easier to study than solids because they can be
prepared without any impurities and the atom-atom interactions can be tuned, for
example. In the work funded by this award, atoms will be confined in a
corrugated cage of light, analogous to an egg crate. By simultaneously using
multiple lasers which emit light of different colors, the geometric details of
the "egg crate" can be smoothly morphed into a variety of patterns, changing the
shapes of the pockets into which the atoms are nestled, and even merging several
pockets into one larger pocket, for example. This allows the scientists involved
in this work to explore the richness of theories that have been developed to
understand real solid materials, such as the "Fermi-Hubbard model." It is
possible that in atomic gases one might discover new phenomena that lead to
practical applications, and this improved understanding of the behavior of
interacting collections of many atoms or electrons may give us new tools for
designing materials with desired properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
system at the heart of this project is the fermionic isotope of strontium,
Sr-87, which has a nuclear spin of 9/2. This nuclear spin provides the analog of
the electron spin in conventional magnetic materials, but with ten possible spin
orientations rather than the conventional two for an electron. Because strontium
is a closed-shell atom, interactions between Sr-87 atoms are independent of the
orientation of the nucleus. This creates a huge degeneracy in the ground state
of the system, which is predicted to display a rich collection of new phenomena
related to the alignment and correlation of nuclear spins. The experimental plan
is to study the thermodynamics of a large-spin gas in a bulk system and to probe
the alignment of nuclear spins when individual atoms are confined to sites of an
optical-lattice potential formed by standing waves of light.