* 1607160
* Many-Body Quantum Optics and Light-Matter Interactions in Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Andrew Houck, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 580,000.00

The goal of this project is to study how light interacts with matter when that
interaction becomes extraordinarily strong. Scientists have long understood how
light interacts with bulk matter: for example, it can reflect off surfaces and
bend when it enters glass. More recently, scientists have begun to explore the
extremes of light-matter interaction. What happens when a single photon
(particle of light) interacts with a single atom? The atom can either absorb or
emit one photon, but if it is placed between two mirrors, it can absorb and re-
emit the same photon many times. When this happens, the atom and photon form a
new collective system, like a molecule between the atom and the photon. In this
case, the interaction is said to be strong. In this project, the goal is to
explore what happens when the interaction becomes still stronger, and more
photons become involved. In particular, scientists have predicted that light
itself will undergo a phase transition (like when water turns into ice). Here,
patterned metal circuits, like those in a computer chip, will be used to study
the interaction between microwave photons and artificial atoms. In particular,
the chief aim is to observe a phase transition for these microwave photons and
to study the new properties of light that emerge. This will give insight into
how interactions lead to complex new behavior, a theme that runs throughout much
of science and technology. Moreover, the specific circuits that will be used to
study this are also used for building a new type of computer called a quantum
computer; improvement in these circuits is an ancillary benefit.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The specific aim of this proposal is to study the emergence of many-
body states of light in systems of interacting photons. Effective photon-photon
interactions will be generated using superconducting microwave circuits, with
effective interactions mediated by Josephson-junction qubits. Two different
architectures will be used to study these phase transitions. First, arrays of
microwave cavities, each coupled to a superconducting qubit, will be used to
generate a lattice of interacting microwave photons. The lattice will be
populated with a steady state drive and dissipation, which, under appropriate
conditions, will lead to a steady-state, non-equilibrium phase transition. The
nature of this phase transition and of the steady states will be explored.
Second, superconducting qubits will be placed in a photonic bandgap medium.
These qubits will result in the generation of bound single photon states;
multiple qubits will result in overlapping bound photons, generating a highly
tunable lattice to study these many-body quantum optics effects. This project
provides a complementary approach to studying phase transitions with cold atoms,
and can easily access non-equilibrium physics and transport properties of the
system.