* 1607143
* RUI: Collapse and folding of a polymer chain: Effects of crowding and confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Mark Taylor, Hiram College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2020
* USD 124,368.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made on a Research at an Undergraduate
Institute (RUI)proposal supports computational and theoretical research and
education to study transformations in the size and shape assumed by long chain-
like molecules, polymers, as they respond to changes in their environment, such
as changes in temperature and pressure. The PI will use advanced computer
simulation techniques and models to advance understanding of this important
problem. Changes in the size and shape of the polymers in biological cells are
often necessary to carry out functions at the biomolecular level to sustain
life. A better understanding of this process contributes to developing design
principles for smart materials that change their properties in response to
changes in their environment in a way that is reversible. Smart materials have
many applications, including actuators, sensors, and a wide range of medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program has been designed to allow
for maximum student participation by dovetailing into the physics curriculum at
Hiram College. Computation and simulation methods taught in the core courses
establish a direct link between classroom learning and this research program and
provide students with the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this
work. The undergraduate students who participate in this research will benefit
by learning state of the art computer simulation techniques and will have
opportunities to present at scientific meetings. Many students who have worked
with the PI at Hiram, have, or will be, pursuing advanced study in physics,
materials science, engineering, or medicine. The PI aims to continue to provide
successful educational experiences for students, and to help recruit more under-
represented students into the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
made on an Research at an Undergraduate Institution (RUI) proposal supports
computational and theoretical research and education that addresses
conformational phase transitions of single polymer molecules in response to
variations in environmental variables such as temperature, pressure, or solution
pH. This topic is of broad importance since both the bulk properties of polymer
containing materials and the functionality of biopolymers and many polymer-based
"smart" materials are directly linked to the underlying microscopic conformation
of individual polymer molecules. Many smart or biologically active materials
utilize polymer chains tethered to surfaces while biopolymers typically operate
in very crowded macromolecular environments. In this geometrically constrained
environment polymers can behave differently and a focus of this research is on
the basic physics of polymer confinement with specific applications to materials
design. This research continues and extends recent work by the PI with
significant contributions from undergraduate collaborators in the areas of
solvent effects on polymer conformation and phase transitions of isolated
homopolymer chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project
are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (i) elucidate the effects of local environment on
the conformational phase transitions of a single polymer chain as relevant, for
example, to the design and function of polymer-based environmentally responsive
smart materials;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (ii) study single-polymer phase
transitions, in particular, polymer all-or-none "folding", which can provide an
on/off switch in smart materials applications, in crowded or geometrically
confined environments; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (iii) develop rigorous analysis
tools such as partition function zeros and free energy landscapes to study phase
transitions and transition pathways in polymer systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will make use of both a solvation potential
approach, recently developed by the PI to reduce computational complexity in
modeling polymer-solvent systems, and advanced simulation techniques that allow
for direct computation of the density of states of classical many-body systems.
The latter methods provide complete thermodynamic information and can be used to
carry out subsequent multi-canonical simulations to determine structural
information. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the
understanding of single-macromolecule behavior through the development of
rigorous solvation potentials, density of states simulation methods, and new
analysis techniques. It will contribute to efforts to develop rational design
principles for functional polymer-based and biomimetic materials. This research
program has been designed to allow for maximum undergraduate student
participation by dovetailing into the physics curriculum at Hiram College.
Computation and simulation methods taught in the core physics courses establish
a direct link between classroom learning and this research program, and provide
students with the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this work.
The undergraduate students who participate in this research will benefit by
learning state of the art computer simulation techniques and will have
opportunities to present at scientific meetings. Many students who have worked
with the PI at Hiram, have, or will be, pursuing advanced study in physics,
materials science, engineering, or medicine. The PI aims to continue to provide
successful educational experiences for students, and to help recruit more under-
represented students into the sciences.