* 1607428
* Cosmic Ray Analysis and Simulation of IceTop and IceCube Data
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Katherine Rawlins, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2020
* USD 185,305.00

It has been over 100 years since the discovery of the energetic particles from
space known as "cosmic rays." Comprised of a variety of particle types, cosmic
rays arrive at Earth with a wide range of energies. High energy cosmic rays are
composed of atomic nuclei, ranging in mass from protons up to iron. Just what
percentage of the population is light, and what percentage is heavy, is still
under active study. Because cosmic rays are charged and their trajectories bend
in magnetic fields, they do not point back to their origin; determining the
origin of these particles is an unsolved problem with a 100-year heritage.
Features in the energy spectrum (such as kinks, bumps, or changes in slope) are
important clues, thought to be related to changes in composition and origin. The
goal of this project is to measure the composition and energy spectrum of cosmic
rays by using data from IceTop, the surface component of the IceCube Observatory
located at the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica, in coincidence
with IceCube data.

The project has been designed to include self-contained projects appropriate for
undergraduates, a unique training and learning opportunity for UAA
undergraduates not only to participate in active research and discovery, but
also to be an important part of a large international effort. In addition, the
construction of a muon telescope and small-scale air shower array using
scintillators is planned as a tool for outreach, education, and training in the
field of particle astrophysics.

IceTop is an 81-element extensive air-shower array located on the surface, above
IceCube. This project first focuses on improving the reconstruction of cosmic
ray air showers with IceTop, especially at high energies where current
reconstruction techniques are underperforming. It will study snow attenuation,
the curvature and fluctuations of the shower front, and the separate treatment
of coincident and isolated signals in the detector. The project includes
simulations to study how different hadronic interaction models impact the
signals seen in IceTop. With plentiful data statistics and advanced data
analysis techniques available, IceTop is capable of delivering results of
relevance to the field of cosmic ray astrophysics: a detailed cosmic ray energy
spectrum, and the mass composition of cosmic rays as a function of energy.