* 1607256
* Quantum Theories of Fundamental Atomic and Molecular Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 209,999.00

This project is focused on improved theoretical descriptions of the interactions
between atoms and/or molecules over a broad range of energy. These elementary
interactions are the essential ingredients for the study of quantum many-body
systems throughout physics and chemistry, and, increasingly, in biology and the
life-sciences as well. In most applications of quantum mechanics to complex
many-body systems, the pairwise interactions between atoms and/or molecules are
approximated with simple analytical forms dictated by practicality and
expedience, but which neglect essential physics. Better representations of these
interactions through accurate, first-principle calculations, by contrast, are
simply too complicated to incorporate into many-body studies. This project is
part of an effort to resolve this conundrum and to develop quantum theories of
fundamental atomic interactions that are both sufficiently simple and systematic
to be incorporated into quantum many-body theories, and simultaneously accurate
enough to capture all the essential physics. The degree to which this can be
accomplished may well determine the relevance of theoretical models and
simulations of many-body systems to real-world experimental observations. The
project builds on the recent success of quantum defect theories for atom-atom
and ion-atom interactions. It intends both to apply them to develop better
models for many-atom systems, and to extend them to other fundamental atomic
interactions such as the electron-atom interaction. Quantum defect theories are
general theories of structures and interactions that take advantage of the fact
that over most energy ranges of interest, the complexities in atomic
interactions, such as their energy and partial wave dependences, are due almost
entirely to the long-range interaction, which makes them amenable to systematic
and often analytic treatment. The project also intends to take initial steps
towards the developments of quantum defect theories for anisotropic
interactions, such as the atom-molecule interaction, with the ultimate goal of
achieving a unified and an efficient framework for all aspects of atomic and
molecular structures and interactions.