* 1608010
* RUI: High Resolution Coherent 3D Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 403,075.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Chen at Spelman College is working with undergraduate
students to develop and investigate a new laser spectroscopic technique that was
invented at Spelman. This new three-dimensional spectroscopy method can overcome
problems and limitations of other existing forms of spectroscopy in the study of
the properties and behavior of molecules in chemistry. Specifically in this
project, Professor Chen works closely with his students to 1) further develop
theory and software for spectral interpretation; 2) demonstrate the study of
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) as the sample molecule using this technique; 3) combine
the new spectroscopic technique with a high resolution, coherent, two
dimensional spectroscopic method to improve the speed of data collection and
information extraction; and 4) identify other interesting molecules that could
benefit from the enhanced capability of this technique. At Spelman College, one
of only two Historically Black Colleges for women in the US, many students in
Professor Chen's lab are from underrepresented minority groups. With this
project, he provides them with a stimulating undergraduate research experience
that encourages and better prepares them to pursue graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High resolution molecular spectroscopy is a mature
technique with a long record of providing detailed information about molecular
structure and behavior. However, many molecules have stubbornly resisted
analysis because the spectra they produce are too heavily congested, perturbed,
complex, and patternless. Furthermore, analytical applications of high
resolution molecular spectroscopy are limited by difficulty in interpreting
spectra when the sample is a mixture. The purpose of the project is to develop
and explore the capabilities of High Resolution Coherent Three Dimensional
(HRC3D) spectroscopy as a method for overcoming these limitations. In
conjunction with a recently developed High Resolution Coherent Two Dimensional
(HRC2D) technique, which has complimentary capabilities, these two tools provide
an alternative method for studying polyatomic molecules (such as NO2) in systems
that cannot be studied using existing methods.