* 1608937
* Electronic Transport in Nanostructured and Amorphous Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* James Kakalios, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 242,378.00

Non-Technical Description: Composite materials consisting of nanocrystals within
a thin-film amorphous matrix can exhibit novel properties not characteristic of
either individual constituent. These composite structures, combining the
advantages of amorphous semiconductors with the unique properties of
nanocrystals may enable new electronic and photovoltaic applications. The goal
of this project is to study the electronic properties of free-standing
nanocrystalline films and amorphous/nanocrystalline composites as the
nanocrystal properties are systematically varied. In order to elucidate the
mechanism underlying the unusual conductivity in this type of material, recently
discovered by the Principle Investigator, a variety of amorphous semiconductors
and amorphous/nanocrystalline composites, synthesized under a broad range of
conditions are investigated, testing various conduction models. A graduate
student and undergraduate researchers work together on this project, learning a
variety of materials synthesis and characterization techniques. The research is
integrated with various outreach activities, promoting the importance of
advanced materials research to a wide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The goal of the research project is to elucidate the charge
transport mechanisms in free-standing nanocrystalline films; composite materials
of amorphous semiconductors containing nanocrystalline inclusions; and pure
amorphous semiconductors. Samples are fabricated by employing an advanced dual-
chamber co-deposition system, developed at the University of Minnesota, that
enables growth of various composite materials of a nanocrystal Si or Ge embedded
in a thin-film matrix of hydrogenated amorphous silicon or germanium, or an
insulating silicon nitride. The material properties are evaluated by using
structural (transmission electron microscopy, Fourier transform infra-red
spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy), optical (transmission and constant
photocurrent techniques) and electrical characterization techniques. The charge
transport in nanostructured films is investigated by using 1/f noise
spectroscopy that is highly sensitive to filamentary conduction processes, as
well as thermopower and Hall-effect measurements, in order to explore the
mechanisms underlying the recently reported anomalous hopping conductivity.