* 1608580
* Unveiling the Enigmatic Machinery of the Azinomycins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Coran Watanabe, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2019
* USD 550,003.00

The National Science Foundation, Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division funds Dr. Coran M. H. Watanabe and his research group from
Texas A&M University to study how a natural soil dwelling microbe makes a
molecule known as azinomycin. This molecule is a member of an important class of
molecules with cancer treatment potential. The research group is investigating
the biosynthesis of the azinomycins, i.e. how nature constructs these molecules.
These studies will not only shed light on how these molecules are constructed by
nature but also pave the way for future engineering of the pathway genes for
therapeutic purposes. These investigations enable graduate students,
undergraduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to develop a broad skillset in
chemical biology and biotechnology. Moreover, this research is integrated into
the classroom where students learn that bioactive agents are often derived from
the environment by carrying out their own field collection of soil samples,
which are assayed for natural products with antibiotic activity. This project
also includes an outreach component. High school students learn about natural
products research through a lecture and lab on antibiotics and drug resistance.
A tailored set of activities is carried out for elementary school students,
which centers on "Man vs. Microbe."

The azinomycins are densely functionalized and architecturally fascinating. The
basic framework of the molecule is generated through a polyketide
synthase/nonribosomal peptide synthetase (PKS/NRPS) skeleton while the
aziridino[1,2-a]pyrollidine moiety is alkaloid derived. From an enzymological
perspective the natural product represents a rich treasure trove of unusual
biosynthetic transformations to be mined. The objective of this application is
to functionally reconstitute and characterize enzymes of the azinomycin
biosynthetic pathway and is being investigated through three primary project
areas: [1] evaluation of the mechanism of polyketide ring expansion mediated by
AziB and AziG, [2] evaluation of the catalytic role of AziA3, and [3] functional
characterization of azabicycle biosynthetic enzymes.