* 1608862
* Geometric Instabilities of Filamentous Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Gregory Grason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2020
* USD 285,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT This award supports theoretical research and education to
advance understanding of the structure and response in "filamentous matter," a
notion which encompasses biological and synthetic nanostructured materials,
ranging from carbon nanotubes and some assemblies of interconnected long
chainlike molecules to filamentous proteins within and around biological cells.
Project research will develop and investigate theoretical models of multi-
filament material structures and related phenomena that derive from the generic,
yet poorly understood, interplay between patterns of orientation and spatial
organization. Developed theories will advance understanding of structure
formation and organized mechanical motion of important classes of biological
materials, including networks, bundles and fibers of filamentous proteins, as
well as technologically valuable materials, like nanotube-based yarns and
textiles. Beyond currently existing materials, studies will lay the groundwork
for designing and engineering new classes of synthetic, responsive filamentous
materials by uncovering new principles for manipulating their structure spanning
from single filaments across assemblies.

The project will advance the training of a postdoctoral and graduate researcher
in a diverse set of quantitative methods, from mechanics and geometry to
statistical and computational physics. Ongoing research goals will be integrated
with undergraduate research projects and development of graduate curriculum in
soft materials theory. The project also involves new collaboration with pre-K
educators in Northampton, MA to develop an in-class curriculum centered on the
connections between shape and materials that will stimulate interest and foster
curiosity in STEM at the pre-K level and engage with the emerging mathematical
thinking of students at 4-5 age range.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT This award supports theoretical research and education to
advance understanding of the structure and response in "filamentous matter."
Focusing on generic models of two prototypical assembly architectures, ordered
bundles and isotropic networks, the research will study novel collective
behaviors of multi-filament assemblies stemming from generic, geometric
nonlinearities of filamentous matter, and their associated multi-scale,
geometric instabilities. The project builds from emerging frameworks that
connect geometric and mechanical principles of multi-filament structures to
those of thin, 2D structures, including elastic sheets and crystalline
membranes. While the geometrically-nonlinear principles of 2D membranes are now
well-established in soft matter physics, an understanding of the basic methods
and consequences of analogous principles for multi-filament bundles or networks,
which this project seeks to develop, is in its infancy.

Project research will consider physical models of multi-filament assemblies in
which intrinsic or extrinsic stresses vary in magnitude, sign and direction
throughout the structure, leading to variations in local stability, and
ultimately, new classes of inhomogeneous and non-linear behaviors:

1) Building on an emerging understanding of the metric geometry of filament
arrays, the project will study structural instabilities of incompatible bundles,
in which uniform inter-filament spacing is frustrated. Two generic models will
be studied: i) defect driven shape-instabilities of cohesive bundles and ii)
ground-state order and geometry of long-range repulsive filaments under lateral
confinement.

2) The project will advance geometric descriptions of inter-filament packing in
contorted configurations of bundles, where the metric properties necessarily
vary along the bundle. The present understanding of metric constraints is
limited to only simplified geometries (straight, constant-twist bundles), and
this study will advance the knowledge of optimal inter-filament organization to
models of bent, toroidal and folded bundles relevant to observed phenomena from
condensation of biopolymers to "in viro" packing of dsDNA chains.

3) Drawing on parallels between the stress-collapse behavior of 2D elastic
sheets subject to spatially non-uniform compression, the project will
investigate generic consequences of the compressive (buckling) instability of
constituent filaments in isotropic network models, driven far beyond the
buckling threshold. This "far-from threshold" regime reveals new universal
behaviors, including the renormalization of far-field stresses due to
compressive collapse of networks near to locally-applied loads.

The project will advance the training of a postdoctoral and graduate researcher
in a diverse set of quantitative methods, from mechanics and geometry to
statistical and computational physics. Ongoing research goals will be integrated
with undergraduate research projects and development of graduate curriculum in
soft materials theory. The project also involves new collaboration with pre-K
educators in Northampton, MA to develop an in-class curriculum centered on the
connections between shape and materials that will stimulate interest and foster
curiosity in STEM at the pre-K level and engage with the emerging mathematical
thinking of students at 4-5 age range.