* 1608711
* Spray Synthesis of Shape-Defined Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 445,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this project provides new synthetic methods that
can be predictably manipulated to yield materials with controllable composition
and structure. This control allows the properties of materials to be enhanced
for applications in solar energy conversion and catalysis. This expansion of the
synthetic toolkit is achieved in this project by integrating new chemical
methods with the aerosol technique ultrasonic spray synthesis, which provides a
scalable route to solids. The principal investigator and her students develop
these methods to achieve new materials for energy applications, with the goal
being the elucidation of criteria for the synthesis and design of materials with
the ability to use light efficiently to drive chemical reactions. Ultimately,
this research forges links between disciplines that include
nano/inorganic/solid-state chemistry, condensed matter physics, chemical
engineering and materials science by distributing new knowledge through high-
impact publications and presentations. This research also enhances scientific
training through multidisciplinary research and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, by
spatially and temporally confining molten salt syntheses with aerosol droplets,
crystal growth can be limited to the nanoscale. This project demonstrates that
the supersaturation conditions achieved within the aerosol droplets can be
manipulated to achieve nanocrystals with different shapes. This ability is being
used to synthesize shape-defined metal oxynitride nanocrystals for
photocatalytic applications by topotactic conversion of nanoscale templates
prepared by aerosol-assisted molten salt synthesis. This ability is also being
used to synthesize shape-controlled layered double hydroxide nanocatalysts by
aerosol-assisted molten salt syntheses. This project is enabling ultrasonic
spray synthesis to emerge as a general and continuous route to advanced
nanomaterials and brings new perspective to both confined nanomaterial syntheses
and molten salt syntheses.