* 1608525
* Defining the classical and quantum limits of surface plasmon optics with hard-soft nanoantenna systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Jonathan Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Title: Exploring the limits of optical enhancement with nanoscale
antennas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description: Nanoscale antennas are
a gateway to the next generation of miniaturized optical systems for
communications, sensing, energy conversion, and optical imaging applications.
The purpose of this research is to understand the physical limits of light
manipulation with nanoscale metal antennas. In particular, our goal is to
quantify these limits and to understand their connection with metal antenna
geometry. We will probe the relationship between antenna geometry and optical
properties by characterizing a metal antenna platform that can reconfigure as a
function of mechanical strain. This research will help us develop new
technologies, based on nanoscale optical devices, which can operate at their
absolute physical limits. For example, it can be used to design ultra-sensitive
sensing platforms with optical readout, which will serve as the cornerstone for
new optically-based point-of-care biomedical technologies. It will also help us
advance our understanding of green energy devices that utilize nanoscale
antennas for photocatalytic and energy harvesting
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Optical antennas have
tremendous potential in miniaturized photonic systems because they can tailor
electromagnetic fields with unprecedented control. The research goal of this NSF
proposal is to measure and quantify plasmonic near-field coupling and field-
enhanced phenomena in the classical and quantum regime using devices that can
dynamically reconfigure with extreme mechanical control. Three research
objectives will be pursued to: i) understand how optical modes transform in
mechanically-actuated antennas; ii) explore the non-linear optics of antennas
with nanoscale gap spacings; and, iii) understand how symmetry breaking can
control optical modes. To address these objectives, a new type of mechanically-
tunable nanoantenna, consisting of plasmonic antennas mounted onto an elastomer,
is proposed. The project outcome will fill a significant void in the field of
quantum plasmonics and address significant fundamental questions that are
scientifically unexplored, including: what are the fundamental field-enhancement
limits in coupled antennas? How can the chemical surface modification of
antennas impact their near-field coupling in the quantum plasmonics regime? How
can device reconfiguration enable extreme sensitivity in optical sensors? By
analyzing individual antennas with dynamically tunable configurations, as oppose
to multiple devices with differing static configurations, uncertainties due to
uncontrolled fabrication variations from device to device are eliminated.