* 1608389
* US Ireland Research and Development Partnership: Spin and valley interactions in intrinsic and magnetic two dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides for novel devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Richard Lehman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Two dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDs) are the ideal
platform for exploration of fundamental spin and valley interactions that will
form the foundation of spintronic and valleytronic devices. In this project,
researchers from the United States, Republic of Ireland (ROI), and Northern
Ireland (NI) propose to study fundamental properties, such as phase and spin
coherences, inter-valley scattering, and magnetism in intrinsic and magnetically
doped 2D TMDs. Each PI will be supported by their respective funding agencies
through the US Ireland R &amp; D Partnership Program. The Research Team is
interdisciplinary with complementary expertise. The NI group will carry out
multi-scale modeling using state-of-the-art theoretical methods to predict new
properties as well as provide fundamental understanding of the experimental
work. The ROI group will provide multi-scale characterization and develop new
scanning transmission electron microscopy methods to simultaneously obtain
information about atomic and magnetic structures. The US group will investigate
new synthesis methods to obtain magnetic 2D materials and perform quantum
transport measurements to elucidate fundamental spin and inter-valley scattering
mechanisms. The collaborative research will lead to realization of synergies
through formation of an interdisciplinary team who will work on spin and valley
physics in 2D materials to enable exciting scientific discoveries. The
educational and training activities of the proposed project will complement the
scientific impact of the proposed project. The graduate students from the US,
Ireland, and Northern Ireland will benefit from the scientific and educational
components of the program. This collaboration will result in developing highly
engaged, globally networked graduate students with interdisciplinary knowledge
experienced in international and national laboratory environments. The students
will benefit from international exchanges by developing new skills beyond the
expertise of their core doctoral thesis topics. Additionally, focused outreach
activities will involve engaging high school students as well as middle and high
school teachers to be familiarized with materials science as well as engaging
public by organizing laboratory tours, designing hands-on demonstrations, and
issuing timely press releases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
proposal is to provide new insights in: (i) fundamental interactions of spin and
valley with magnetic impurities in the very dilute (i.e. intrinsic) or weak
magnetic ordering regime; and (ii) ferromagnetism in 2D semiconductors in the
high magnetic ordering regime and its influence on spin polarization and
coherence. The new knowledge obtained from this project will be complementary in
realizing future spintronics and valleytronics devices based on 2D TMDs. In
addition, electrical doping remains an unresolved question in 2D semiconductors
and it is expected the outcome of this research will address key fundamental
questions regarding thermodynamic concentration limit and influence of
impurities on electronic and magnetic properties. These properties will be
investigated by quantum transport and Hall Effect measurements to obtain
information about weak localization for the non-magnetic materials. Information
about spin-polarized transport in magnetic samples will be obtained using
magneto-resistance measurements with in-plane magnetic fields. It is expected
that the research will generate the foundation of new fundamental knowledge and
investigate the feasibility of experimentally realizing 2D magnetic TMDs for
fabrication of spintronic and valleytronic devices. This US-Ireland partnership
will provide a framework to collaborate theoretically and experimentally for
realizing new 2D materials properties and thier potential synergies for device
applications.