* 1608224
* Narrow Bandgap Multi-Stage Structures for Thermophotovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Rui Yang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 459,982.00

Non-technical Description: About two-thirds of the energy generated to power the
world's machinery is lost as waste heat. The recovery of even a fraction of
these large losses would have a significant environmental impact. This project
explores semiconductor multilayer structures for converting this otherwise
wasted heat into useful electricity. The objectives of the project are to
achieve extensive and systematic understanding of the fundamental aspects of the
multilayer semiconductor structures, and to advance the knowledge of how
underlying physical processes affect their electrical and optical properties.
This enables development of novel concepts for effective conversion of radiant
energy from a heat source into electricity. The project offers graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Oklahoma unique opportunities to
pursue education, training and research in multidisciplinary topics, such as
materials science, quantum engineering, photonics, and device fabrication. This
project also enhances Oklahoma's infrastructure for science and technology
development and opens new opportunities for students from under-represented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Narrow bandgap materials
are desirable for making efficient thermophotovoltaic (TPV) cells that convert
the otherwise-wasted radiant energy from a heat source into useful electrical
energy. The TPV devices take advantage of the type-II band alignment of
InAs/GaSb interfaces to form multi-stage cascade structures. These multi-stage
structures have many potential advantages including: significantly improved
collection efficiency for photo-generated carriers, a wide range of infrared
spectral coverage, high open-circuit voltage due to the cascade architecture, as
well as the benefits of current matching through adjustments of the number of
cascade stages and the thickness of individual absorber layers. Consequently,
these narrow bandgap materials enable TPV cells that effectively absorb infrared
radiant photons from a heat source and efficiently convert them into
electricity. The power conversion efficiency is expected to approach 20%, which
would be remarkably high for a TPV system operating at long wavelengths and with
a modest light intensity from a low temperature source. The approach and tasks
involve: theory development and designs for multi-stage TPV structures,
molecular beam epitaxial growth of the TPV structures, material
characterization, and prototype device fabrication and characterization. The TPV
cells enabled by multi-stage structures have important applications for waste-
heat recovery, more efficient use of solar energy, space exploration, power
beaming, as well as portable and quiet energy sources. This project not only
advances the understanding of physical processes, it also generates new
knowledge in the design of quantum-engineered structures and broadens their
applications. The advancement of narrow bandgap multi-stage TPV structures in
the mid-infrared wavelength region is a critical step toward harvesting energy
from widely available heat sources.