* 1608515
* EarthCaching for Pre-Service Teachers: Examining Attitudes and Intentions towards Informal Science Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 316,334.00

This Exploration &amp; Design project, of the Engaged Student Learning track of
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program, will develop, test, and
study high-quality undergraduate instructional materials that integrate field-
based geoscience learning into elementary teacher education. Historically, the
geosciences have been taught inconsistently to future elementary teachers, and
many elementary teachers enter their practice lacking strong exposure to
geoscience topics. The geosciences are central to issues of importance to human
well-being and global sustainability, and strong K-12 geoscience instruction is
critical to ensuring the development of citizens who can make informed decisions
in their own lives and for inspiring a new generation of geoscientists. The
geoscience workforce has the lowest participation by underrepresented minorities
of any of the sciences, and if the geoscience workforce is to grow in both
numbers and diversity, more attention to the preparation of teachers of earth
science across grade levels is needed. This project addresses this problem by
testing a new model for geoscience instruction in a science content course for
elementary education majors. The model integrates principles of field-based
experiences and informal, out-of-classroom learning using the highly successful
EarthCaching program as a foundation for teacher candidates' learning. The new
curriculum materials will directly impact 225 undergraduate education majors
during the grant period, with the goal of increasing their knowledge of earth
science core concepts and positive attitudes towards field-based learning,
thereby strengthening their preparation to teach science in their own
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to the need for further
studies on how informal learning complements the formal classroom environment.
The project will develop and study a curriculum that includes an Introduction to
EarthCaching module and six EarthCaching authentic field-based experiences to be
completed outside of class time. The curriculum will be aimed at pre-service
elementary teachers; however, the materials will be appropriate for special
education and early childhood education majors. This enhanced course content
will support pre-service teachers to connect abstract geoscience concepts to
real-world contexts. The project will employ qualitative and quantitative
research methods, providing a rich dataset to advance understanding of the
impact of field-based informal learning on teacher candidates' knowledge of
earth science as aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards. Furthermore,
the research will examine teacher willingness to use informal learning
experiences with their students after participating in such an activity and
changes in their own personal dispositions towards lifelong science learning.
The curriculum materials will become a permanent component of the science
content course for pre-service teachers at Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville, and will be widely disseminated to the teacher education and
geoscience education communities. The research findings will be the foundation
for a larger project to examine the role of informal learning in the preparation
of science teachers across different institutional contexts. Additionally,
project-developed EarthCaches that are accepted into the EarthCaching.org public
database will be available for discovery and exploration by members of the
general public, with expected visits in the many thousands. The Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program is providing co-funding for this project in
recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher preparation goals of the
Noyce effort.