* 1608957
* Building Electron Transfer Cascades into Amphiphlic Donor-Acceptor Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 07/31/2020
* USD 699,785.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Sarah Tolbert, Benjamin
Schwartz, and Yves Rubin of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California, Los Angeles are developing complex molecules that will convert light
into separated electrical charges that can drive useful chemical reactions. In
natural systems, such as photosynthesis, the absorption of light energy can be
translated efficiently into separated electrical charges. These charges can then
be used to conduct a range of important chemical reactions, and the overall
process is called photochemistry. Using modern synthetic chemistry, Professors
Tolbert, Schwartz and Rubin are creating molecules that absorb light efficiently
and then separate the electrical charges via a series of cascades across the
molecules. Then, they are examining ways to use those separated charges to do
useful chemistry. In the process, they are training a group of graduate students
in interdisciplinary science. Those students are further working to share their
knowledge of photochemistry and photochemical technologies with a broad range of
middle and high school students in the greater Los Angeles area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Tolbert, Schwartz and Rubin are studying ways
to create and exploit artificial electron transfer cascades using strongly
absorbing pi-conjugated polymers and molecules. The principal challenges in
producing artificial electron transfer cascades are first to create well-defined
donor/acceptor pairs and second to place additional acceptors with progressively
lower LUMOs at precise positions so that their energy gradient leads to spatial
separation of the initially created charge pair. The cascades are being
constructed starting with amphiphilic, water-soluble pi-conjugated polymers that
assemble into networks of electrically-interconnected micelles. The conjugated
polyelectrolytes are then assembled with charged C60 derivatives or other pi-
conjugated acceptors. The structure of the assembly and the energetics of both
the polymer donor and the pi-conjugated electron acceptor are being tuned. The
electron transfer cascades are being characterized using ultrafast transient
absorption spectroscopy, and the structures are being correlated with the
observed photochemical properties. Optimized assemblies are being adapted for
use as photosensitizers in reduction reactions.