* 1608980
* Enhancing Spectral Access through Adaptive Terahertz Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Gregory Pottie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 478,998.00

High-speed wireless communication has attracted extensive attention in the past
decades because of dramatic changes in the ways people create and share
information. The expected data rate to satisfy the needs of the customers is
projected to be 100 Gbit/s by 2020. However, the speed of today's wireless
communication systems is limited by the narrow bandwidth of existing
transmitters and receivers and the heavy use of the electromagnetic spectrum up
to 60 GHz. This trend has been forcing researchers to push the carrier
frequencies of transceivers to higher frequencies to allow operation at
frequency bands which have not been allocated to any specific active service
yet. In order to increase the channel capacity, researchers have been trying to
operate at terahertz frequencies, which cover the frequency range of 0.3-10 THz
in the electromagnetic spectrum. While communication systems with such high
carrier frequencies have been hard to develop so far, a data link operating at
terahertz frequencies with data rates exceeding 100 Gbit/s over 10-20 meters
distance is believed to be viable now thanks to recent advancements in terahertz
photonics and electronics. The research component of this program plans to
develop such a high data rate wireless communication system at terahertz carrier
frequencies for indoor communication applications. A system with this capability
can be very suitable for the next generation indoor wireless communication
systems such as wireless local area networks and wireless personal area
networks, kiosk downloads, wireless backhauling, data center connection, and
real-time data analysis for wearable devices. Additionally, this program plans
to integrate research with education and outreach activities by developing new
courses, recruitment and involvement of undergraduate students, and organizing
high-school seminars.

During this program a directional terahertz transceiver system based on an
adaptive two-dimensional array of plasmonic photomixers operating under novel
communication protocols is designed, fabricated, and experimentally
demonstrated. The proposed work presents an entirely new perspective on the
potential use of terahertz bandwidth for increasing wireless communication data
rates to levels that could not be envisioned before due to low output power and
limited adaptability of existing terahertz transmitters. This limitation can be
tackled through use of plasmonic photomixer arrays that offer significantly
higher terahertz radiation powers and higher level of transmitter adaptability
compared to other terahertz transmitter candidates. Additionally, the adaptive
nature of the proposed terahertz transceiver system allows compensation for
accidental misalignments and shadowing effects through beam-forming and non-
line-of-sight communication links. While theoretical investigations provide a
deep understanding of fundamental physical limitations of terahertz transceiver
systems based on plasmonic photomixer arrays and achievable wireless
communication data rates, the experimental effort provides valuable data to
develop accurate channel models at terahertz frequencies in order to utilize
appropriate communication modalities, equalization techniques, and adaptive
signal tracking systems to mitigate signal fading in indoor terahertz
communication systems.