* 1608949
* Single-Molecule Imaging of Biorecognition Kinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Joel Harris, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 528,239.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program of the Division of Chemistry
at the National Science Foundation supports this project. Professor Joel M.
Harris and his research group at the University of Utah are developing
microscopy experiments to investigate reactions of biological molecules,
especially DNA. The chemical reaction between complementary strands of DNA is
the fundamental step in duplication and transcription of genetic information in
living organisms. The goal of this project is to develop microscopy methods that
allow the reactions between DNA strands to be observed in "movies" of individual
molecules as they react at a glass surface. Understanding these reactions is
critical to the development of DNA-based genetic testing used in disease
diagnosis. Single-molecule imaging also serves as a sensitive detection method,
where counting individual molecules enables the analysis of extremely low
concentrations of target DNA in biological specimens. The broader impacts are
demonstrated through the training of graduate students, undergraduates, and
postdoctoral associates in microscopy and bioanalytical chemistry. These topics
are relevant to advancing U.S. science and technology. The project also supports
K-12 science education and outreach through development of Chemistry-under-the-
Microscope exercises for middle- and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique approach taken in this project is to
immobilize unlabeled DNA on a capture surface that is engineered to have
extremely low non-specific interactions with fluorescently-labeled target DNA in
solution. The result is a high sensitivity measurement platform, where capture
surfaces can be used for long periods of time, and even reused in multiple
experiments. With super-resolution imaging, individual immobilized DNA probe
strands on the surface can be identified, thereby creating a microarray of
single-molecule capture sites. Impacts of the research include generating
understanding of structural factors that influence the performance of DNA-based
biosensors. The development of microscopy instrumentation for single-molecule
imaging supports several collaborations including DNA aptamer discovery,
measuring membrane affinity of signaling proteins, and assessing of new drug
candidates.