* 1608454
* NSF/DMR-BSF:  Bioinspired peptidic materials for proton and electron-proton conducting membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* David Beratan, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 398,000.00

Nontechnical: This NSF/DMR-BSF award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to Duke University aims to produce, model and study
innovative materials that are inspired by biological structures. This is a
collaborative proposal with scientists from US and Israel (Ben Gurion University
of the Negev), and this award is co-funded by the Global Venture Funds program
in the Office of International Science and Engineering. The scientific goal of
this project is to put the ingenuity of nature to the service of modern
electronics and devices for environment friendly applications in transportation,
energy production and storage, sensing, and other environmental challenges.
Applications of these technologies would be very important in the automotive
industry, in industrial energy production processes, and in providing energy
sources for implantable biomedical devices. While biological materials proteins
may not function well in these targeted applications of interest, borrowing some
of the motifs and building blocks of nature can be used to produce materials
that capture some of the critical functions of biomolecules, while still
functioning effectively in demanding non-biological settings. The proposed
theoretical and experimental studies are expected to advance the development of
components based on biological building blocks. In addition, the proposed
theoretical studies would enable the accurate modeling of molecular mechanisms
at an atomic level. The collaborative experimental-theoretical nature of this
project promotes great cross-training of students in a lively multi-disciplinary
setting that will include students and faculty members from two universities at
USA and Israel. In mentoring the students, the proposal is particularly
attentive to novel curriculum developments, and in recruiting and mentoring
underrepresented groups into careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project combines theoretical
and experimental studies with chemical synthesis and materials characterization
to design and elucidate the function of bioinspired electron-proton transport
membranes. Extensive studies indicate that the alignment of proton-conduction
channels is required for high proton conductivities in these bioinspired
structures. This finding motivates the study of self-assembling pi-stacked
polypeptides that form beta sheets and lead to designed pathways for proton
transport. The main objective of this project is to explore the mechanisms of
charge transport (proton and/or electron transport, or coupled proton-electron
transport) in biological protein assemblies with beta-sheet architecture
(fibrils and nanotubes) using a variety of theoretical and experimental
approaches. Fundamental understanding of proton and electron and coupled proton-
electron transport mechanisms in these specific examples of biological
assemblies will help to establish the structure-function relationship to
optimize conductive properties of bioinspired materials. These structures of
interest involve natural and engineered amino acids (with modified side-chains)
that can self-assemble into fibers or nanotubes because of key hydrogen-bonding
motifs. Since proton transfer can involve between side chains and amide bonds,
these assemblies promise to provide intrinsic networks with effective long-range
proton transport relays. Preliminary data in the investigator's laboratory
support the concept of developing lower-cost materials that may, in the long
run, be able to compete with favorable proton-transport membrane materials
(e.g., Nafion), and yet to operate in a widened ranges of temperature and
hydration states. In addition, the biomaterials under study may support tunable
channels for proton-coupled electron transport, which would provide advantages
for the development of hydrogen separation structures. The theoretical study of
charge transport in these materials will extend earlier theories to the
mesoscale, encompassing transport on the scale of thousands of molecules. The
theoretical studies in the project will use simulation tools that range from ab
initio methods to coarse-grained molecular dynamics and mathematical modeling.
By combining synthesis, theory, and materials characterization, the project will
attempt to realize the promise of this field. The scientific broader impact of
this project is to put the ingenuity of nature to the service of modern
electronics, which may produce desirable long-term impacts on transportation,
energy production and storage, sensing, and environmental challenges.