* 1608752
* Tailoring interface functionality of complex oxide heterostructures - A neutron and x-ray study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Xianglin Ke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 333,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Complex transition-metal oxide heterostructures
represent an emerging and rapidly growing field with both significant scientific
merits and potential applications in spintronics, catalysts, solar cells, etc. A
plethora of novel physical phenomena can arise at the interface of dissimilar
materials in oxide heterostructures that are not attainable in the bulk
constituents. This project investigates such novel phenomena in transition-metal
oxide heterostructures via creation and manipulation of novel interface
functionalities by tuning the substrate geometry and surface orientation.
Importantly, this project serves as a platform to train the next-generation
neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering scientists, helping to promote the user
community of the cutting-edge facilities in national laboratories. In addition
to training graduate and undergraduate students, this project also supports the
scientific research activities engaging high school teachers and K-12 students,
as well as the activities of developing and presenting workshops to students in
community colleges in Michigan.

Technical Abstract: The project investigates the emergent quantum phenomena in
correlated transition-metal oxide heterostructures via creation and manipulation
of novel interface functionalities. Tuning the substrate geometry and surface
orientation gives rise to diverse polar surface terminations, bond connections,
and octahedral distortions, which are anticipated to affect electronic and
orbital reconstruction as well as magnetic and structural coupling at the
interfaces. Consequently, this can drastically alter physical properties of
oxide heterostructures grown atop, providing a pathway to new physics and
materials research. This project utilizes two unique and complementary
techniques, i.e., polarized neutron reflectometry and polarized x-ray absorption
spectroscopy, which offer high depth resolution and characteristic fingerprint
of transition-metal elements to decisively determine the nature of interfacial
magnetic and electronic states.