* 1608692
* A New Approach to Capacitive Sensing: Repulsive Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ronald Miles, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 480,958.00

Proposal Title: A New Approach to Capacitive Sensing: Repulsive Sensors

Brief Description of Project Goals: This research aims to devise a new approach
to capacitive sensing and to demonstrate its effectiveness in MEMS microphones.

Abstract:

Nontechnical Hearing aids are useful tools an aging population can use to
improve their quality of life. Miniature microphones are a key component in
hearing aids and their acoustic performance determines the effectiveness of
hearing aids in helping the hearing impaired communicate in noisy environments.
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) microphones have grown to dominate the
market for miniature microphones in portable electronic devices such as cell
phones due to their small form factor as well as their compatibility with high-
volume manufacturing processes. While MEMS microphones have the potential of
providing significant performance improvements in hearing aids, they have
generally not yet demonstrated sufficient performance for this demanding
application. A goal of the proposed research is to take better advantage of MEMS
technology to enable a revolutionary change in the design of high-performance
MEMS microphones. If successful, this research will lead to more sensitive MEMS
microphones for hearing aids and will have a tremendous impact on the lives of
hearing impaired. Noise performance of the MEMS microphone will be the major
improvement that can help the aging population hear better.

Technical Capacitive sensing using electrostatic repulsive fingers is a novel
concept that can transform many applications suffering from limited
functionality due to the pull-in instability of conventional parallel plate
sensors. Since the invention of capacitive microphones in 1916, the limitation
of pull-in voltage has significantly diminished the functionality of these
devices in terms of noise performance and sensitivity. We propose using a Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) capacitive sensing mechanism based on the
repulsive force that, unlike conventional capacitive sensors, does not suffer
from pull-in voltage. This approach allows significantly increased bias voltages
that will substantially improve the signal-to-noise ratio and electrical
sensitivity of microphones. The MEMS microphone examined here is composed of a
silicon diaphragm that rotates about an axis upon exposure to sound pressure.
The diaphragm incorporates a number of capacitive sensor unit cells, and their
change in capacitance converts to a voltage in the preamplifier. A unit sensor
cell consists of a movable finger above a vertically aligned fixed finger next
to an unaligned fixed finger. When potential differences are made in the aligned
and unaligned fingers, an asymmetric electric field is created on the movable
finger, generating a repulsive force that pushes it away from the substrate. Our
preliminary studies show that the initial gap of the unit sensor cell can be
designed so the force on the movable finger remains repulsive, which prevents
the collapse of the movable fingers on the substrate (pull-in). The asymmetric
electric field distribution on the movable finger causes a complicated coupled
relationship between the capacitance and mechanical displacement. Therefore, to
gain a fundamental understanding of the coupled system behavior, we will create
analytical and numerical models of the capacitive MEMS sensor. Using the model
simulations, we will design the sensor for desired sensitivity. Using
microfabrication techniques, we will build the sensor and characterize its
behavior using a Laser Doppler Vibrometer. After integrating the sensor with
preamplifier circuitry, we will test the system in an anechoic chamber to verify
the sensor improves the performance and sensitivity of microphones.