* 1608361
* A control-theoretic framework for analysis and design of networked systems with strategic agents via structured strategies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

For the proper functioning of modern societal networks it is critical to
incentivize strategically minded users participating in these networks to
voluntarily act in the interest of the collective. Examples of such networks
arise in intelligent transportation systems, electronic commerce, smart energy
grid and energy markets, and spectrum allocation in wireless systems. These
systems are being dramatically transformed by the ever-expanding use of
electronic connectivity and computation so that increasingly sophisticated
approaches can be applied for engineering these networks. This proposal aims to
study these networked systems as stochastic dynamical systems with strategic
agents having multiple interactions in the presence of partial information about
the system and each other. In particular, the goal is to develop a control-
theoretic framework to advance the state of the art for the analysis of such
systems, and also to design novel incentive schemes that drive the agents'
actions towards desirable social objectives. The research will be tightly
integrated with a significant education and outreach program consisting of two
focus areas: training students, including undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities, in interdisciplinary research; and broadly disseminating research
outcomes in the form of new curricular development and student involvement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will pursue two synergistic thrusts, one
focusing on analysis and the other on design. The analysis thrust consists of
investigating a control-theoretic framework that will enable the systematic
evaluation of the agents' equilibrium strategies and beliefs, by modeling their
interactions as a dynamic game with asymmetric and imperfect information.
Specifically, we plan to develop a systematic methodology for finding Perfect
Bayesian Equilibria for a broad class of dynamic games with asymmetric
information. The associated analysis builds upon foundations in game theory,
decentralized stochastic control, Markov decision processes and optimization. We
envision a theoretical framework that supports analytical tools for the
evaluation of equilibria much like the well-established backward dynamic
programming tools for Markov decision processes. The design thrust consists of
investigating incentives that induce agents to have an equilibrium behavior
consistent with a socially optimal objective, and developing new dynamic
mechanism design methodologies. Here, we will build upon the work on dynamic
games by exploring applications of the systematic methodology developed in the
analysis thrust to dynamic mechanism design. Specifically, we will investigate
indirect dynamic mechanisms that are appropriate for realistic models with
agents having large private type-sets but small action sets. Furthermore, we
will investigate Lagrangian relaxation methods that allow for an easier and more
general analysis of dynamic mechanism design with time-average constraints.