* 1608289
* In Operando Characterization of Degradation Processes in Organic Semiconductor Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Erin Ratcliff, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 589,999.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductor materials hold
exceptional promise in a number of existing and emerging technologies including
optoelectronics, thermoelectrics, bioelectronics, and energy harvesting and
storage applications. Degradation of these materials during use is a major issue
in the commercial implementation of organic semiconductors. These degradation
pathways are thought to be a complex combination of effects resulting from
exposure to small amounts of gases and moisture in the ambient atmosphere as
well as ultraviolet radiation. With the support of the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, this foundational effort allows development of sophisticated,
state-of-the-art spectroscopic tools based on the interaction of light and
electrons with these materials to identify the chemical pathways that accompany
degradation, leading to better solutions to solve this complicated problem. This
inherently interdisciplinary effort has substantial broader impact through the
professional development of the graduate students involved. Graduate students
conduct a portion of their dissertation research in the laboratory of the other
Principal Investigator, as well as complete a 6-week internship at Next Energy
Technologies, Inc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Solid-
state organic semiconductor materials are the essential active components of a
variety of existing and emerging technologies, including light-emitting diode
lasers and organic-based electronic and photonic devices. These technologies
suffer from limited lifetimes due to the inevitable degradation of organic
semiconductors through poorly defined chemical, photochemical and photophysical
processes, especially in operando, or under conditions of operation. Addressing
these limitations requires characterization of the molecular structural,
electronic, and charge transport attributes of these organic semiconductor
materials during and after degradation. Toward this end, a suite of state-of-
the-art methods, including surface vibrational spectroscopies (Raman, PM-IRRAS)
in ambient to ultrahigh vacuum, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), inverse photoemission spectroscopy
(IPES), and charge mobility measurements, are used to study organic
semiconductors in environments that systematically increase in chemical and
optoelectronic complexity, including in operando. The primary objective of this
effort is to undertake a comprehensive fundamental investigation of the
chemical, photochemical, and photophysical mechanisms of degradation that
underlie the diminished performance and eventual failure of organic
semiconductor-based devices. The secondary impact of this effort is formulation
of new design criteria for more robust organic semiconductors.