* 1608553
* Mechanism of a new flavin-derived cofactor involved in enzymatic decarboxylation reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* E. Neil Marsh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 503,452.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Neil Marsh from the University of Michigan for studies
on a potentially useful new enzyme. Enzymes are proteins that speed-up many
chemical reactions within cells and thus, enzymes are necessary for life. There
is increasing interest in using enzymes to catalyze industrial chemical
reactions because they are extremely efficient, renewable, biodegradable and
non-toxic. One class of industrially promising enzymes is known as
decarboxylases. These enzymes have the ability to add carbon dioxide to (or
remove carbon dioxide from) molecules, which may allow them to be used in
processes to develop new biofuels or important commodity chemicals such as
styrene (used in making plastics). This project is studing the biochemical
properties of a newly discovered decarboxylase enzyme with the long-term
objective of producing this enzyme for industrial applications. In synergy with
the scientific goals, the project is advancing the education, training and
professional development of undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
scientists in the inter-disciplinary area of chemical biology. Students and
postdocs are receiving training in a wide variety of specialized techniques
ranging from organic synthesis to sophisticated spectroscopy experiments.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the mechanism of a novel
2-component decarboxylase system recently identified from yeast. Ferulic acid
decarboxylase (FDC) catalyzes the decarboxylation of a wide range of substituted
phenylacrylic acids and sorbic acid. The enzyme uses a novel, modified flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) as a cofactor that contains an additional 6-membered ring
derived from dimethylallyl phosphate. The second enzyme, termed PAD1,
synthesizes the cofactor from reduced FMN and dimethylallyl phosphate. In
particular, the Marsh group aims to determine the mechanism of FDC and role of
the novel, modified flavin cofactor in catalyzing the decarboxylation reaction.
They further aim to determine the mechanism by which PAD1 synthesizes the
modified flavin cofactor. The experimental approaches includes measuring the
kinetics of the FDC- and PAD1-catalyzed reactions using both steady state and
pre-steady state techniques with a variety of substrate and coenzyme analogs.
Deuterium, and 14C and 13C kinetic isotope effects are measured for FDC and
combined with computational studies to fit the experimentally-determined kinetic
isotope effects with models of the enzyme transition state.