* 1608040
* SHF: Small: Bridging the Gap Between Global and Detailed Routing of Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Azadeh Davoodi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 416,006.00

As semiconductor technology enters the sub-10nm era, it has significantly
complicated the computer-aided design (CAD) of integrated circuits (ICs).
Today's designer must deal with increasingly complex rules, imposed by the
manufacturing facility so as to ensure that the chip can be successfully
fabricated. This project aims to develop CAD tools that incorporate major design
rules within a key, higher stage of the design flow, namely the global routing
stage. By integrating these rules into global routing, the project aims to
accelerate the progress of IC design within the sub-10nm regime. Other broader
goals of the project include: public release of a version of the tools developed
to facilitate academic research, technology transfer to major semiconductor
companies, integration with two existing courses at UW-Madison, and training
graduate and undergraduate students to gain the necessary skills for today's IC-
CAD job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tasks are centered around
investigating design-rule-aware models at the global routing level of
abstraction, including machine-learning techniques for better pin-access
planning. In addition, the project will identify new routing challenges caused
by modern design rules and will investigate appropriate optimization strategies,
including graph-based and mathematical programming techniques, to address them.