* 1608656
* Investigation of Depth-Dependence in Strongly Correlated Magnetic Oxides by Integrated Experiments and Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* James LeBeau, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 461,232.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Surfaces of materials have different properties
than bulk. Such differences can be manipulated, eliminated or enhanced to
improve desired properties and create better, more useful devices. This work
focuses on a class of magnetic thin films which are hoped to provide wide array
of future applications in computing, electronics and even power generation. A
strong collaboration of theory and experiment will benefit the quality of
planned effort by providing a way to describe the observations theoretically and
build models of observed variations of material properties as a function of
depth. This project will support the education of PhD students in advanced
vacuum deposition and theoretical and characterization techniques; a proven
approach providing excellent training opportunities resulting in productive
scientific careers in academic and technology settings. The expected increased
physical understanding of magnetism and interfacial properties in thin films
from these studies will be particularly relevant to technological applications
which incorporate thin magnetic films, such as magnetic recording, spin
generation, spin manipulation and/or spin detection. An improved understanding
of surface and interface properties will allow smaller devices using less
materials, higher energy efficiency and faster
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic and other properties at surfaces and interfaces are
often different from the bulk, which can have significant impact on technologies
relying on these properties. To develop enhanced interfaces and potentially new
interfacial phenomena, strong competition is favorable. Strongly correlated
oxides, with their competition between charge, spin and orbital degrees of
freedom offer many promising systems that may allow these tunable parameters.
This project will study strongly correlated magnetic LaxSr1-xMnO3 (LSMO) thin
films, which have been widely proposed for applications such as tunnel junctions
and solid oxide fuel cells. Using scanning transmission electron microscopy and
newly developed depth-dependent x-ray absorption analysis to model the
magnetization and other properties with depth, the deviation of these parameters
from bulk values at both the top and bottom interfacial layers of the thin film
will be quantified. Improvements or degradation in the interfacial properties
will be linked with the other measured parameters that vary in order to
determine in collaboration with dynamical mean field theory the contribution
from each factor. The project's focus on comparing the theoretical and
experimental depth-dependent properties near surfaces and interfaces is expected
to provide valuable insight into the properties of magnetic thin films and help
answer questions about the primary contributing factors to the manifestations of
magnetic properties at LSMO complex oxide surfaces and interfaces, the effect of
adjustable strain on LSMO thin film properties, and general behaviors of
interfacial properties in strongly correlated systems. These outcomes can be
expected to allow optimization of both material choice and parameters for
various magnetic applications such as computer memory, magnetic sensing and
energy scavenging. The project will support the education of PhD students in
advanced vacuum deposition, theoretical and characterization techniques, which
have been proven to be excellent training for productive scientific careers in
academic and technology settings.