* 1608287
* Self-Assembling RNA Nanosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Thomas Hermann, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 336,637.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation. Professor Thomas Hermann
of the University of California, San Diego, develops nano-sized, self-assembling
sensors for biologically-active molecules (analytes) including toxins in the
environment and metabolites in organisms. The sensors are made from
biocompatible building blocks which self-assemble upon analyte detection by
exploiting recognition principles encoded in natural nucleic acids. The design
approach allows the construction of sensors that detect a variety of different
analytes simultaneously. A signal is generated only if a threshold concentration
is reached for all analytes at the same time. The sensors constitute a novel
application of biological materials in nanotechnology which is a rapidly
emerging field of research for medical devices and environmental monitoring. The
broader impact of the work is related to the development of novel RNA-based
nanosensors whose function relies on the self-assembly from short
oligonucleotides, triggered by analyte recognition. Students involved in the
research gain broad and interdisciplinary training in areas of materials and
device development for biological and medical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops sensors for biologically-active
analytes based on modular RNA nanostructures that contain several copies of an
aptamer which self-assemble to a signaling configuration in a cooperative
response to ligand binding. By coupling sensor RNA assembly with multivalent
cooperative ligand binding, sensing devices are created with nonlinear dose
response over a wide dynamic range. The design concept for the sensors is based
on previously developed self-assembling RNA nanostructures, including double-
stranded RNAs in the shape of a square or triangle. The RNA nanosensors
capitalize on two unique properties of RNA nanostructures: their modular design,
which facilitates the rapid iterative optimization of sensor constructs for a
variety of ligands, and their self-assembly from short oligonucleotides in an
all-or-nothing process. The nanostructures design provides the basis for
nonlinear cooperativity of ligand binding at multiple recognition sites. Modular
design facilitates the design of a wide variety of RNA nanosensors with up to 4
ligand recognition sites within a single construct, allowing the design of AND-
gated as well as OR-gated sensors. The sensor signaling is dependent on either
the simultaneous or exclusive presence of two different ligands. Self-assembly
of the complete signaling-competent RNA nanosensor depends on ligand binding to
all aptamer units and gives rise to cooperative recognition behavior of multiple
binding sites. The novel RNA nanosensors are capable of nonlinear dose response
over a wide dynamic range. The research is performed by graduate and
undergraduate students who are trained in a diverse array of technical skills
including nucleic acid biochemistry, fluorescence assays, cloning, and
biochemical in vitro assay development. The graduate students involved in the
research gain a broad and interdisciplinary training, which renders the project
ideally suited for the Chemical Biology graduate track at UCSD. Professor
Hermann continue outreach efforts by recruiting members of groups
underrepresented in science through self-initiated and campus-supported programs
and by outreach to local high schools.