* 1608914
* Imaging Morphology, Ion Conductance and Degradation Processes in Energy Materials on the Nanometer Scale Using Tunneling Atomic Force Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Steven Buratto, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Number: 1608914 PI: Buratto, S. Imaging Morphology, Ion Conductance and
Degradation Processes in Energy Materials on the Nanometer Scale Using Tunneling
Atomic Force Microscopy

Polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs) are key components in electrochemical
devices such as fuel cells and redox flow batteries. These devices are capable
of producing clean energy with high efficiency and are useful in tandem with
intermittent renewable electricity generation technologies using wind or solar
when the wind or sun is not available and also to store electricity in the form
of chemical energy for energy storage. PEMs are, in general, composed of a
polymer with a hydrophobic backbone and side chains terminated with hydrophilic
functional groups. When this polymer is cast in films to make the membrane,
phase separation between the hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments results in a
random nanoscale network of hydrophilic channels through which ions are
transported and hydrophobic domains that give the membrane mechanical strength.
Novel membrane chemistries are currently under development, especially alkaline
electrolyte membranes, but require feedback from characterization efforts,
especially on the nanometer scale, in order to understand ion conductance and
its dependence on the pore network structure. Another key question is how the
membrane degrades during operation and that impacts the performance of the
device. This project addresses this need for fundamental understanding on how
degradation occurs in these types of electrochemical devices. Knowledge gained
will help to close the feedback loop between designing the membrane's structure
and its resultant function. Students working on this research will learn about
alternative power sources, help optimize membrane function, and provide valuable
insight and inspiration into the development of the next-generation membrane
materials.

This project leverages a suite of experimental methods that utilize tapping (or
AC) mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) and conductive probe AFM (cAFM) to probe
the pore connectivity and ion transport in proton-conducting membranes such as
PEMs. The Principal Investigator and his research group have developed these
techniques. In this project, the tools are adapted and applied to the study of
alkaline electrolyte membranes, which transport hydroxide ions. Under alkaline
conditions, the oxygen reduction half-reaction has significantly improved
kinetics, obviating the need for precious metal catalysts. This project's
transformative feature includes the characterization of PEM membrane morphology
and hydroxide-ion conductance on the nanometer length scale to provide a link
between morphology and conductance. The project also includes the investigation
of the ion domain morphology and connectivity in vanadium redox flow batteries
that utilize proton-conducting membranes under drastically different operating
conditions than the alkaline fuel cells. These experiments probe the dependence
of the pore network structure on the electrolyte concentration, the degree of
vanadium ion penetration into the membrane and the prolonged exposure of the
membrane surface to water and heat. The ultimate goal is fundamental
understanding of ion conduction, in terms of the size and distribution of the
chemical domains responsible for the transport in both alkaline fuel cells and
vanadium flow cell batteries. In both systems, ion conductance will be studied
systematically as a function of (1) the device operating conditions, (2) the
membrane type, and (3) the degree of membrane degradation and decomposition.