* 1608624
* I-Corps: Exploring Physics - the Curriculum App
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Meera Chandrasekhar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The Exploring Physics Curriculum App provides a yearlong digital curriculum for
conceptual physics that can be used as early as 9th grade. Thus the app provides
ALL students access to a physics course, in contrast to the 39% of high school
students who take physics at present. Additionally, many school districts are
replacing textbooks with mobile devices for their students. Districts need a
comprehensive, rigorous, interactive and engaging digital curriculum, beyond
just digital versions of existing textbooks. The Exploring Physics Curriculum
App addresses both these needs. Students learn physics using a discussion-based
hands-on method, with embedded animations, simulations and media. The app also
provides teachers extensive built-in resources to teach the course. This I-Corps
team expects that the proposed comprehensive, interactive curriculum app will be
a standout in the digital curriculum landscape. By exposing ALL students to
physics, the foundation of STEM, this team addresses a national need as stated
in the 2010 report to the President on K-12 education in STEM for America's
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The app will be available on iPad, Android and
PC/Mac platforms. The paper-pencil version of the curriculum has been
extensively tested during a previous Math-Science Partnership project funded by
NSF (A TIME for Freshman Physics (NSF DUE 0928924, 2009-15). The curriculum is
aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) both in disciplinary
core ideas and scientific practices. An inquiry-and modeling-based curriculum
was created during that project, and features of interest to students and
teachers were tested (for example, specific labs, discussion points necessary
for students to infer conceptual models of phenomena, level of algebraic and
graphing complexity, reading levels, depth of knowledge spans, level of
interactivity desired). In the app, labs are set up so that students are the
designers of experiments that then lead them to producing conceptual or
mathematical models of a concept. Thus, laws are not "given" to the student, but
they "discover" them with guidance from the teacher and discussion among
students. They then gain deeper knowledge about the concept from reading pages
and practice application of the concept in practices that follow each lab.