* 1608779
* RUI: Searches for New Physics with the CMS Detector at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Matthew Bellis, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2020
* USD 213,333.00

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), located at the CERN particle physics laboratory
in Switzerland, is the largest machine that humanity has ever constructed and
allows scientists to study matter and energy on the smallest scales. The goal of
these efforts is to answer questions about how our Universe came into exisitence
and how it evolved to look the way it does today. The PI is a member of the
Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment, one of the large particle detectors at
the LHC that collects data produced by the collisions of 40 million protons
every second. The CMS collaboration consists of 3000 scientists the world over
that study all the different particles that come out of these collisions in an
effort to understand precisely how they were produced and whether or not there
are indications of new Physics: cracks in our current understanding of Nature or
glimpses of new and exciting theories. This project looks for new physics
through the search for as-yet-unobserved decays of the top quark, one of the
particles that make up the list of fundamental particles known to date.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will be conducting an analysis to search for
baryon-number violating (BNV) decays of the top quark. The top quark is the most
massive fundamental particle yet discovered, and while it was first observed 20
years ago, it is only relatively recently that experiments have begun to collect
enough data to study them in detail. This analysis is related to another as-of-
yet unobserved phenomenon, proton decay. Some theories suggest that the same
protons that are found in every atom will eventually decay away and these
theories are invoked to try to explain why our Universe is dominated by matter
and does not consist of equal amounts of matter and antimatter. Any sign of BNV
decays, whether in top quarks or protons or other particles, would instantly
change how we understand fundamental particle interactions. A preliminary
analysis was performed with the first set of data from CMS, but in the next
couple of years, we will have 10x the data to work with and so we will be much
more sensitive to any signs of new physics. In parallel, the PI will continue to
work on innovative outreach techniques, such as making real experimental data
from CMS and other experiments available to teachers and the general public,
simplifed so that anyone can use it and learn from it. The PI will also continue
to host high school teachers for workshops where they build cloud chambers, one
of the earliest particle detectors, for use in their classrooms.