* 1608968
* Interfacial Science and Defect Engineering of Functional Oxides for Na-ion Storage and Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ying Meng, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 490,220.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The demand for alternative energy sources has
significantly increased in the past decade. Ceramics have revolutionized modern
technologies such as electric vehicles, and more importantly renewable energy
storage through the use of rechargeable electrochemical energy storage systems
that couple chemical and electrical processes to convert the chemical energy to
electric current. Sodium (Na) intercalation ceramics play a critical role in
enabling possible use of rechargeable Na-ion batteries as the key large-scale
energy storage systems. The high natural abundance and broad distribution of Na
resources offer significant cost advantages. Yet Na ion batteries have not
reached their full potential; therefore, it is imperative that high energy and
power density materials are developed to further improve the technology. This
project aims at discovering new high performance materials as well as exploring
the interfacial science and defect engineering in ceramics. By taking a
systematic approach using a suite of powerful analytical tools paired with first
principles computational modeling, it is possible to identify the fundamental
mechanisms in new ceramic materials for energy storage and conversion, in this
case, sodium ion storage materials. Investigating and improving ceramic cathode
materials for sodium ion batteries provides vital exposure to the next
generation of research scientists through outreach activities for local
underrepresented high school students with an interest in the materials science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: During the
electrochemical process, structural changes due to first order and second order
phase transformations that affect the system's electrochemical performance are
noticeable in the voltage profile. In addition, subtle yet critical changes
occur at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces, limiting the lifetime of any
ceramic materials used for energy storage. This research is significantly
improving the understanding of both these structural phase transformations and
surface/interface modifications, and at the same time is exploring their effects
on ion transport and charge transfer in sodium ion intercalation compounds.
Various types of surface modification are being carried out including carbon
coating, sol-gel coating, and atomic layer deposition coating on sodium
intercalation ceramic materials. Advanced surface probe techniques are being
applied to find the changes in surface/interface structure and chemistry in
sodium electrochemical cells. The objectives of this work are to determine: 1)
structural factors that promote enhanced sodium ion mobility; 2) interfacial
effects on ion transport and charge transfer; and, 3) effects of defect
(dislocations, substitutional elements, and oxygen vacancies) on stability and
reaction kinetics. This study obtains key knowledge that will propel the
development of new sodium ion storage ceramic materials for future energy
storage and conversion systems. Furthermore, active recruitment of
underrepresented minority students is carried out at precollegiate,
undergraduate as well as graduate levels. The project enables students to
receive advanced instrument training at various national laboratories and shared
University of California system user facilities and present their findings at
conferences, thereby broadening participation of underrepresented students and
highlighting their research.