* 1608194
* Conference on Symplectic Geometry and Topology at the International Center for Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Yakov Eliashberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2017
* USD 18,183.00

This award supports travel for US-based participants in the conference
"Symplectic Geometry and Topology" at the International Center for Mathematical
Sciences (ICMS), Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, held July 25-29, 2016. Symplectic
topology is a rapidly developing branch of mathematics, which originated as a
geometric tool for understanding qualitative problems of classical mechanics and
geometric optics. Since its inception in 1980s, it quickly became one of
important branches of mathematics interrelated with topology, dynamics, complex
analysis, algebraic geometry, algebra, and mathematical physics. This led to
fascinating cross-fertilizations, making symplectic topology a centerpiece of
many modern mathematical developments. The conference at ICMS will be
concentrated on recent developments in the fields of symplectic geometry and
topology. The meeting will allow students and young mathematicians to learn
about new research and to interact with a senior outstanding mathematicians
taking part in the conference. This award supports participation of US students,
postdoctoral associates, and young mathematicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference focuses on four core topics: &lt;br/&gt;1. Holomorphic curves
(algebraic structures and foundational problems); &lt;br/&gt;2. Groups of
symplectic diffeomorphisms; &lt;br/&gt;3. Recent advances in symplectic
packings; and&lt;br/&gt;4. Symplectic structures (new constructions and spaces
of symplectic structures). &lt;br/&gt;The objective is to bring together
specialists in symplectic topology and related areas to discuss recent progress
in the field and to catalyze efforts for achieving further breakthroughs in
these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference website is
http://www.icms.org.uk/workshops/symplectic