* 1608501
* Theoretical Problems in Soft Matter and Quantitative Biology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* David Nelson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
exploit the power of statistical physics to gain insight into complex systems
that lie at the interface of biology, physics, and materials science. The
approach applies understanding of materials and materials-related phenomena
across disciplinary boundaries into biologically inspired problems with
potential implications for applications. The project contains three major aims
to investigate:

1.) How spatial obstacles change the distribution of genes that appear at a
particular place on a chromosome populations of invading organisms. Of
particular interest is gaining insight into how environmental inhomogeneities
can shape not only the boundaries at front of a population of invading bacteria
but also the genetic structure of the bacteria. This research has potential to
contribute to understanding the evolution of resistance of bacteria to
antibiotics, as when opportunistic pathogens such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa
invade catheters connected to hospitalized patients. 2.) How mechanical
properties of very thin shells are affected by temperature. This builds on the
observation that fluctuations that arise with increasing temperature lead to
unusual mechanical properties that describe distortions of a sheet over long
distances. The PI aims to understand what happens when the sheet is rolled in to
a thin spherical shell. This research has potential to contribute to developing
strategies for the delivery of drugs to affected areas of the body, as well as
having implications for mechanical systems assembled on scales 1000 times or so
smaller than the diameter of a human hair. 3.) Networks that describe neural
development in animals and humans, and in particular how loss of connections
among neurons and the strengthening and weakening of neural connections lead to
neural circuits learning various functions. The project will contribute to the
training of students and postodocs in modern theoretical methods on problems
with impact across disciplinary boundaries.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award will support theoretical research and education in
the development and application of statistical physics methods to diverse
problems in materials science and biophysics. The PI will tackle problems that
challenge theory and lead to intriguing confrontations with experiments. The
issues addressed include spatial population genetics near obstacles and
constrictions, the soft condensed matter physics of thin thermalized shells and
the theory of the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues that control the nonlinear
dynamics of directed localization in sparse networks with spatial randomness.
Nonequilibrium statistical dynamics and population genetics that incorporate
genetic drift, mutations, migrations, and competition and cooperation have
played a crucial role in the evolutionary history of many species, in particular
on solid surfaces. Examples include the migrations of invasive species, or
bacterial invasions of animal tissue. Using the tools of nonequilibrium
statistical dynamics and population genetics the PI will examine how these
phenomena affect genetic lineages in spatial media containing obstacles. Because
biological organisms do not typically grow up in well-mixed test tubes or
featureless Petri dishes, it is important to understand how they behave in the
presence of environmental inhomogeneities. The PI's research on thermalized
shells builds on the "extreme mechanics" of thin plates and shells,
characterized by the highly nonlinear Foeppl - von Karman equations. The
background curvature of thermally excited spherical shells presents new
challenges relative to flat plates, which will be addressed by generalizing
graphical summation and renormalization group methods that have proven useful
for sheet polymers. Finally, the project will investigate directed localization
and the associated nonequilibrium dynamics in strongly non-Hermitian matrices
(involving both excitatory and inhibitory connections) that arise naturally in
simple models of interacting ecosystems and in sparse neural networks. The PI's
theoretical research will determine how the intricate fractal eigenvalue
spectrum that controls the spontaneous activity and induced response changes
with an increasing ratio of inhibitory to excitatory connections and with a
variable bias for the transfer of information in a particular direction.
Strongly interdisciplinary by nature, the research could provide insights into
controlling human pathogen invasions, the development of drug delivery
strategies, and human and animal neural development. In addition, the project
will contribute to the training of students and postodocs in modern theoretical
methods with a wide area of applicability.