* 1608685
* Measuring Protein Topology in Conformationally Heterogeneous Mixtures by Top-Down Hydroxyl Radical Protein Footprinting
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Joshua Sharp, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 339,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Dr. Joshua Sharp
and his group at the University of Mississippi are developing analytical tools
to advance the ability to determine the three-dimensional shape of biomolecules
(including proteins) - information essential for understanding biology at the
molecular level. Of particular interest are challenging applications involving
proteins that fluctuate between multiple shapes. The Sharp group is developing
powerful new methods to characterize shapes coexisting in solution. As part of
this technology development, they are incorporating hands-on research training
opportunities for postdoctoral research associates and undergraduate students
recruited via minority outreach programs at the University of Mississippi.

This project is developing methodology that can provide new insights into
structurally heterogeneous proteins, including (but not limited to)
conformationally dynamic proteins and those encountered in protein aggregation.
The methods can also illuminate the structural consequences of protein sequence
variations and post-translational modifications. The approach combines advances
in high resolution hydroxyl radical protein footprinting (HR-HRPF) with top-down
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analyses. In HRPF, the rate of reaction of
amino acid side chains with hydroxyl radicals generated in situ is used to
assess the side chain?s solvent accessibility. Previous work has shown that
different non-covalent conformations co-existing in a mixture experience
differing amounts of oxidation when subjected to HRPF. However, "bottom-up" HR-
HRPF as currently practiced only detects an overall average of all conformers;
structural details are lost upon digestion and bottom-up analysis. By using top-
down analyses with HR-HRPF, conformers can be separated based on the extent of
overall modification. Development of this technology is focusing on two systems
with controllable conformational changes. Mixtures of wild-type CXCL4 (a
tetramer) with the K50E mutant of CXCL4 (a dimer) are being used to test the
ability to characterize the dimer and tetramer independently in solution, using
isotopic labeling of the mutant to separate the conformers by mass and verify
results from the unlabeled samples. A second test system probes the differential
hydroxyl radical reactivity of the unfolded and folded states of ubiquitin to
differentiate the conformers based on the number of oxidation events that occur
in each protein. The knowledge derived from this project will benefit
researchers working at the forefront of some of the most difficult problems in
structural biology - the detailed characterization of dynamic populations of
conformations including aggregation, inherently disordered proteins, and protein
misfolding/unfolding. This technology would also play a powerful role in the
analysis of the structural consequences of protein sequence variants and protein
post-translational modifications.