* 1608086
* CDS&amp;E: Molecular Dynamics Studies of the Structure, Dynamics, and Formation of Stable Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Elijah Flenner, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 308,809.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research to advance understanding of how the properties of glasses and glassy
materials depend on how they are made. Amorphous, glassy solid materials have
become a part of everyday life. They are used as protective coatings for cell
phones and in the drug formulation process. Through a process known as vapor
deposition, glass forming materials can be made onto a properly prepared
substrate. This process emerged as a method to create glasses with desirable
properties, such as increased density, increased mechanical stability, and
higher resistance to chemical reactions, as compared to glasses that are
prepared by cooling from a liquid. Experiments suggest that the increased
ability of molecules to move around on the surface enables them to find more
favorable positions for the vapor deposited glass than for ordinary glasses, and
that incoming molecules help trap the surface molecules into these favorable
positions. Furthermore, the structures obtained by the vapor deposition process
exhibit different vibrational properties than the glasses created by other
means. The PIs and their team will use the ability of molecular dynamics
simulations to track the positions of individual atoms to study the vapor
deposition process and to examine the microscopic structures that give rise to
the different vibrational properties of the vapor deposited glasses compared to
glasses created by cooling at a constant rate. At the completion of the project,
it is expected that the insights obtained from the computer simulations will
help guide researchers trying to make vapor deposited glasses with desirable
characteristics and will elucidate what aspects of a glass's microscopic
structure lead to these desirable
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical research to
study the formation and properties of vapor deposited glasses. Vapor deposition
of glass forming materials onto a substrate held at a temperature of around 85
percent of the glass transition temperature produces glasses that have higher
densities, lower heat capacities, and higher kinetic, and mechanical stability
than glasses formed by the conventional method of cooling from a liquid.
Experiments suggest that increased mobility of the molecules at the surface
allows the molecules to find lower energy configurations, and that incoming
material traps the molecules into these lower energy configurations. The PIs and
their team will use molecular dynamics simulations to study the vapor deposition
process and the structural properties of glasses formed through vapor
deposition, and compare glasses formed this way to those formed by cooling at a
constant rate. Since molecular dynamics simulation are able to track individual
atoms, the group will examine the dependence of the dynamics of the vapor
deposited glasses on the substrate temperature and on the distance from the
substrate and the free surface. Furthermore, the research will examine
differences in the microscopic structure and the vibrational density of states
of glasses with different kinetic and mechanical stability that are created by
vapor deposition at different deposition rates, and by cooling at different
cooling rates. This study will help researchers understand what influences the
kinetic and mechanical stability of glasses, and aid researchers in making vapor
deposited glasses with desired characteristics.