* 1608997
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eva Fischer, Fischer                 Eva            K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Eva Fischer

Proposal Number 1608997

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Dr. Eva K. Fischer is "Maintenance and evolution of
parental care in poison frogs." The host institution for this fellowship is
Harvard University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Lauren A. O'Connell.

The goal of the Fellow's research is to identify physiological, neural, and
molecular mechanisms that promote parental care within species, as well as those
promoting the evolution of alternative parental care strategies across species.
To do so, the Fellow is taking advantage of the rich behavioral diversity of
South American poison frogs that exhibit maternal care, paternal care, and
biparental care. Different parental care behaviors have evolved across many
different species, and allow animals to take advantage of novel habitats and
thereby contribute to biodiversity. While parental care has long been
appreciated as an evolutionary innovation, very little is known about the
mechanisms that underlie the maintenance and evolution of parental behaviors.
One particular challenge is that parental care is tightly linked with pair
bonding in many species, making it difficult to identify mechanisms specifically
associated with parental behaviors. Comparisons across species with different
care strategies allow the Fellow to distinguish mechanisms of parental behavior
from those of pair bonding in both males and females. Furthermore, the project
takes advantage of the fact that male and female poison frogs can reverse their
parenting behaviors. For example, female frogs of paternal care species
sometimes provide care when males are inexperienced or disappear. Such reversed
behavior may be an important precursor for the evolution of alternative parental
care strategies. The Fellow is exploring three specific objectives, which are to
identify how (1) hormonal changes, (2) neural activity, and (3) brain gene
expression patterns, are linked to parenting behavior. Comparing data between
males and females, and among both normal and role-reversing species, will
uncover fundamental principles governing how parental care is maintained within
a species and how diverse parental care strategies evolve across poison frogs
and other animals.

The Fellow's training and career development goals are being met through
activities that (1) develop poison frogs as a promising system for an
independent research program, (2) refine the Fellow's science communication and
professional skills, and (3) improve the Fellow's skills as a mentor, both
within the university and the community. A major component of the Fellow's work
is creating opportunities for scientific learning and creativity for diverse
communities. Broadening participation of groups underrepresented in biology is
being encouraged through a variety of activities. (1) The Fellow will is
expanding the Little Froggers School Program founded by her sponsoring scientist
(Dr. O'Connell) in 2012. This program provides live poison frogs to classrooms
and utilizes them as a tool for teaching experiment-based science. The Fellow is
also providing training and resources to teachers, regularly visiting
participating classrooms, and developing web-based resources for teachers and
students. These include lesson plans and activities, reading materials,
interviews with researchers, a "Frogger Cam" live video stream, and forums for
interaction and data sharing between researchers and students as well as among
participating classrooms. (2) Through a partnership with the Science Club for
Girls, the Fellow is coordinating activities for K-12 students of all ages,
including mentorship of two high school research interns per year. The Science
Club for Girls is a non-profit that serves students from racial and socio-
economic backgrounds underrepresented in STEM fields, thereby providing
meaningful scientific experiences for underserved students of all ages. (3) The
fellow is mentoring undergraduates conducting independent research projects in
the O'Connell Lab. The fellow is partnering with two Harvard Programs to target
underrepresented groups, including racial minorities and first generation
college students.