* 1608269
* IT Catalyst: Evaluating the Impact of Service on Career Advancement of Women Faculty at SF State
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Sally Pasion, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

San Francisco State University (SF State) will undertake an ADVANCE
Institutional Transformation-Catalyst (IT-Catalyst) project to examine the role
and effects of faculty service on the professional outcomes of women faculty at
SF State. Preliminary data from SF State STEM departments reveal a high service
burden for women faculty. The project will further the understanding of the
meaning, perceptions, and distribution of service at SF State among faculty.
Importantly, the project will develop strategies to assist faculty in balancing
teaching, research, and service to successfully obtain tenure and promotion.

The proposal aims to identify the possible negative consequences of a heavy
service load on the productivity and academic advancement of women STEM faculty.
SF State will also investigate whether sex/gender, race/ethnicity, and sexuality
(lesbian, gay, bisexual, heterosexual, queer, and several identities) influence
the service load of faculty at SF State. SF State is a large urban university
serving a highly diverse student population. The results and the methodologies
developed in this project will be of broad interest to institutions of higher
education particularly other large public universities

The ADVANCE program is focused on developing systemic approaches to increase the
participation, retention, and advancement of women in academic STEM careers. The
IT-Catalyst track funds projects to conduct institutional self-assessments as
well as implement strategies that have been shown to be effective to address
gendered issues for STEM faculty.