* 1608424
* Arrays of Molecular Dipolar Rotors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 435,000.00

Non-technical Abstract

With the support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the
research team will work on an interdisciplinary project in design-directed
material synthesis that calls for close interactions with colleagues in the
Physics department. The project aims to prepare and characterize a so far
unknown class of dielectric materials based on artificial dipolar molecular
rotors arranged in a 2-dimensional grid. Such materials do not occur in nature
and would be useful for signal processing and specifically for minituarization
of analog components in electronic circuitry such as that found in cellular
telephones. A post-doctoral student and several undergraduates will receive
interdisciplinary training (organic synthesis, a variety of spectroscopic and
other physical techniques, and underlying materials theory). The project will
attract undergraduate students, K-12 students, and under-represented minorities
to nanoscience.

Technical Abstract

The new 2-dimensional materials are to be assembled on a Langmuir-Blodgett (LB)
trough and transferred to a lithographically patterned solid substrate. The
specifically synthesized rod-like rotor molecules carry a dipolar rotator
between two triptycene units on an axle normal to the surface, and a carboxylic
group at one end (the term molecular rotor is used for a molecule with a
rotatable part, which is called the rotator). Initial grazing-incidence X-ray
scattering and other data demonstrate that molecules of this type self-assemble
into a Langmuir monolayer on an aqueous subphase. The structure of the assembly
is characterized by an interlocking of the triptycene units into a double-decker
trigonal pattern, with almost freely rotatable dipoles between the decks. The
distance between the dipoles and their magnitude are such that as long as
sufficiently large 2-dimensional single-crystal domains can be prepared, in the
first approximation the ground state should be ferroelectric, with a Curie
temperature above ambient. Rotator dynamics in the transferred monolayers (and
multilayers) are to be studied by electric dichroism in the infrared part of the
spectrum in the Michl laboratory and by dielectric spectroscopy in the Rogers
laboratory. Theory predicts the existence of ferroelectric ordering with
unusually low velocity polar sound waves when long-range dipolar interactions
dominate local steric barriers to rotation.