* 1608747
* I-Corps: Portable Autonomous Biomarker Sampling Technology (PABST)
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* David Fries, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Chemistry in our bodies is the next frontier for medical diagnostics and
testing. Current medical testing of patients for their health is dominated by
infrequent testing out of the home (i.e. at the hospital or doctor's office).
This under-sampling paradigm which has dominated healthcare diagnostics has led
to a persistent bias in fully understanding patient wellness. A patient "weather
report" cannot be done without sufficient knowledge of the changes of the
patient's internal chemistry and how that chemistry is changing due to
environmental stress, drug therapy or other treatments on a patient after they
leave the hospital. Testing at the doctor's office or clinic yields minimal
insight into variability of a patient throughout the day or over the week. This
I-Corps team has devised a Portable Biomarker Autonomous Sampling Technology
that can be attached to a toilet to create an intelligent non-invasive sampling
system for urine biomarkers in the home. The biomarkers captured from urine over
the course of some prescribed period are shipped to a lab for analytical testing
and the biochemical history of the patient can be then understood to a level of
detail never before allowed in the healthcare industry. Doctors will have a
powerful tool to chart a person's physical well-being. The technology was
originally developed for ocean observations to gain understanding of the spatial
and temporal change of the chemistry and biology of the oceans and now can be
applied to measuring human health changes and
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to advance both the
product and the business potential of the proposed diagnostic innovation which
is a portable biomarker robotic sampler for in-the-home use for biomarker
sampling in urine. Samples from the home can be coupled to clinical laboratory-
based biomarker testing to allow for high frequency, precision medicine and
personal observations of a patient for the first time. An expected outcome of
this project is the customer-discovery guided development of a commercialization
plan for the Biomarker Sampler products and services. The I-Corps team expects
to also include collaborative demonstrations using the automation system with
potential customers, third party vendors, and outside manufacturers to validate
and enhance the effectiveness of the current sampler design. Engineering design
changes will occur based on customer feedback and demo-testing results. In
parallel, the team will research the current and future markets for the in-home
automation system, its distribution channels, and potential partnership
opportunities. Based on the outcomes of the team's development, the team will
determine the appropriate business strategy to move the automation system to
market. At the end of the project, the team expects to have a scalable
automation core that effectively enables automated quantitative sampling of key
biomarkers ready for analysis in the laboratory to allow for unique, industry
changing "patient weather" reporting.