* 1608374
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Growth Induced Crystal Curvature
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 465,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The great crystallographer Shubnikov said that
"crystals flash forth their symmetry." He was emphasizing in this pithy remark
the characteristic feature of crystals, their striking polyhedral shapes with
sharp edges and flat faces; crystals, by definition, are straight. Witness
facetted gemstones, or naturally grown quartz. However, it was recognized almost
a century ago that a wide variety of crystals can be made to grow with twisted,
helix-like morphologies -- forms that are decidedly not straight. Remarkably,
this general feature of the crystal kingdom was largely forgotten, even though
it is characteristic of common substances such as aspirin. With support from the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the research team aims to
understand how crystals twist themselves as they grow. These processes are
windows into the mechanical properties of crystals built from molecules,
processes that underlie important industrial operations such as the tableting of
pharmaceuticals. Twisted crystals are vivid in their rhythmic bands of optical
contrast, promising a bridge between microscopic and macroscopic handed forms.
The research team is partnered with several Bronx public high schools in order
to provide science identity-building research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The origin of growth induced
deformations of form presumably lie in the supramolecular chemistry of mixed
crystals and in the manner in which these forces are manifest in the mechanical
properties of solid bodies. The team has shown that additives induce twisting
stereospecifically at growing crystal interfaces. Additives likely twist
crystals by creating mixed domains with distinct metric properies. Mismatches at
the molecular level produce strain that in turn can generate stress and twist
moments. The strategy is threefold: 1. Establishing the conditions for twisting
mixed or disordered crystals of substituted benzenes about which we already
understand the origin of growth induced strain from long-standing studies of
single crystals. 2. Using advanced microscopies to accurately describe the
shapes of crystals with growth induced curvature -- this work is proceeding in
collaboration with Professor E. Efrati at the Weizmann Institute of Science
under the collaborative arrangement established by the Division of Materials
Research and the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation. 3. Weizmann experts in
differential geometry of twisted ribbons are analyzing growth deformation within
the framework of geometric frustration encoded in local differential growth.
These studies will be matched with atomistic force-field and molecular dynamics
simulations.