* 1608610
* Collaborative Research: Perovskite Photodetectors with Microcavity Organic Light Emitting Diodes for Sensing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jinsong Huang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2017
* USD 186,428.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing need for small-
size chemical and biological sensors to enable their integration into existing
and developing technologies such as wearable electronics. The proposed research
will address this need by developing such compact, sensitive, reliable,
eventually user-friendly, inexpensive, flexible, and field-deployable sensors.
In the long run the sensors will be adapted for applications such as medical
testing, water and food quality monitoring, and security inspection. In addition
to advancing the vital (bio) chemical sensing field, the project will benefit
society by educating students in a diverse and highly interdisciplinary
environment, producing highly qualified scientists/engineers who will contribute
to this important multifaceted field, addressing key challenges in materials and
device designs. The success of the project is expected to significantly advance
the fields of thin film flexible electronics in conjunction with life-saving
analytical applications.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the
proposed research is to advance the development of compact, sensitive, reliable,
eventually user-friendly, inexpensive, flexible, and field-deployable,
integrated photoluminescence (PL)-based chem/bio sensors, including in multiple
analyte arrays. This objective addresses the growing need for continued
miniaturization of sensors in applications such as medical testing, water and
food quality monitoring, and security inspection. Moreover, such small-size
sensors will enable their integration into existing and developing technologies,
e.g., wearable electronics. To accomplish the objective of the proposed research
fundamental science and engineering research is required. Thin film¡Vbased
microcavity organic light emitting diodes (mcOLEDs) will be used as optical
excitation sources; they will be integrated with hybrid, perovskite-based
photodetectors (PDs). The mcOLEDs will be fabricated combinatorially on a single
substrate, providing narrow emission bands (full width half max FWHM~20 nm). The
emission peaks, produced by different active materials and microcavity
dimensions, will range from the red to the near UV. The uniform dense array of
such mcOLEDs, yet unachieved, will be integrated with two types of highly
responsive perovskite PDs (an approach not yet explored): those responsive over
a broad spectral range and those responsive over a narrow range. Bio/chem
analytes will be monitored in two modes of operation, measuring analyte-induced
changes in the (i) PL intensity using narrow-band PDs and (ii) PL decay time
using both PD types. Developing both approaches will enhance selectivity and
specificity. Importantly, to enable the advantageous PL monitoring where viable,
the mcOLEDs and PDs will be evaluated and optimized to shorten the pulsed
electroluminescence (EL) decay time and the PDs¡¦ response time by fundamental
studies of their relation to materials, charge mobility, layer structures and
thickness, defects, and device design. The integrated compact sensors will be
demonstrated for two array types: (i) those operated by monitoring PL for, e.g.,
O2, dissolved O2, glucose, lactate, cholesterol, and ethanol, and (2) those
operated largely by monitoring IPL as in e.g., pH measurement and immunoassays,
which are of biological and health monitoring importance. The approaches
outlined in this proposal will pave the way to miniaturized analytical tools on
flexible substrates, integrated with microfluidic architectures. Array designs,
attribute optimization, the demonstrated applications, and initial exploration
of flexible devices are expected to significantly advance the fields of organic
and hybrid electronics and analytical methodologies.