* 1608146
* Halogen bonds in biomolecular design
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Anthony Rappe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 520,000.00

The study of halogen bonds (X-bonds) is growing in nearly all fields of
chemistry and material science. In biology and biochemistry, X-bonds have great
potential to facilitate the rational design of new halogenated inhibitors
against enzyme targets. This project applies a comprehensive strategy to study
how structure affects the energy of biomolecular X-bonds in DNA and proteins.
This project is developing a unique computational tool that can be used by
biologists, biochemists and chemical biologists to rationally design new
inhibitors against important enzymes. The tool would also be used to aid design
of new biologically-based materials. The impact of this project on society is to
improve the scientific literacy of the future workforce by engaging students at
the K-12 level with experiential learning through an educational outreach
project. This outreach project is introducing high school students to two
important concepts in structural biology: 1) the fundamentals of 3-dimensional
protein structures and 2) how those structures are experimentally determined.
Finally, research training is provided to diverse groups of students, ranging
from high school to postdoctoral levels, inclusive of gender, ethnicity and
economic background.

The driving hypothesis of the proposed studies is that a force field for
biological halogen bonds (ffBXB), once incorporated into a molecular
mechanics/dynamics program, can be accurately and efficiently applied to design
novel halogenated molecules for bioengineering applications. The project
implements and tests the ffBXB in a standard molecular simulation program. The
program is tested for its ability to accurately model the structures and
energies of X-bonds that involve formally negatively charged oxygen acceptors in
a previously-characterized experimental model DNA junction. The new program is
independently cross-validated for its ability to accurately model the structures
and energies of X-bonds that involve formally neutral oxygen acceptors in the
model DNA junction and in T4 lysozyme. The validation studies are performed by
X-ray crystallographic atomic level structure determination of these molecular
systems and measuring their energies of interaction by differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) in solution. Free energy perturbation methods are used to
study the effects of engineered X-bonds on the conformational and solvent
dynamics of a biological system. The primary hypothesis is tested by applying
the ffBXB to design new protein-protein interfaces. A coiled-coil polypeptide
model system has been designed in which halogenated amino acids are introduced
to serve as X-bond donating "knobs" that fit into engineered acceptor "holes".
The resulting "X-Zipper" serves as a proof of concept that X-bonds can be used
to facilitate specific assembly of proteins in a rational manner.