* 1608448
* Broadband Quantum limited Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier based on a Superconducting Metamaterial Transmission Line
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Matthew Bell, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2020
* USD 344,652.00

Title: Broadband Quantum Limited Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier based on a
Superconducting Metamaterial Transmission Line

Non-Technical Description: There has been renewed interest in utilizing quantum
limited amplifiers for detection of weak microwave signals. Such amplifiers have
allowed for ultra-sensitive detection in radio astronomy (such as dark matter
searches or cosmic microwave background studies), detectors with photon number
resolution, ultra-secure quantum communications, and real time monitoring of
superconducting quantum bits. Detection of low level signals, particularly at
the single photon level is challenging, where amplifiers which have noise levels
which are limited by quantum mechanical fluctuations are required for a
satisfactory signal-to-noise ratio measurement. In this project a novel
traveling-wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) composed of a tunable metamaterial
transmission line which will allow for efficient parametric amplification of a
weak signal over a broad bandwidth in the microwave regime utilizing low-loss
superconducting circuits is developed. The metamaterial transmission line which
makes up the proposed amplifier can be tuned to have a negative refractive index
which allows for efficient amplification over very short lengths, which aides in
the reduction of noise and promotes scalability.

Students participating in this research will be exposed to state-of-the-art
experimental techniques in modern solid-state science and engineering, and will
also be able to share their enthusiasm for science and engineering by
participating in outreach activities to K-12 students and teachers. Outreach
activities include mobile atomic force microscope demonstrative laboratory which
are brought to K-12 institutions.to demonstrate nanoscience concepts.

Technical Description: Present state-of-the-art TWPA designs have been primarily
based on series arrays of Josephson junctions as originally introduced in the
early 1980s. Limitations in these designs have prevented their wide-spread use
and adoption. These limitations have to do with: phase matching, weak
nonlinearities, and excessive noise several times the quantum limit. In this
research program we propose to take an entirely different approach to phase
matching in a TWPA. The proposed TWPA is composed of a metamaterial transmission
line which will allow for efficient parametric amplification over a broad
bandwidth in the microwave regime utilizing low-loss superconducting circuits.
The metamaterial transmission line is composed of a unique network of coupled
magnetically frustrated asymmetric superconducting quantum interference devices.
The tunability of the refractive index (impedance) of the proposed metamaterial
transmission line in situ allows for the nonlinear component of the refractive
index to be tuned from positive to negative which can phase match a weak signal
to a strong pump and result in efficient parametric amplification of the weak
signal. The proposed TWPA is expected to deliver high gain (> 20 dB) over a
broad bandwidth (> 5 GHz) while maintaining quantum limited in noise
performance. The objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to fabricate
prototype TWPAs (2) Characterize the gain, bandwidth, dynamic range, and added
noise (3) Validate the quantum limited in noise nature of the TWPA (4)
Investigate the performance of the TWPA in the presence of parameter variations
(4) Study loss mechanisms in the TWPA which contribute to excessive noise.