* 1608950
* Influence of Structural Ordering and Defects on the Magnetostriction in Strong and Ductile Fe-Based Alloys with Large Low-Field Magnetostriction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sivaraman Guruswamy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 397,866.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work deals with alloys that
exhibit strain in response to an applied magnetic field or change in
magnetization with application of stress. Use of these materials for deploying
antenna structures in space, wind and ocean energy harvesting systems,
nanopositioning systems and numerous other applications make them an
economically important class of metallic materials. Alloys based on Iron and
Gallium metals have been demonstrated to be an attractive alternative and
further development of this class of alloys requires a large data base of how
alloying elements, structure and defects influence composition-structure-
property correlations. This project addresses these important issues. The
project will further the knowledge that will enable the design and development
of a new generation of inexpensive and high performance alloys for use in sensor
and actuator applications. The project will further the education and training
of undergraduate and graduate students and enhance research opportunities for
women and underrepresented minority students. The project will also have a great
impact in a wide range of applications that will utilize these rare-earth free,
strong, ductile, low cost and high performance sensor and actuator materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
examines how short-range ordering, long-range ordering and structural
dislocations can dramatically influence the magnetostriction in FeGa, and other
alpha-Fe based magnetostrictive alloy single crystals. We have shown in earlier
work that the addition of Ga to Fe results in a large increase in
magnetostriction at low applied magnetic fields and that these alloys are strong
and ductile. Ongoing investigations also suggest that internal inhomogeneous
strains introduced by the structural changes and defects play a much greater
role than has been appreciated in determining the magnetostriction in these
alloys. The long-term objectives are to gain an improved understanding of
magnetostriction in Fe and Fe alloys and formulate the guidelines for the design
of alloys with attractive magnetostrictive and mechanical properties. As a part
of this effort, the proposed work will focus on a detailed examination of (a)
how short range order is changed with thermal treatments and how it influences
magnetostriction in Fe-Ga, Fe-Al and Fe-Si alloys, (b) influence of coherent
second phases on the internal strain modulations and how it affects
magnetostriction (c) the effect of well-defined crystal defects in particular
dislocation structures introduced with controlled single crystal deformation on
magnetostriction and (d) Interference contrast imaging of microcellular patterns
and how they are influenced by the ordered second phases regions and dislocation
arrays. The work envisaged involves alloy preparation by vacuum arc-melting,
single crystal growth using Bridgman technique, structural evaluation, magnetic
and magnetostriction measurements, and structure-composition-property
correlations. Characterization and analysis of the defects will be carried out
using transmission electron microscopy. Elastic measurements will be made using
the resonance ultrasound spectroscopy technique. Theta-2 theta x-ray diffraction
scans, rocking curve scans and x-ray topography measurements will be performed
to assess the crystal orientation, short range order and the structural defects.