* 1608055
* Theory of order and fluctuations in quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Steven Kivelson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
funds this award on theoretical research and education in the physics of
strongly interacting electron systems. The study of emergent properties in these
systems, i.e. properties that the system displays as a whole but which are not
characteristic of the constituents, is one of the central thrusts of theoretical
physics, and currently a key area of inquiry in a broad range of subfields
including condensed matter, string theory and quantum gravity, cold-atom
condensates, and quantum information theory. More generally, quantum materials
play an increasingly important role in a range of more applied sciences, so
increased understanding of these problems has the potential to influence broader
developments in science and technology as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical work in this field ranges from highly focused
"microscopic" studies that attempt to provide a quantitative understanding of
specific properties of particular interesting materials, to more abstract
studies of simple models that shed light on the possible qualitative behaviors
of quantum materials. The bulk of the work that will be supported by this award
is of the latter variety. Both analytic and newly developed numerical methods
will be deployed to compute the equilibrium and near-equilibrium properties of
paradigmatic models of many interacting electrons. That knowledge could enable
qualitative contact with measured properties of materials that have so far
proven too complex to be understood from a more microscopic
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the proposed research will be carried
out in collaboration with PhD students and post-doctoral scholars. The
combination of theoretical precision and phenomenological relevance of the
proposed studies makes them ideal for training future condensed matter
theorists, and more generally for producing scholars able to grapple with
complex, open-ended problems in a broad range of
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division
of Materials Research funds this award on theoretical research and education in
the physics of strongly interacting electron systems. One of the striking
characteristics of systems of strongly interacting electrons is the complex
interplay between competing or coexisting forms of order including magnetism,
superconductivity, and electronic liquid crystalline order. Understanding the
inter-relations between these ordering tendencies and the fluctuations
associated with them may well be the key to understanding the physics of highly
correlated quantum materials, including various high-temperature
superconductors. Many aspects of the emergent low-energy physics of such
materials are qualitatively similar despite their chemical and structural
diversity. In the vicinity of a zero temperature quantum critical point (where
an electronic order onsets as a function of an external tuning parameter), the
microscopic physics is averaged out, giving rise to universal scaling behavior.
More generally, many of the materials of interest show surprisingly simple
scaling laws, such as a linear dependence of the resistivity on temperature,
over broad regimes which may or may not be influenced by a "nearby" quantum
critical point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI will undertake a
theoretical investigation of the qualitative aspects of the interplay of order
and fluctuations in correlated materials. The work will focus on simple models
that can illuminate the generic behavior of systems of strongly correlated
electrons. Among the directions to be pursued are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Determinantal quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) methods will be employed to study
models of interacting electrons that do not suffer from the fermion minus sign
problem, and can thus be solved efficiently in a broad range of temperatures and
system sizes. A large part of the effort will be devoted to models of quantum
criticality in metallic systems. In addition, the problem of electrons
interacting strongly with phonons, which is at the heart of the physics of
conventional superconductors, will be revisited in order to understand, among
other things, what limits the maximum superconducting transition
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Novel regimes of electron transport, not
described by the traditional nearly-free-electron theory of metals, will be
investigated. In particular, the PI will identify regimes in which electrons in
solids behave hydrodynamically, i.e. as a locally-equilibrated collective
"fluid" with a nearly-conserved momentum and energy. In addition, the "bad
metal" transport regime, where the resistivity of a material is too high to be
accounted for by a model of nearly-independent quasi-particles, will be explored
in simple theoretical models that can be controlled in certain
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the proposed research will be carried out in
collaboration with PhD students and post-doctoral scholars. The combination of
theoretical precision and phenomenological relevance of the proposed studies
makes them ideal for training future condensed matter theorists, and more
generally for producing scholars able to grapple with complex, open-ended
problems in a broad range of venues.