* 1608663
* Capillary Channeled Polymer Structures and Chemistries for High Throughput Measurement of Large Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* R. Kenneth Marcus, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 532,191.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Professor R. Kenneth
Marcus and collaborators at Clemson University are developing and characterizing
capillary-channeled polymer (C-CP) fibers as stationary phases for rapid
processing of synthetic and large biological molecules. These stationary phases
are amenable to a wide range of instrumentation formats and offer advantages for
the separation of mixtures. The goal of the studies is to produce efficient and
selective separations in an economical manner. This work is interdisciplinary,
involving collaborative efforts between research groups in chemistry,
bioengineering, mathematical and materials sciences. The project includes
investigators affiliated with the Clemson University Center for Advanced
Engineering of Fibers and Films. There are also collaborations with federal
laboratories. If successful, the project may result in new commercial ventures
in the textile and biopharmaceutical industries in South Carolina. Enhanced
capabilities for large molecule separations have implications across many
commercial sectors, including the rapidly expanding area of protein
therapeutics.

A two-pronged approach is used to better affect macromolecule separations using
the C-CP fiber phases. The first area focuses on the novel implementation of the
fibers as the stationary phases for dimension two of comprehensive two-
dimensional liquid chromatographic separations. C-CP phases of various surface
chemistries are evaluated in terms of the cycling times required to affect high
quality separations of temporal "cuts" obtained from the first dimension. The
second area focuses on modification of surface chemistries to affect high levels
of selectivity. There are four classes of reactions: further use of lipid
tethered ligands as a general reaction methodology to modify hydrophobic
surfaces, high density amination of polyester base fibers, microwave energy to
affect covalent coupling of ligands to nylon 6 C-CP materials, and finally the
adsorption of macromolecule ligands on polypropylene surface for class-specific
separation. These chemistries are used to develop stand-alone columns (on either
the analytical or preparative scales) as well as columns for use as dimension
two in multidimensional applications.