* 1608333
* Development and Application of Synthetic Receptors for Methylated Lysine and Arginine for Methyltransferase Assays
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Marcey Waters, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,100.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Marcey Waters from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. While every cell in an individual person has the same genes, not
all genes in a cell are expressed. Gene expression is the process by which
genetic instructions are used to synthesize genetic products. Differences in
gene expression lead to differentiation, such that a skin cell is different from
a liver cell, for example. Research into understanding how genes are expressed
is an important area because the factors that control gene expression can lead
to many diseases. One factor that controls gene expression, but that is poorly
understood, is a phenomenon called protein methylation, which involves the
"tagging" of certain proteins with a molecule, here a methyl group. Studies
indicate that incorrect methylation is a critical component in many diseases,
particularly cancer, and that the processes that lead to methylation are
potential medicinal targets. However, the ability to detect methylation is
currently severely limited. Dr. Waters is developing new detection tools for
rapidly sensing methylation, and determining when incorrect methylation occurs.
This project is also supporting continued efforts to increase diversity in
science fields and provide undergraduate and graduate student research
opportunities for those from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is developing synthetic receptors as molecular sensors for
methylated lysine and arginine, which are being used to characterize the enzymes
that install and remove these post-translational modifications. Dysregulation of
lysine and arginine methylation has been linked to a wide range of diseases, yet
the tools available for sensing these modifications are limited and this has
hindered advancements in the field. These approaches include the use of
antibodies, which are expensive and have been shown to give false negatives;
radioactive labeling, which is a low-throughput single-timepoint assay and
requires specialized equipment and safety protocols; and mass spectrometry,
which is time consuming and requires very sensitive, expensive equipment. The
approach taken in this proposal is providing a rapid, real-time, high
throughput, fluorogenic sensing method, which is enabling a significant
advancement in the ability to characterize lysine and arginine methylation.