* 1608049
* OP: A High-Throughput Quantum Photonic Source
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Jung-Tsung Shen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2021
* USD 269,003.00

Abstract title: A high-throughput quantum photonic source for generating non-
classical light

Abstract: Non-technical description: The invention of lasers is one of the most
important scientific and technological achievements in the history. The laser is
already integrated into our daily life: Among their many applications, lasers
are used in optical disk drives, laser printers, and barcode scanners; fiber-
optic and free-space optical communication; laser surgery and skin treatments;
cutting and welding materials; military and law enforcement devices for marking
targets and measuring range and speed; and laser lighting displays in
entertainment. The laser produces bright, coherent, and tightly-focused light
beams which consist of lots of photons (individual constituents of light). When
measuring the arrival times of the photons in a laser beam using a photo-dector,
the photons arrive randomly. Researchers have discovered that if the arrival
times of photons can be orchestrated, these photons could have novel
applications in quantum computing and communications that are not possible by
using conventional lasers. A light beam that consists of these orchestrated
photons is called non-classical light. Scientists have demonstrated the
existence of the non-classical light. Nonetheless, to date there exist no
efficient methods to produce bright non-classical light. The major hurdle is
that although the scientists can coordinate a handful photons, it is very
challenging to coordinate a large number of photons in a batch. The project aims
to research a quantum light source for generating bright non-classical light.
Specifically, we will design a quantum light source, and develop a computational
framework to control and to manipulate the photons generated by the light
source. Once completed, this project will make possible a new type of quantum
light sources such that the output light of the quantum light sources will
consist of a large number of coordinated photons so that their arrival times at
the photo-detector can be controlled. Such a new quantum light source will be
important for practical applications in quantum information science. The
capabilities for controlling quantum state of light are of paramount importance
for modern society. The success of the project will represent important
breakthroughs in quantum optical information processing, a field that has
already broadly impacted modern technology and human life.

Technical description: The capability of on-chip generation of a large flux of
entangled quantum photonic states (antibunched or bunched entangled photons) is
necessary to meet the growing demands of a broad range of next-generation
scientific and technological applications. Among these are quantum optical
information processing, such as quantum computing and quantum key distribution,
and quantum (or ghost) imaging. In bunched states, the photons always arrive
together at the photo-detector; while in the antibunched states, the photons
never arrive together. A promising solid-state route to engineer the quantum
photonic states is to use the cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) systems that
relies on the anharmonicity of the Jaynes-Cummings interaction. The PI has shown
that the geometry currently employed in experiments - a single Jaynes-Cummings
(JC) component sandwiched by two waveguides - have a fundamental tradeoff
between high converting efficiency (from independent photons to entangled
photons) and the quality of the quantum states (degree of entanglement), and is
sensitive to dissipation. Furthermore, the short lifetime of a single JC
component severely limits the efficient generation of the quantum photonic
states. It is desirable to have high-throughput quantum light sources; however,
direct scaling up the number of the cavity QED components would not work, as the
photons generated from different cavity QED component would intervene with each
other at the output to wash out the intra-state correlations. The goal of this
proposal is to computationally research high-throughput quantum photonic sources
that produce high-quality entangled quantum photonic states to push the
generation of the quantum photonic states well beyond the state-of-the-art.