* 1608654
* Tuning and protecting MoTe2 derived phase change materials for electronic device fabrication
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 296,739.00

Abstract: Growth, modification, and encapsulation of MoTe2 derived
semiconductor-to-metal phase change materials for electronic device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Layered semiconductors, with strong in-
plane bonding and only weak, non-covalent interactions between planes, can be
reduced to a single molecular layer thickness while maintaining good electronic
properties. Thus these materials enable the ultimate reduction in length scale
for microelectronic devices. MoTe2 is of particular interest in this class of
novel semiconductors because of a desirable band-gap and importantly, the
presence of a structural phase change that enables transforming the material
from a semiconductor to a metal. Local switching of the phase of MoTe2 thus
enables to make metal/semiconductor devices entirely build out of a single
elemental composition. In this project we are aiming at overcoming materials
engineering challenges and thus enabling utilization of the special phase change
properties of MoTe2 in device structures. First, we will establish synthesis of
single or few molecular layers of MoTe2 on a wafer scale. Second, we investigate
the controlled phase transformation from the semiconducting to the metallic
phase and investigate approaches to modify this phase transformation by addition
of other elements. Third, we address the chemical instability of MoTe2, which
leads to easy oxidation. Strategies to encapsulate it in a protective layer will
be developed, which is essential for making MoTe2 useable for devices. This
project is embedded in the research activity on two-dimensional materials at the
University of South Florida and will provide education to graduate and
undergraduate students in an area of future technological relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The van-der Waals semiconductor MoTe2 exhibits a
relatively small band gap of about ~ 1eV and is a promising material for
ambipolar field effect devices. The strong light absorption over the entire
visible spectrum makes MoTe2 also interesting for photovoltaics and its band gap
value makes it a candidate for near infrared optoelectronics. In addition, a
thermally induced phase change of MoTe2 from semiconducting to metallic provides
possible solutions to materials engineering problems of making electrical
contacts to van der Waals semiconductors. In this project we will investigate
and optimize the growth of MoTe2 by molecular beam epitaxy. Modification of
MoTe2 by alloying will be studied with the goal of enabling tuning of the band
gap as well as phase change behavior. The growth of these films and their
properties are primarily characterized with scanning probe
microscopy/spectroscopy and photoemission and thus we gain insights of the
growth and phase transformation mechanisms at the nanoscale. One main
shortcoming of MoTe2 is its relatively poor chemical stability, which causes its
degradation under ambient conditions. To overcome this stability-issue the
protection of these MoTe2-derived materials by oxide-capping layers will be
studied. Phase change behavior with and without capping layer is compared,
especially in view of the dependence of the transition temperature on Te-
deficiency. Finally, in-plane interfaces between MoTe2 and dissimilar TMDs are
fabricated with the aim of utilizing the phase change properties of MoTe2 for
making ohmic-contacts to other TMD semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;Thus this project
will investigate if MoTe2 could be used as a universal material for addressing
the general problem of making electrical contacts to two-dimensional van der
Waals semiconductors.