* 1608886
* RET Site: Incorporating Engineering Design and Manufacturing into High School Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Weihang Zhu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 555,380.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, entitled, Incorporating Engineering Design and Manufacturing into High
School Curriculum, at Lamar University (LU) Beaumont, will provide opportunities
for STEM high school teachers from underserved school districts in Southeast
Texas to engage in cutting-edge advanced engineering design and manufacturing
research and develop curriculum modules based on their research. Advanced design
and manufacturing is an industry with growing opportunities for creating the
next generation workforce. Given the many petrochemical, manufacturing and
military operations in the Beaumont-Port Arthur area the research topic is of
high economic impact to the region. LU is uniquely located amongst the local
manufacturing and petrochemical industry in the Beaumont-Port Arthur area and it
is anticipated that the project will help strengthen education in design and
manufacturing, and ultimately help the workforce to be more competitive.
Research projects include: advanced design and manufacturing, including
computer-aided design and manufacturing, computer-numerically controlled
machining, 3D printing, laser marking and micro-machining; sustainable
microelectronics manufacturing and design; intelligent sensor technology in
building materials design; computational fluid dynamics (CFD) assisted design in
industrial applications; and synthesis, simulation, and manufacturing of legged
robotics. This research experience will help teachers to develop and implement
innovative curriculum by translating cutting-edge research in advanced design
and manufacturing into high school classrooms, strengthen education in design
and manufacturing, enrich the professional development of future leaders in STEM
education, result in innovative STEM curriculum and stimulate the interest of
high school students in scientific inquiry and engineering. The project will
positively influence the learning and career paths of young students, especially
those from underserved districts and underrepresented groups in Southeast Texas
for years to come and contribute to a technology-savvy workforce. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, this RET Site will offer an intensive
6-week summer research program to a total of 36 STEM high school teachers. They
will join faculty mentors and their research teams in performing cutting-edge
advanced engineering design and manufacturing research and developing and
implementing innovative high school curriculum based on their research that
meets Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) standards. The RET Site
program will also include workshops, seminars, field trips to local industry,
teacher project and course module presentations and extensive follow-up
activities during the academic year. Dissemination of the project outcomes will
be through LU's RET website, conference and journal papers, TeachEngineering.org
and alumni and students in the largest domestic online Masters Program of
Educational Leadership at LU.