* 1608463
* I-Corps:  Semiconductor Diode for High Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Tom Oder, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps Team project seeks to investigate the commercialization potential
of Schottky diodes capable of operating at temperatures in excess of 600C.
Schottky barrier diodes are used in wireless technologies for commercial and
military needs, high efficiency switches for power distribution, sensors,
photovoltaic inverters, and in the automobile industry. Schottky barrier diodes
made from SiC currently available commercially are limited to operating
temperatures below 300C. It is widely accepted that the development of
electronic systems capable of high temperature operations above 300C, without
the need for cooling, is a critical technology for current and future
applications. The ability to operate electronic components in harsh conditions
advances technology across a broad spectrum of applications. The proposed new
technology is poised to expand the innovation boundaries set by current
temperature limitations. If successful, this could lead to commercialization of
other electronic components. Target applications include power systems for oil-
drilling, automotive, aerospace and space exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to determine the commercialization potential of Schottky
diodes capable of operating at temperatures in excess of 600C. The innovation in
our technology comes from the materials used as the metal contacts (refractory
metal borides and nickel gallide) as well as the unique processing techniques
employed. This process removes deleterious but inherent oxides that form at the
interface. This technology can also be extended to fabricate transistors with
similarly improved high temperature reliability. The new technology could lead
to the reduction or complete elimination of expensive cooling systems in high
temperature electronics operation. Funds from this I-Corps Team project will
enable assessment of interest among the electronics community addressing target
markets. This project offers opportunity to further the team's understanding of
the market opportunity for the technology. The workshops and interviews will
help the team gain perspectives on the target customers and thereby lead them to
either a licensing pathway, a spin-out SBIR/STTR pathway for further
development, or a commercial partnership to accomplish both. Since the scope of
the opportunity is rather wide, the team will use information gathered from this
project to prioritize the deployment of limited resources towards sectors that
offer the highest probability of commercial success.