* 1608874
* Functional Organic Nanotubes from Self-Assembled Bis-Urea Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Linda Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 469,960.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the National
Science Foundation supports the work of Professor Linda Shimizu of the
University of South Carolina to make well-defined, tiny 1-dimensional channels
(nanotubes) to answer fundamental scientific questions. These nanotubes are
prepared from simple, donut-shaped molecules that stack one on top of each other
to make tiny straw-like structures. The nanotubes can be loaded with gases and
small molecules without altering the channel structure. The advanced knowledge
acquired leads to a greater understanding of molecular transport and could help
optimize performance for industrial gas separations and the development of
environmentally friendly methods to carry out industrial oxidation reactions.
The educational component of this award encompasses three areas: (1) it trains
graduate students in research and prepares them for future careers in science or
engineering fields; (2) it supports the first research experiences of
undergraduates and high school students; and (3) it broadly promotes interest in
science by bringing chemists into South Carolina's K-12 classrooms to showcase
the scientific method and to foster interest in chemistry and in the natural
sciences, especially at high minority enrollment middle schools and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom-up approaches to design functional
materials through molecular self-assembly provide an efficient and high fidelity
strategy to prepare well-defined nanostructures that can be used to answer
fundamental questions. In this research project, the Shimizu group prepares
structurally tunable 1-dimensional nanochannels by controlling the self-assembly
of simple macrocyclic building blocks. These nanochannels are used for three
main purposes: (1) to study the rates of transporting gas or guest molecules
through the channels as a function of the channel dimensions, guest dimensions,
and the interactions that can occur between the guests and the channel walls.
(2) to organize molecules that can interact with light and to study the effect
of this organization on their properties, and (3) to generate a reactive form of
oxygen, singlet oxygen, and to control the oxidation of organic substrates.