* 1608221
* Collaborative Research: University Student Conceptual Resources for Understanding Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paula Heron, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 145,080.00

This project aims to help physics instructors: (a) value student's intuitive
thinking and (b) improve their instruction by building on those student
intuitions. The project is grounded in the premises that students bring stores
of ideas about the physical world to the classroom, and taking into account
these ideas, however informal, can improve their learning. This project will
develop instructional materials in forces, waves and optics, and the particle
nature of matter that utilize students' intuitive ideas.

Researchers have taken very different stances toward students' intuitive
knowledge. The misconceptions theory of knowledge takes the stance that
students' intuitive understandings are often inconsistent with the scientific
consensus and thus are obstacles to learning unless addressed. From this
perspective student knowledge is relatively rigid and mostly context-
independent. Thus researchers search for common, incorrect patterns in student
thinking, and instructors elicit, confront, and resolve misconceptions.
Alternatively, according to the resources theory of knowledge: 1) students'
intuitive understandings develop from their experiences of the physical world
and 2) student knowledge is dynamic and context-dependent. Hence, researchers
should attend to productive and potentially useful student intuitions on which
instructors can build. While instructors and researchers need not ascribe to a
single theory of knowledge, misconceptions research has had a more pronounced
impact on physics education research and instruction than resources research.
This project has the long-term goal of promoting instructor adoption of this
second perspective, the resources theory of knowledge. Researchers will first
document the common, prevalent resources that students marshal to reason about
physics. Then they will develop instructional materials that embed a resources
orientation toward student thinking and build on the resources they document.
The PI team will also test the effectiveness of these instructional materials in
improving students' conceptual understanding. The STEM education community is
embracing resources-oriented instruction for reasons of equity and agency.
Framing students' intuitive physics ideas as misconceptions disadvantages
students from diverse cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic communities.
Conversely, framing student ideas as resources -- as "productive beginnings" of
more sophisticated thinking -- has the potential to broaden participation in
physics.