* 1608275
* Chronologically Correlated Sweat Biosensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Gerald Kasting, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

Among non-invasive wearable technologies with a large upside potential, sweat
sensing technology is arguably the most underdeveloped. Even so, excitement is
building, as many sweat electrolytes, metabolites, amino acids, proteins, and
other biomarkers are showing promise for monitoring both mental and physical
status and/or disease. However, unfortunately many of the commercially available
technology solutions that could be used for sweat require ~10's of microliters
sample volumes, which are entirely too large for continuous sweat analysis. Even
the latest patch or tattoo advances in sweat sensing technology require several
microliters of biofluid, resulting in slow sampling intervals (10's of minutes
or even hours). If one of the biggest arguments for sweat sensing is the
potential for continuous monitoring, then there is a clear and pressing need to
discover powerful yet simple methods to continuously bring the tiniest amounts
of sweat (nanoliters) to sensors. This is by no means a simple challenge, as the
skin surface is highly variable and presents numerous factors that can confound
sweat sampling. If such technology could be developed the payoff could be huge,
allowing: (1) correlations with blood with as fast as ~2 min. time resolution;
(2) for sedentary users, more sampling events per day of natural sweat; (3) for
chemically stimulated sweat, a &gt;100X reduction in the amount of chemical
stimulant delivered compared to commercial products; (4) importantly, reducing
confounding contamination coming from the dead skin surface. Clearly, improved
sweat sampling is a central-challenge worthy of attention by researchers.
Furthermore, such a research topic is also ideal for cultivating and inspiring
the next generation of scientists and engineers through integration of research
with both high-school and undergraduate student research and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of this NSF proposal is to
create for the first time, the ability to achieve chronologically correlated
sweat sensing with minute-level resolution. The proposal's central hypothesis is
that through a clever interplay of microfluidics, the fluidic volume between
eccrine sweat ducts and sensors can be reduced from ~1's of microliters down to
10's of nanoliters (10-100X), resulting in only minutes before new sweat reaches
the sensors. The rationale for pursuing this hypothesis is simple, sweat sensing
has enormous upside potential for applications in patient and wellness
monitoring, athletics, narrow therapeutic-range pharmaceutical monitoring, etc.,
but cannot reach its full potential unless lower sweat rates can be used, faster
sampling times enabled, and analyte contamination from the skin surface
mitigated. The proposal also advances knowledge in sweat sensing science by: (1)
creating temporal models which predict the time for partitioning of ionic,
molecular, and protein analytes from blood, into sweat, and onto the sensors;(2)
advancing the frontiers of minimum biofluid sampling and sensing from the
microliter to the nanoliter regime;(3 experimentally validating both the created
models and technology, and therefore igniting further pursuit of sweat sensing
science and technology.