* 1608922
* A Tilt-Free Seismometer for Advanced Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Luca Bombelli, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the LIGO Research Program (Physics Division)
and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This is
an exciting time for the maturing field of gravitational-wave physics.
Construction of Advanced LIGO (the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory), an overhaul of the Initial LIGO interferometers, is now complete
and the first couple months of data have been collected. The advanced detectors
made last year the first direct detection of gravitational waves, a momentous
event that will transform our understanding of the universe and marks the
beginning of a new field of gravitational wave astronomy. Predicted by Einstein
nearly 100 years ago, gravitational waves are distortions of space-time created
by the movements of massive astrophysical objects such as exploding stars and
coalescing black holes or neutron stars. The effect of gravitational waves on
space-time is minuscule, however, and necessitates the design and construction
of detectors that push the limits of precision measurement techniques. This
award supports research to improve the Advanced LIGO sensitivity at low
frequencies and increase the amount of time the detector is collecting science
quality data. In addition, this program will serve as an invaluable training
ground for undergraduate and graduate students who will develop scientific
skills from a diverse set of disciplines and prepare them to fill positions in
academia and industry. The group is strongly committed to sharing the excitement
of the field with the public through outreach at all levels, reaching out in
particular to the communities in Mississippi.

Gravitational waves can be detected by using laser light to measure
infinitesimal changes in the distance between mirrors located two-and-a-half
miles (4 km) away from one another. The mirrors are suspended as pendulums to
isolate them from all vibrations other than the gravitational wave. The Advanced
LIGO detectors have achieved a sensitivity to changes in the distance between
the mirrors of better than one-ten-thousandth the diameter of a proton. There
nonetheless remain many challenges to further improve the interferometers in
order to increase the rate of gravitational wave detections and expand the
spectrum of astrophysical objects that can be observed. One such challenge
arises from the design of the commercial seismometers that are used to provide
active vibration isolation of the mirrors. The seismometers cannot distinguish
between horizontal acceleration of the ground and tilt of the ground. This award
supports the development of a high precision tilt-free seismometer to improve
the Advanced LIGO seismic isolation. The project includes deriving updated
requirements for a tilt-free seismometer based on data from the observatories,
designing and modeling the instrument, constructing and measuring the
performance of the tilt-free seismometer and conducting a theoretical and
experimental noise analysis of the system.