* 1608579
* Enabling Wireless Communications in the Terahertz Band
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2020
* USD 330,000.00

In recent years, wireless data traffic has grown exponentially due to a change
in the way today's society creates, shares and consumes information. This change
has been accompanied by an increasing demand for higher speed wireless
communication. Wireless Terabit-per-second links are expected to become a
reality within the next ten years. Towards this aim, the Terahertz Band (0.1-10
THz) communication is envisioned as one of the key wireless technologies of the
next decade. The THz band will help to overcome the spectrum scarcity problems
and capacity limitations of current wireless networks, by providing an
unprecedentedly large bandwidth. In addition, THz-band communication will enable
a plethora of long-awaited applications ranging from instantaneous massive data
transfer among nearby devices in Terabit Wireless Personal and Local Area
Networks, to ultra-high-definition content streaming over mobile devices in 5G
and beyond small cells. Nevertheless, there are several research challenges from
the very-high and frequency-selective path loss of the THz-band channel and the
very limited distance, which require innovative solutions and the revision of
well-established concepts in wireless communication.

This project will contribute to pave the way for the development of ultra-
broadband communication in the THz band. THz technology and its applications has
been recently identified by DARPA as one of the four with a potential broader
impact larger than the Internet itself. Ultra-broadband communication will play
a major role in the society by drastically increasing the capacity of wireless
networks and enabling long-awaited applications not possible with current
wireless technologies. In addition, the THz band is not yet regulated. The
project team is actively involved in IEEE 802.15 Wireless Personal Area Network
Terahertz Task Group, whose objective is to create the first standard for this
paradigm. In this project, one graduate student will be supported, and master
students (as special topic students) will be involved, to become experts in this
fast evolving field. The research results will be disseminated in important,
first rate scientific conferences, journals and premier magazines in the field.
Moreover, the proposed solutions in this project can be tailored and are useful
for the lower frequencies such as the millimeter-wave systems, which can help
the development progress of 5G cellular systems.

The research objective of this project is to strengthen the theoretical
foundations of ultra- broadband communications in the THz band and bring the
Terabit-per-second links one-step closer to reality. Our targeted breakthrough
is to increase the capacity of wireless systems to reach Terabit-per-second and
overcome the spectrum scarcity and capacity limitations of current wireless
networks. This project will make contributions along three major thrusts. First,
the concept of ultra-massive multiple-input-multiple-output is introduced to
overcome the distance limitation, based on the use of the very large antenna
arrays with thousands of antenna elements. The dynamic operation modes that
include beamforming, spatial multiplexing and a combination of both, as well as
the multi-band ultra-massive multiple-input-multiple-output will be analyzed.
Second, accurate models for the three-dimensional end-to-end channel, and the
three-dimensional ultra-massive multiple-input-multiple-output channel will be
developed, which will provide physical insights and the guidelines for the THz
band communication design. Third, by capturing the unique channel peculiarities,
distance-adaptive resource allocation, and low-sampling-rate and multi-carrier
synchronization schemes will be investigated for THz band communications.