* 1608606
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Horizons Social Science and the High North
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Kevin Smith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2017
* USD 54,439.00

Over the past 15 years, the Arctic has experienced substantial social and
environmental transformations. Some of these changes are on pace with
predictions of the late 1990s, but others have occurred much more rapidly than
expected. Many of the documented and anticipated shifts in the Arctic are linked
to environmental change: changing sea ice and snow cover, coastal erosion
leading to displacement of modern villages and destruction of preserved
archaeological sites, questions of subsistence food security, increased shipping
and oil exploration, with their associated economic impacts (positive and
negative) and risk of oil spills, to name just a few. Many other changes in the
Arctic are largely independent of changing climate: continued loss of Native
languages, high rates of unemployment, domestic violence and substance abuse,
and the increased influence of social media among and between isolated
communities of the high north. Yet, while the North has always seemed remote and
marginal to global or US national interests, Arctic people and environments are
increasingly connected socially, economically, and environmentally to those
living to the south.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The potential for an increasingly
ice-free Arctic Ocean, for example, opens up possibilities for new shipping
routes shifting economic costs and benefits for global markets, for expanded
exploitation of the circumpolar basin?s fossil fuel and mineral resources, and
for attendant new focus on the north as an economic and security zone of
strategic and tactical importance. All of these potential transformations have
impacts not only on the United States? northernmost communities, but also on the
global and national economic, social, and cultural systems best studied by
social scientists in interdisciplinary collaborations capable of providing
information and strategies of need for policy development and community
development. The National Science Foundation?s Arctic Social Sciences Program
(ASSP) is the leading source of funding for U.S.-based social sciences research
in the Arctic. Just as the Arctic has changed, arctic social sciences have
experienced substantial growth and development, transitioning from an emerging
field of research to a well-established multidisciplinary research area; yet the
research priorities for NSF?s Arctic Social Sciences program were last updated
in 1999. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Horizons project will bring together
members of the Arctic social science research and indigenous communities to
reassess the goals, potentials, and needs of these diverse communities and ASSP
within the context of a rapidly changing circumpolar North. A series of five
topical and regional workshops held across the country will bring together
approximately 150 western and indigenous scholars to discuss the future of
Arctic social science research. Additional participation by the broader Arctic
social sciences, indigenous science, and stakeholder communities will be
solicited through an interactive web platform that will also share workshop
and&lt;br/&gt; project outcomes, supported by special sessions at national and
regional conferences. The results of the workshops and on-line input will be
compiled at a final synthesis workshop with a report produced to describes the
community's vision for the future of Arctic social science research. This re-
envisioning process will help shape future Arctic social science research and
inform Arctic economic, environmental, and political policy
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic Horizons project provides a framework
and process that will bring together the Arctic social science research and
Arctic indigenous communities to reassess goals, potentials, and needs in the
diverse disciplinary and transdisciplinary currents of social science research
of the circumpolar North. A series of five regional workshops and one synthesis
workshop will engage approximately 150 western and indigenous scholars in the
re-visioning process. Additional participation by the broader Arctic social
sciences, indigenous science, and stakeholder communities will be solicited
through an interactive web platform that will also be used to share workshop and
project outcomes (e.g. videos of speakers, workshop notes, copy of the report),
as well as through special sessions at regional conferences (e.g. Alaska
Anthropological Association Annual Meeting, Arctic Science Summit Week,
Association of American Geographers). Whenever possible, keynote addresses will
be video live cast through the platform and preserved for convenient review.
Dynamic embeddable data visualizations will present the running results of
project analytics, including text analysis of associations in the transcripts of
workshop discussions, participant survey results, citation surveys, and an
analysis of all 737 NSF grants issued since 1981. The resulting community-based
vision will inform research investments for Arctic social science research over
the next decade. Arctic social sciences have experienced substantial growth and
development over the past 15 years, transitioning from an emerging field of
research to a well-established multidisciplinary research area since the last
arctic social sciences visioning workshop held in 1999.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is the collaboration of five institutions, all
of which have a strong history of supporting Arctic social science research (UAF
and Brown) or are developing new programs that support Arctic social science
research (UNI and PSU). The process will be overseen by a senior advisory panel
that includes social scientists and indigenous community members. The project
will leverage the broad research networks of the PIs to recruit participation
from a diverse and wide-ranging group&lt;br/&gt; of early, mid and senior career
scholars, ensuring gender and disciplinary equity and the participation of
underrepresented groups. This will be achieved through targeted invitation to
workshops, a promotional campaign for web input through electronic media, and
through participant recruitment at conferences and meetings. The capstone event
is a synthesis workshop where the information generated at each of the
regional/topical workshops and the on-line input will be combined in a report on
the research priorities collectively identified by the Arctic social sciences
community.