* 1608437
* OP: Momentum Conservation in Optoelectronic Processes at 2D Van der Waals Semiconductor Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers are
the thinnest semiconductor materials, with thickness on the order of one to
three atoms (i.e., a fraction of a nanometer) and are often called two-
dimensional semiconductors. These materials may serve as a material platform for
future electronics and optoelectronics applications as the conventional
semiconductor technologies are reaching dimensional limits. The main goal of
this project is to understand how charges move across the interface between two-
dimensional semiconductors, a process central to the operation of many
electronic and optoelectronic devices. The research combines advanced growth and
processing technologies with various spectroscopic characterization methods. In
addition, the project offers training opportunities for students, ranging from
K-12, community college, and undergraduates to graduate students.

Technical Description: Optical and optoelectronic processes at two-dimensional
semiconductor interfaces must satisfy the conservation of both energy and
momentum; the later includes both spin and crystal momentum. The hexagonal
structure of a transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayer leads to six
valleys in momentum space, K and -K, with opposite spin-orbital splitting. The K
or -K valleys in one monolayer are usually not aligned with those of the other.
Thus, charge transfer across the interface is accompanied by change in parallel
momentum. However, little is known about the mechanism for momentum
conservation, due in a large part to the lack of momentum resolution in
experimental techniques applied to date to the TMDs. This research
experimentally tackles this problem by directly measuring the energy and
momentum of the electron in the time domain, as it is excited in the K (or -K)
valley of a TMD monolayer, transferred to the second monolayer as a free
electron or to form an inter-layer exciton, and or recombine with the hole
across the interface. This is enabled by a state-of-the-art experimental
techniques, time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy with near-IR to
visible excitation of the TMD monolayers or heterojunctions and an extreme
ultraviolet laser to ionize the excited electron. The ionized electron is
detected in both energy and momentum spaces with femtosecond time resolution.
Such a direct experimental approach advances the understanding of interlayer
excitons at TMD heterojunctions and guides the development of future
optoelectronic technologies based on two-dimensional semiconductors.