* 1608218
* Solid-State Oxides and Oxide-Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 460,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly-efficient non-linear optical
(NLO) materials are essential to act as waveguides for electrooptic
applications. Such materials are used in ultrafast laser spectroscopy and, more
recently, to generate ultraviolet laser light for nanolithographic applications.
Current research and engineering activities in the field of NLO materials
typically concern synthesis of NLO crystals; however, research is needed for
understanding how to design NLO materials and why materials exhibit a particular
NLO response. While exploring the fundamental driving factors for creation of
new NLO materials, research will be performed to grow large (on the order of one
cubic centimeter) single crystals to allow a quantitative understanding of the
interaction of light with the NLO material. These analyses of basic principles
by graduate students and postdoctoral associates -- who are also engaged in
local education, teaching, mentoring, and leadership -- will enhance scientific
progress and promote commercial expansion of this technologically important
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging technologies require high-performance
nonlinear optical (NLO) materials that exhibit enhanced optical properties at
the microscopic and macroscopic level. The rational design of crystal
structures, in particular noncentrosymmetric materials, and how to target polar,
polar-chiral, and chiral structures, is an ongoing theme in crystal engineering.
A new class of potentially high performance NLO inorganic materials, solid-state
oxide-fluorides, has been identified. These studies demonstrate that i) the use
of fluoride ligands with early-transition metals enhances the second-order Jahn-
Teller distortion in comparison to pure oxide compounds, ii) the synthesis of
noncentrosymmetric materials can be promoted with the use of polar basic-
building units, and iii) the synthesis of compounds that contain two separate
anionic building units is likely to result in a noncentrosymmetric compound.
These materials comprise a large and new class of solids with properties
associated with piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, ferroelectricity and second
harmonic generation (SHG). The structure-property relationships that give rise
to high, low, or null nonlinearities of the NLO materials will be examined.
Finally, the growth of large crystals (on the order of one cubic centimeter)
allows detailed analysis with measurements of the NLO tensor and phase-
matchability properties, and other properties of interest such as
piezoelectricity. The materials synthesized will have potential use in relaxor
ferroelectrics and non-linear optics. These materials will have a high damage
threshold and the potential to fabricate large, single crystals suitable for
optical use and technical applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research.