* 1608401
* Development of tungsten stable isotope analysis for constraining sorption mechanisms and tracking the transport and fate of tungsten
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Laura Wasylenki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Laura Wasylenki of
Indiana University (IU) develops a new way to assess how and to what extent
sorption to mineral particles changes the mobility of toxic metals in
contaminated settings. The new approach enables better prediction of the
transport and fate for many metals, but the focus here is on tungsten (W),
recently declared an "emerging contaminant of concern" by the US EPA. This
approach takes advantage of variations in the stable isotope ratios of tungsten
(e.g., W-183/W-182), which are highly sensitive to differences in the numbers,
lengths, and strengths of chemical bonds involving the metal atoms. Stable
isotope systematics are used to probe the molecular-scale interactions between
dissolved W and porous media at realistic concentrations in the environment, but
inaccessible to conventional spectroscopic techniques such as extended X-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis. Concurrently, an innovative
informational effort is launched at Indiana University to educate the campus
community about where metals in everyday objects come from and what hazards and
consequences are associated with taking those resources from the Earth. A series
of signs are displayed on campus with quiz questions and QR (quadratic residue)
code links that are developed by interns in IU's Office of Sustainability, with
assistance from the Office of Science Outreach and Professor Wasylenki's
research students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simple sorption experiments and precise
isotope analyses yield quantitative information about isotope fractionation
during sorption of W onto four common sorbent phases. Studies are made first at
high concentrations, where EXAFS provide information directly about coordination
chemistry and sorption mechanisms, and then at field-relevant conditions, where
isotopes may be the only way to constrain sorption mechanisms. Computational
quantum mechanical modeling complement the experiments, isotope analyses, and
EXAFS analyses. The modeling studies predict the expected isotope offsets
between monomeric and polymeric species of W, which form in solution and as
sorbed complexes. The work advances what is known about the environmental
chemistry of tungsten and enables stable metal isotopes to be used as a tool for
tracking transport and fate of metal contaminants.