* 1608464
* Collaborative Research: Integrated In Silico and Non-Target Analytical Framework for High Throughput Prioritization of Bioactive Transformation Products
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Edward Kolodziej, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 156,000.00

Today, water resources are threatened by a complex mixture of chemical
pollutants, many of which are poorly removed by traditional water and wastewater
treatment technologies. These water pollutants include potent pharmaceutical
classes including synthetic steroids, whose bioactivity can persist in the
environment despite their transformation to other compounds through natural and
man-made processes. In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical
Sciences Program of the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, a
collaborative team of researchers at the University of Iowa, University of
Washington at Tacoma and Seattle, University of California at San Diego, and
Stony Brook University develops a predictive framework to help improve chemical
risk assessment. Ultimately, outcomes of this project may produce more safe and
sustainable water supplies, particularly as society becomes more reliant on
reuse of treated wastewater to bridge the widening gap in supply and demand. The
broader impacts of this work include advancing undergraduate education by
enabling the participation of under-represented groups in research activities,
integrating modern computational tools into student learning, and promoting
scientific literacy in non-technical audiences through general education
coursework development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research attempts to improve
water quality. Focusing on a widely utilized abiotic treatment process,
chlorination, and ubiquitous but understudied pollutant classes, potent
synthetic progestins and glucocorticoids, this project develops a high-
throughput framework built upon computational and experimental methods for the a
priori prediction of high risk, bioactive transformation products. This approach
integrates theoretical calculations to identify probable chlorination products
using descriptors for both parent (partial charges, oxidation potentials) and
likely product (thermodynamic stability) species. Potential product species are
prioritized based on bioactivity (i.e., risk) using high throughput virtual
ligand screening. Once identified, the formation and yield of high risk products
are evaluated in bench-scale experiments across a range of chlorination
conditions. High resolution mass spectrometric detection is used to examine
wastewaters and receiving waters. Research outcomes may be used to predict
emerging pollutants and provide a more holistic approach to addressing the risks
posed by their bioactive products. This collaborative project provides
transdisciplinary training of two graduate students, two postdocs, and several
undergraduates at the interface of environmental chemistry, computational
chemistry, and biochemistry.