* 1608915
* Structural studies of DNA at replication fork junctions by 2D fluorescence spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Andrew Marcus, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 570,000.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program supports work by
Professor Andrew H. Marcus at the University of Oregon to determine the local
conformations of DNA bases and backbones at replication fork junctions. These
junctions are potential binding sites for proteins that manipulate genes. There
are currently few techniques available that can provide detailed structural
information about protein-DNA complexes, particularly those near DNA fork
junctions. This project is developing methods that combine two fluorescence
measurements, to specifically investigate DNA-protein structural dynamics at
fork junctions. The methods are potentially of general use in understanding many
processes of DNA biochemistry. In addition, such methods could potentially help
to identify defects in the function of DNA replication, repair and cell cycle
control complexes involved in human diseases. The tools are made readily
available to the scientific community. The undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students are benefitting from cross-disciplinary training and
interactions with researchers that have a variety of scientific backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project uses two-dimensional fluorescence
spectroscopy (2DFS) to investigate the local DNA base and backbone conformations
and conformational dynamics at pre-selected sites within model DNA replication
forks, and functional replication protein-DNA complexes. The experiments
determine key structural end-states and DNA-protein binding recognition motifs
important for the formation of replication complexes. The approaches employ DNA
constructs containing two adjacently positioned fluorescent base analogue
probes. In separate experiments, cyanine chromophores which absorb in a spectral
region where DNA and proteins are transparent, are incorporated into the sugar-
phosphate backbone. Coupling between the electronic states of the dimer probe
residues produces signature spectral features that are used to infer local
nucleic acid base or backbone conformation. The acquired information on dynamics
is central to understanding mechanisms by which protein-DNA complexes assemble
to carry out their specialized functions. A second goal of the project is to
begin to develop single-molecule 2DFS to monitor local DNA conformational
dynamics with sub-second time resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.