* 1608213
* ortho-Phenylenes in Complex Foldamer Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Christopher Hartley, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 430,622.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the work of Prof. C. Scott Hartley in the Department of
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at Miami University. In nature, the structural
complexity of large molecules (e.g., proteins), and ultimately their function,
is generated by the folding of smaller molecular pieces (oligomers and
polymers). This fact has inspired many efforts to study non-biological
"foldamers" smaller molecular pieces that fold in well-defined ways. Research in
the Hartley group focuses on the ortho-phenylenes, a simple class of foldamers
formed from directly connected aromatic rings. In this project, the Harley group
develops methods to control the folding of o-phenylenes and incorporates the
rings into more complex structures. The project involves graduate students,
undergraduates, and high-school teachers working to understand fundamental
concepts of molecular folding, self-assembly, and molecular recognition, using
the techniques of organic synthesis, computational chemistry, and various
characterization methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ortho-phenylenes combine
several features that make them attractive as "next-generation" foldamers. They
are straightforward to synthesize. Their folding behavior is easily modeled
using simple, inexpensive methods. Their exact, solution-phase folding state can
be characterized by NMR spectroscopy. This project has three specific aims that
take advantage of these features. First, the twist-sense of o-phenylene folding
is controlled using chiral end groups. While this sort of control over oligomer
folding has been demonstrated in other systems, it is critical for more advanced
uses of o-phenylenes. If successful, may be used to test o-phenylenes for spin-
selective electron transport. Second, o-phenylene subunits are linked together
into macrocycles. This simple system represents a first step toward
incorporating o-phenylene secondary structures (i.e., helices) into higher-order
structures, and provides a framework to test the conformational interaction
between bridged foldamer subunits. Finally, o-phenylenes are functionalized with
macrocycles to create binding sites along their sides. The architectures
represents a first step toward o-phenylene-based molecular recognition.