* 1608848
* Probing Exotic Quasiparticles in Weyl Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Ali Yazdani, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Non-techical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the properties of novel
electronic materials is key to future advances in many areas of science and
technology. This program supports research that is focused on elucidating the
properties of new class of electronic materials, called Weyl materials
(semimetals and possible superconductors), and offer undergraduate students
opportunity to learn about novel quantum states of matter through both a seminar
course and hands on laboratory research experience. The research program uses
advanced atomic scale imaging tools to probe Weyl materials with unprecedented
resolution and will use these findings to test theoretical models of electronic
behavior in these materials. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained to
carry out the proposed research agenda using sophisticated state-of-the-art
scanning tunneling microscopy instrumentation. Under this project, the PI is
also developing a seminar class for freshman undergraduates to expose them to
broad field of quantum materials, their potential application for advancing
electronics, and their importance in discoveries of new phases of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research project
consists of using advanced scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy
techniques to elucidate the key topological properties of bulk and surface
quasi-particles in Weyl semimetals and to determining the nature of
superconductivity in Weyl materials, introduced for example through proximity
with a conventional superconductor. Demonstration of topological protection in
Weyl systems is currently one of the key goals in studies of this new class of
materials. Spectroscopic imaging with STM, as previously demonstrated on a wide
range of topological materials, is a unique tool to achieve this fundamental
goal. New type(s) of superconducting states may be realized in Weyl systems in
their bulk because of the chiral nature of carriers or at their surface because
of the unusually arced Fermi surface with spin texture. These studies will add
considerable information to our understanding of topological phases of matter in
materials. The freshman research seminar being developed as part of this program
will introduce student to a wide range of quantum phases from those in cold
atomic gases to novel topological phases discovered in recent years.