* 1608125
* Thermal Properties of Electrospun Fibers, with Research Opportunities for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Interns
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2021
* USD 444,116.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer fibers are used in a wide variety of applications such as textiles. Now,
through a process called electrospinning, it has become possible to make polymer
fibers with extremely small diameters, much smaller than a human hair. Ability
to create very small fibers is significant because it opens up the possibility
for use in more advanced applications, for example as oil-water separation
membranes for provision of clean water (promoting human welfare), or as supports
to assist the growth of human cells like neurons (promoting human health). The
first part of the research project involves making small diameter polymer fibers
and characterizing their properties. The next part involves heating these small
diameter fibers to discover what changes will occur in the structure of the
fibers when they experience heating. For example, some fibers when they are
heated may shrink, twist up, melt, or completely fall apart, depending upon how
much heat they experience, and how fast they are heated up. There are also
positive changes that may occur in the fibers, such as becoming stronger and
less likely to break, or developing more resistance to chemicals which could
attack them. Making small diameter fibers and studying these properties will
provide important fundamental information to optimize their structure and
behavior for use in their intended applications. The proposed research also will
provide education and training to graduate and undergraduate students. Societal
benefit will be derived from the internship program for deaf and hard of hearing
students. This program will contribute to improving the diversity of the
scientific workforce, by increasing the participation in science and technology
of persons with disabilities, who belong to a group under-represented in these
fields.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Advanced methods of thermal analysis, such as temperature modulated and fast
scanning chip calorimetry, will be used for fundamental studies of electrospun
micron to nanoscale fibers. These approaches will be used to study
crystallization, and the glass and liquid states, of fibers and droplets made
from melting the fibers. Candidate polymers will have glass transition
temperatures above room temperature. Examples include nylon 11, poly(ethylene
terephthalate), poly(butylene terephthalate), or, poly(vinyl alcohol), which
degrades at its melting temperature. The technical objectives are to: 1. prepare
an array of electrospun fibers, and investigate thermal properties in
relationship to fiber morphology and structure; 2. use fast scanning chip
calorimetry on fibers, including polymers that degrade above their glass
transition temperatures, to minimize effects of degradation on thermal
properties; and, 3. measure nucleation and growth processes in droplets made
from these fibers, and compare with behavior in bulk materials. The amounts of
crystal, mobile amorphous, and rigid amorphous phases will be evaluated from the
heat capacity increment at the glass transition. By using the fast scanning
approach, the process of nucleation and crystal growth will be evaluated over
six orders of magnitude in the cooling rate. The thermal analysis undertaken
will provide new experimental protocols and aid in the evaluation of fast
scanning data from semicrystalline polymers. The research will increase the
participation in STEM fields of under-represented groups, especially persons
with disabilities, through the summer program for deaf and hard of hearing
undergraduate interns. Through collaborative projects, fibers for more applied
uses will be studied, such as fibers for oil-water separation, or oriented
fibers for guided growth of neurons.