* 1608891
* Expanding the Scope and Enabling Potential of Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professor Barry C. Thompson. Professor Thompson
is a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Southern
California (USC). Professor Thompson's research develops new synthetic methods
to prepare conjugated polymers. Conjugated polymers have emerged as a highly
attractive platform for organic electronics and specifically for applications
such as solar cells and light emitting diodes. The current synthetic methods of
making these devices are difficult. These reactions typically require highly
reactive and flammable reagents for preparation. These prevailing chemistries
also limit the type of monomers to a narrow group, further limiting the range of
polymer properties. This research describes a strategy to develop the new
synthetic technique for making polymers, Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP),
into a robust, broad-reaching, and enabling platform for the synthesis of
conjugated polymers. Professor Thompson?s hypothesis is that through careful
control of reaction parameters and additives, DArP can be made to be broadly
compatible with a variety of monomer systems and can exhibit selectivity better
than traditional methods of conjugated polymer synthesis. The research project
also offers a significantly more green and sustainable route to conjugated
polymer synthesis. The research provides training for community college students
through the USC-Cerritos College summer internship program. Optimization of DArP
and the ultimate scale-up of polymers made by DArP provides a significantly more
economical and environmentally friendly way to synthesize polymers for solar
cell applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research describes Professor
Thompson?s strategy to develop Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP) into a
robust, broad-reaching, and enabling platform for the synthesis of conjugated
polymers. Motivation for this work is based on the limited methods for
conjugated polymer synthesis. While DArP can attractively bypass metalation
requirements, it currently lags behind state-of-the-art methods like Stille
methods in terms of functional group tolerance and minimization of defects andas
Kumada catalyst-transfer polycondensation (KTCP) reactions in terms of control
over polymer growth. As a result, the major objectives of this work are to: 1.
Establish a broadly applicable direct arylation polymerization platform that is
both versatile and robust, 2. Develop oxidative direct arylation polymerization
for the generation of polymers without preactivation of the monomers, and 3.
Refine the DArP platform for enhanced control over polymer growth and
compatibility with more abundant metal catalysts. Professor Thompson?s approach
toward achieving these objectives is a hypothesis driven study based on
promising observations in small molecule direct arylation. This methods has
theability to not just extend small molecule chemistry but to adapt and develop
new polymer chemistry through simple, modular control of reaction parameters.