* 1608182
* Statistical Theory and Methodology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Persi Diaconis, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 700,000.00

Modern computational capabilities, modern theory, and the expanded data sets
produced by modern scientific equipment have greatly increased the scope of
statistical inference. This research project investigates a set of questions in
probability and statistics raised by large-scale data collection. While of
increasing use, empirical Bayes methods have proved difficult to justify. The
approach under development in this project brings a novel application of
exponential family theory to the job, with the goal of clarifying how empirical
Bayes analyses converge to traditional Bayes methods as sample sizes increase.
The project aims to develop empirical Bayes methods that use large-scale
parallel data sets, such as those from microarray studies, to improve estimation
in situations reporting many small sub-experiments, each of which by itself has
low accuracy; and improved Monte Carlo methods for the computer solution of
massive optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics under
investigation in this research project include large-scale empirical Bayes
strategies, importance sampling for computer-assisted inference in formerly
intractable situations, and a theory of stability assessment for traditional
methods of accuracy estimation. Exponential families of probability
distributions play a central role in both computation and statistical inference.
A particularly stubborn impediment to their use in massive data analyses is the
lack of a suitable norming constant in the exponential family density. This
research project further develops computational methods based on solutions of
appropriate variational problems; a promising application is in the area of
graphical models. A second application of exponential families involves
efficient deconvolution of datasets to obtain empirical Bayes estimates.