* 1608938
* Collaborative Research: Chemisorption-Induced Ultraviolet Quantum Well Optoelectronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Lane Martin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Next-generation devices require new classes of
materials capable of advance (multi-) functional response. In this regard,
complex-oxide materials and interfaces have the potential for far-reaching
impact. Of particular interest are opportunities to harness novel light-matter
interactions to enable a range of applications. Controlling such interactions
requires exacting production of materials and in-depth understanding of the
mechanism(s) underlying the phenomena. For example, semiconductor
heterostructures drive optoelectronics for solid-state lighting, communications,
computing, and sensing and the subsequent introduction of nitride- and simple
oxide-based materials has helped pushed such technologies into the ultraviolet
emission range. New functionalities involving ultraviolet-emitting devices may
enable faster encoding and manipulation of information, new modes of chemical
detection and sensing, and more efficient solid-state lighting. This project
explores opportunities for on-demand complex oxide-electronics through local
material reconfiguration. It builds upon discoveries of conductivity at the
interface of two insulators, and demonstration of reversible, local manipulation
of conductance to produce tunable ultraviolet-light emission from such
materials. The project actively promotes the training of next-generation
scientists and engineers in technologically important and relevant fields
critical for the sustained economic vitality of the United States, focuses
efforts on the mentoring and training of students from historically
underrepresented groups, and provides research co-op and international research
experiences for student trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: In
this project, a new optoelectronic materials paradigm is defined by the coupling
of spatially- and chemically-selective chemisorption with sub-surface quantum
well(s) formed at the interface(s) of two band insulators. Symmetry-breaking and
electrostatic potential mismatch between constituent semiconductors at an
interface results in novel phenomena inaccessible in the bulk. This emergent
phenomena can, in some systems, be tuned extensively since a surface, and to
some extent, an interface, is free to reconstruct structurally and
electronically. Bringing a surface or sub-surface into equilibrium with a
controlled environment enables local, reversible control of the electronic phase
or functional state. The effects of adsorbate type and locality, of a symmetry-
lowering field on the strength, energy, and spatial response of ultraviolet
luminescence from one or more distinct sub-surface, two-dimensional electron
liquid(s) exhibiting electron correlations are studied. In particular, the
activities focus on understanding and ultimately controlling several
distinguishing features: 1) how the steady-state ultraviolet light emission
intensity changes in response to different adsorbates; 2) how the physical
properties of the model system, as probed by changes in spectral emission,
respond to externally applied fields; 3) how the ultraviolet luminescence,
including locality and stability, can be controlled with external stimuli; and
4) what the introduction of multiple, closely-spaced quantum wells and/or other
oxide heterojunction materials does to the response. These investigations
advance understanding of radiative recombination in new model optoelectronic
ultraviolet light-emitting systems defined not by bulk, interfacial or surface
properties alone, but by coupling of sub-surface interfacial quantum well
electronic structure to surface chemisorption.