* 1608484
* RUI:   Domain-Domain and Protein-Protein Interactions in Reactive Oxygen Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Chin-Chuan Wei, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2020
* USD 213,803.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Chin-Chuan Wei from Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville who is investigating an important class of proteins that have been
implicated in disease processes such as atherosclerosis and tumor growth. The
program involves studying how the functions of these proteins are ultimately
related to their unique structures as governed by weak interactions between
various proteins and other molecules. The Professor Wei is characterizing these
weak interactions in an effort to understand the similarities and differences of
these protein functions and to provide new insights in enzymology. The project
participants, including undergraduate and M.S. graduate students, acquire
specialized training in protein preparation and characterization techniques,
that enhance fundamental research programs at a primary undergraduate
institution. The project also recruits underrepresented students and high school
students to biochemical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
uses biophysical techniques to elucidate the enzymatic mechanism of two related
enzymes, NADPH oxidase 5 and dual oxidase. Their enzymatic activities are
modulated by several factors including domain-domain and protein-protein
interactions. These interactions are investigated by ultra-sensitive calorimetry
and UV/fluorescence spectroscopy to obtain thermodynamic and kinetic parameters,
as well as information about structural changes. In addition, the
dissimilarities between their sequences, phosphorylation, and auxiliary protein
recognition sites are investigated for their distinct activity profiles.
Information from this study provides a molecular understanding of these two
enzymes in regards to their catalysis and regulation, defining a new model
system for exploring non-phagocyte NADPH Oxidases.