* 1608927
* Solute Trapping in Low-Temperature Vapor-Liquid-Solid Growth: A Route to Direct-Gap Ge-Sn Single Crystal Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Paul McIntyre, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 490,575.00

Non-technical Description: Growing bulk crystals by freezing them from a liquid
is a well-established method for making highly perfect semiconductor materials
for a host of applications including electronics, and the detection or emission
of light. A crystal growth process that is used to produce very small (tens to
hundreds of nanometers) diameter semiconductor wires is investigated in this
project. The focus is on growth of germanium-tin wires that have the potential
to enable exciting devices, such as lasers that can be grown directly on
silicon. The principal investigator and his graduate students are studying how
unusually large concentrations of tin atoms can be frozen into these
semiconductor wires as they grow. This project also integrates undergraduates in
the experimental effort by involving research-experiences-for-undergraduates
(REU) students in all three years of planned activities. In parallel with their
research experiences, the REU students work with the principal investigator to
develop simple laboratory demonstrations and presentation materials on
semiconductors, light-solid interactions and crystal growth. Finally, this
research effort is used as a vehicle for science outreach to low income San
Francisco Bay Area high school students, through participation in Stanford RISE
summer internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This
project extends to the nanoscale the study of solute trapping as a means of
achieving metastably high semiconductor alloy compositions. In so doing, it
exploits the large liquid supersaturations and deep subeutectic temperatures
possible with vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) Ge nanowire growth. The project focusses
on growth of free-standing Ge-Sn binary alloy nanowires, which are of great
interest for their high carrier mobilities and the possibility of achieving a
direct band gap for very efficient light absorption and emission. Research on
epitaxial thin films suggests that Sn alloying of diamond cubic Ge can decrease
the energy of the Gamma valley of the conduction band relative to the L valley.
In practice, Sn alloying up to the predicted &gt; 6 at.% composition required to
achieve a direct gap in an unstrained thin film is difficult. The equilibrium
solubility limit of Sn in bulk Ge is &lt; 1 at.%. Moreover, the lattice mismatch
of Ge-Sn to Ge and Si induces compressive biaxial strain in films deposited on
these most useful substrates that shifts the sub-band energies in opposition to
the effect of Sn addition, thus requiring even larger Sn concentrations. These
considerations make clear the potential scientific and technological impact of
developing methods to produce free-standing, single crystal Ge-Sn nanowires
without coherency strains. A comprehensive experimental approach is used to
probe solute trapping in Ge-Sn nanowires grown from either Au or Sn nanoscale
catalysts, including energy dispersive spectroscopy in the transmission electron
microscope, and local electrode atom probe tomography. In parallel with these
studies of VLS solute trapping kinetics and mechanisms, optical probes such as
photoluminescence and transient absorption are used to study the effects of Sn
incorporation on alloy band structure and carrier recombination dynamics.