* 1608899
* Controlling and Understanding Thermal Energy Exchange at Single Domains of Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Junqiao Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Heat has been familiar and important to humankind for
a much longer history than electricity, yet people's ability of controlling and
understanding heat lags much behind that of electricity. The key lies in
materials science and engineering: how to design, synthesize and develop
materials and tools that support, direct and gauge heat flow (in the same manner
in which semiconductors work with electric current). This project seeks to
tackle this fundamental problem using a specific class of materials: nanoscale
functional materials. As heat is carried by both electrons and atomic vibration
(the so-called "phonons"), achieving this goal requires exquisite control of
behavior of both electrons and phonons, as well as their interactions.
Functional materials made in the nanoscale and with high quality allow such
control because they can be used to regulate the direction and magnitude of heat
flow (as well as its conversion from/to electric current and fields). Knowledge
gained in this project is used to educate underrepresented students through a
partnership between Prof. Wu's university and local middle-high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Functional materials support
extraordinary thermal energy exchange processes such as thermoelectrics, thermal
rectification, and electrocaloric effect. Domains (including functional domains
and crystal grains) and domain walls of various types ubiquitously exist in
these materials and strongly influence, sometimes dominate, the thermal energy
exchange processes. Hampered by challenges in measuring heat flow at the
nanoscale, previous studies of these effects are mostly limited to materials
with a large number of disordered domains. As a result, intrinsic effects are
hidden by ensemble averaging over the domains, leaving many key questions
unsettled. This project goes beyond this ensemble averaging, to gauge,
understand, control and optimize the thermal energy exchange at the level of
single domain or single domain wall of functional materials, using
microfabricated tools and nanomaterials processing techniques recently developed
in Prof. Wu's lab. The project enables exquisite control of heat flow with
functional materials by engineering density and mobility of electrons as well as
crystallinity and interface of the lattice; identifies fundamental limits in
such thermal energy exchange processes as interfacial thermal rectification,
composite thermoelectrics, and electrocaloric cooling; and opens tremendous
opportunities for novel design and improved performance of various thermal
devices. Integrated with the research activities, Prof. Wu is also running an
education project that stimulates and prepares pre-college students for careers
in materials science and engineering pertaining to thermal applications.