* 1608550
* Developing a Small-Molecule Immunoassay
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* John Conboy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2021
* USD 451,300.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Conboy at the University of Utah is developing new
analytical methods for small-molecule (low molecular weight substances)
detection and quantification. Antibodies, with their chemical specificity and
high affinity are exceptionally suited for bio-specific detection and
quantification. However, utilizing antibodies for the direct label-free
detection of low molecular weight substances is a major technical challenge.
Professor Conboy is using nonlinear optical methods to develop a highly
sensitive small-molecule immunoassay, providing a reliable, label-free method
for detecting and quantifying low molecular weight substances. The research
outcome is to provide a set of new highly sensitive analytical tools for the
purpose of detection of illicit substances and hazardous substances screening.
Integrated within the research objectives is the education of both graduate and
undergraduate students in analytical/bioanalytical chemistry, which is of great
National importance in maintaining the strength of the US economy and the
competitive edge of US biotechnology industries. Professor Conboy is also
involved in hands on demonstrations, science fair activities and assistance with
setting up dedicated teaching space for science experiments at local primary
schools in the Salt Lake valley with the goal of exposing primary grade students
to the wonders of the chemical world and to promote teacher training and
introducing young people to the potentials of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of the proposed studies is to implement second-harmonic
correlation spectroscopy (SHCS) for rapid single point calibration and utilize
the high-throughput capabilities of second harmonic imaging (SHI) for screening
and quantification. These complimentary techniques, SHCS and SHI have many
inherent advantages over existing approaches. SHCS has the intrinsic advantage
that calibration (binding affinity data) can be obtained from a single
concentration of the analyte to derive the Kd (or Ka) in a fraction of the time
required by a conventional thermodynamic equilibrium binding isotherm
measurement, with the added benefit of acquiring both the association and
dissociation rates. SHI has the advantage of high-throughput measurement by
utilizing antibody capture arrays. Both methods are also biologically versatile
and capable of detecting any molecule containing conjugated structures,
including virtually all biomolecules targeted in current assays. Together these
methods represent a unique analytical approach that does not compromise
sensitivity and speed yet provides a novel, cost effective, and flexible
immunoassay format.