* 1608613
* I-Corps Teams: BEES: Building Energy Efficiency Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

As a multitude of electronic gadgets make their way into our day-to-day lives,
technological innovations are redefining the notion of human comfort, requiring
it to be more personalized and adaptive. At the same time, changes in our
general living style and expectations are accompanied with a surge in our
individual energy demands. This calls for the design of smart systems that can
achieve desired human comfort levels without putting additional pressure on
energy resources. In current practices, shared multi-occupant spaces such as
office floors with cubicles, conference rooms, student dorms, and homes, thermal
settings are chosen irrespective of the number of occupants and their individual
preferences. This existing approach is not only non user-centric but also sub-
optimal from both energy&lt;br/&gt;consumption and occupant
satisfaction/productivity perspectives. The proposed approach (Building Energy
Efficiency Solutions, BEES) is more performance-efficient than controlling the
thermal setting of each zone in the building in an isolated manner. BEES
solution can be deployed in multi-occupant spaces to make the occupants of the
entire space more comfortable, and simultaneously facilitate energy efficient
operation of the space. Given that nearly 40% of the total energy consumption in
US, and 20% of the total energy consumption worldwide is attributed to
residential and commercial building usage, a plug-n-play framework for improving
energy efficiency of buildings can go a long way towards establishing a
sustainable planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BEES involves developing an Internet of
Everything (IoE) platform that acts as a hub for smart home and commercial
building automation. The solution framework comprises multiple components such
as distributed sensors for real time measurement of building parameters, mobile
applications to provide interface for human interaction enabling feedback
mechanism through smart phones and wearables, a central server to collate and
interpret the data, and finally integration with the building HVAC control
system. BEES framework optimizes the thermal environment of a building by
learning and utilizing the correlations and connections between different
components, and adaptively developing the required environmental model in real
time. The optimal thermal setting of the space running BEES is updated in real
time based on changes in occupancy pattern, ambient conditions and other thermal
variations, along with occupant's feedback and preferences.