* 1608097
* Wetting and Spreading with Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 545,223.00

Non-technical abstract: The wetting and spreading of fluids appears throughout
natural and engineered systems. While the dynamics of droplets resting on rigid
substrates are well-understood to be controlled by the contact line separating
the three (solid/liquid/gas) phases, soft materials present new challenges. For
compliant substrates, the forces at the contact line cause a deformation of the
underlying surface, which in turn impacts the wetting and spreading of the
droplet. This is a highly nonlinear problem that can result in a large range of
behaviors. Predicting and controlling them is relevant to medical technologies,
microfluidic flows, tissue growth, and bacterial biofilms. When the materials
involved are not just soft, but living, the spreading can even be driven by
self-fluidization, increasing the degree of complexity. Understanding this
process could provide new means for efficiently fluidizing industrial granular
flows, or for introducing circulation into dry fermentation processes. The
project not only funds undergraduate and graduate students to perform research,
but makes new training in materials characterization available to other students
in the department through the rheometer and surface tensiometer to be placed in
the physics department's shared Education and Research Lab. The annual "Launch
your Excellent Adventures with Physics!" (LEAP!) Workshop encourages high school
girls from diverse backgrounds to explore physics through hands-on workshops.
The research team strives to recruit and support students who are members of
traditionally under-represented groups, both to work on laboratory research and
to take part in dissemination/outreach activities.

Technical abstract: This research project addresses open questions about how
small-scale interactions give rise to macroscopic effects in the wetting and
spreading of droplets in soft materials. The research team utilizes two model
systems to understand the complex interplay between deformation and flow. The
first system addresses the contact line forces at a gel/liquid/gas interface,
using systematically-varied material parameters and geometries to resolve the
interaction of capillary and elastic forces on soft substrates. The second
system uses a new model organism, colonies of Tyrolichus casei (cheese mites),
to open a new avenue of study into the onset and dynamics of living hydrodynamic
flows. The work starts from detailed characterizations of both the gels and the
living fluids to measure such quantities as the complex shear modulus, Poisson
ratio, surface tension, and degree of activity. Knowledge of these material
parameters will allow the team to both design experiments which probe the
necessary range of parameter values, and also allow for comparison and
development of models. Together, these two systems allow the team to answer the
following questions: Can current controversies surrounding static contact line
models be rationalized through experiments on a range of materials? Does the
curvature of the contact line play an additional role? What new modes of
spreading and transport of droplets can be achieved through gravity and/or
gradients in materials properties? Can particle-scale position fluctuations in
living fluids be thought of as analogous to the thermal fluctuations in an
ordinary fluid?