* 1608682
* Novel Metastable Phases and Kinetics Studies in Transition Metals and Alloys under Terapascal Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 383,322.00

Non-technical Abstract

Several elements in the periodic table when subjected to external high-pressure
and high-temperature adapt novel structural modifications leading to
improvements in their physical and mechanical properties. In certain cases,
these novel crystal modifications with enhanced physical and mechanical
properties can be retained after removal of pressure resulting in potential
industrial applications. The conversion of graphitic carbon into diamond by
application of high-pressure and high-temperature is a prime example of this
research. This research program will carry out high-pressure high-temperature
studies on transition metals and alloys that are widely used in aerospace,
biomedical, and nuclear industry. This research is enabled by advances in the
generation of ultra high pressure up to ten million atmospheres in the
laboratory using an innovative design of diamond anvils in high pressure
devices. This advance in high pressure technique coupled with very bright
sources of x-rays allows us to probe changes in crystal structures so we can
construct stability maps for various crystal structures at elevated pressures
and temperatures. These stability maps will allow researchers to design new
strategies to synthesize these materials in bulk form for industrial
applications. The project participants will receive extensive research training
at the premier national facilities employing x-ray synchrotron radiation in
materials research leading to a pipeline of trained scientific workforce in high
pressure science. Our long-term partnership with the Historically Black Colleges
and Universities in the southeastern region will ensure participation of
underrepresented minority groups in this research program.

Technical Abstract

The study of transition metals under extreme conditions has seen rapid progress
in the last few years with the attainment of near Terapascal (1 TPa = 1000 GPa)
static pressures using two-stage diamond micro-anvils along with the development
of millisecond x-ray diffraction techniques using fast detectors at the
synchrotron facilities. At the University of Alabama at Birmingham, a novel
method for the fabrication of two-stage diamond micro-anvils using a chemical
vapor deposition technique has been developed. In addition, rapid pressure and
temperature changes can be applied to samples using piezoelectric drivers
(dynamic diamond anvil cells) and boron-doped heating anvils, thus providing
ideal tools to study phase transformations and transformation kinetics in
transition metals and alloys under extreme conditions. In this study, a focus is
on transformation kinetics of hexagonal close-packed (hcp-phase) to simple
hexagonal (omega-phase) transformation and from omega-phase to body-centered
cubic (bcc-phase) in Titanium-Vanadium (Ti-V) and Hafnium-Tantalum (Hf-Ta)
alloys. The goal is to establish the occurrence of other novel phases like the
orthorhombic modifications (gamma, delta, and eta phases) in early transition
metals and alloys under hydrostatic (neon pressure medium) and non-hydrostatic
(no pressure medium) conditions. In Osmium (Os) metal, structural anomalies have
been observed at 150 GPa and 440 GPa at ambient temperature that warrant further
investigations at elevated temperatures. It is anticipated that most of the
early members of the transition metal series are converted in to nearly pure
d-band metals as s-electron levels move above the Fermi-level at extreme
pressures. This study would provide crystal structure data and pressure-volume
data for this unique electronic state of transition metals and alloys under
extreme conditions for direct comparison with the theoretical models.