* 1608743
* Conformational Proteomics on Nanoparticle Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Catherine Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 610,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanoscience
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Catherine Murphy of the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign addresses the conformation (three-dimensional
shape) of proteins on nanoparticle surfaces as a function of nanoparticle size,
shape, and surface chemistry. Insights from these experiments may lead to
improved prediction of biological effects at the molecular and potentially
cellular levels. Metallic nanoparticles in the 10-100 nm size range exhibit
unusual properties that enable applications in biology, ranging from diagnostics
to therapeutics. The details of the chemistry at the surface of these
nanoparticles matter. Some surface chemistries promote protein binding. Others
discourage protein binding, and some even control how proteins bind to the
surface. The position of molecules such as proteins on the surface of
nanoparticles can influence the fate and function of these nanoparticles in
biological systems. The project also contributes to the education and training
of undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of nanotechnology,
bionanotechnology, and analytical measurements. This training provides a
pipeline of well-rounded scientists who contribute to the innovation economy.
Classroom modules on surface chemistry are created and broadly disseminated to
enable students to learn about these scientific topics. Outreach to non-science
students helps educate non-scientists about bionanotechnology as well as improve
the communication skills of the science students.

A wide-ranging set of experiments are designed to examine the phenomenon of
"conformational proteomics on nanoparticles." This research group is developing
the ability to measure protein conformations and then rationally alter the
conformation/orientation of proteins on nanoparticle surfaces. The systems
include gold cores with various organic ligand shells or new porous,
constraining shells. The proteins include a small, carefully selected set of
molecules with intrinsically interesting bioactivity. The methods used include
adaptive control of protein behavior that comes from "plasmonic refreshing" of
the surface or capturing protein conformers in designed pores near the metal
surface. The measurement of bound protein conformation and orientation comes
from a combination of NMR methods, footprinting mass spectrometry, and
vibrational spectroscopy.