* 1608709
* Biogeography of a marine defensive microbial symbiont: relative importance of host defense vs. abiotic factors
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Nicole Lopanik, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 492,416.00

Recent research has shown that microorganisms can be very important to their
eukaryotic hosts, by providing nutrition or contributing to host defense against
enemies, such as pathogens or predators. In many cases, however, hosting a
bacterial symbiont imposes a physiological cost on the host organism, resulting
in reduced growth or reproduction in the presence of the symbiont. Further,
these costs may be more pronounced in some habitats than others, causing natural
selection to act in eliminating symbiont-containing hosts from the population.
In this project, the investigators are studying the relationship between the
marine bryozoan invertebrate, Bugula neritina, and its uncultured symbiont. The
symbiont produces natural products with activity against cancer, Alzheimer's
disease, and HIV. Interestingly, these compounds also are distasteful and
protect larvae from predators, indicating that this symbiotic relationship is
defensive in nature. Along the East Coast of the US, the investigators have
found a much higher proportion of individuals that have the defensive symbiont
at lower latitudes, while the symbiont is absent in individuals collected at
higher latitudes. This pattern is consistent with the theory that higher
predation pressure exists at lower latitudes. Other environmental factors, such
as temperature, can also vary over a wide geographical area, and may also play a
role in influencing the relationship. In this project, the investigators will
evaluate the ecological and environmental parameters that influence the
distribution of a defensive symbiont, including predation pressure and
temperature. Defensive symbionts represent another level of ecological
complexity, and likely play an important role in structuring marine communities.
This study will provide insight into how environmental factors can influence
host-symbiont interactions and drive partner co-evolution. Furthermore, the
bioactive products have pharmaceutical potential, and understanding how
environmental factors influence the relationship between B. neritina and its
symbiont may improve bioprospecting for novel compounds that could be developed
into drugs. The educational outreach component of this project will include
development of a biodiversity module for the Georgia State University mobile
outreach laboratory that interacts with K-12 students throughout the state of
Georgia. In addition, both PIs will be involved in the development of a
"citizen-science" project with high school students in Virginia to document B.
neritina populations and reproductive patterns.

In this research, the investigators will determine the ecological and
environmental parameters that influence the distribution of a defensive symbiont
in the marine bryozoan, Bugula neritina. The goal of this research is to
determine the mechanism that results in the defensive endosymbiont being
restricted to hosts that inhabit lower latitudes. This pattern of symbiont
distribution could be the result of differing levels of costs and benefits at
different latitudes: where predation pressure is low, the costs of hosting the
symbiont outweigh the benefits, and aposymbiotic individuals outcompete their
symbiotic conspecifics. In areas of higher predation, the defensive benefit
outweighs the cost, and symbiotic individuals have higher survival rates than
their undefended, aposymbiotic conspecifics. An alternative, but not mutually
exclusive hypothesis, is that symbiont growth is inhibited at higher latitudes,
where it is not as beneficial, and growth is induced in areas of higher
predation. Specific goals are to determine if (1) a biogeographical cline in
predation pressure corresponds to a gradient of symbiont frequency associating
with the host, (2) symbiotic hosts have a higher fitness at low latitudes, and
aposymbiotic hosts have a higher fitness at high latitudes, and (3) symbiont
growth is promoted at low latitudes and inhibited at high latitudes. A
combination of field and laboratory-based experiments will be conducted using
ecological and molecular biology techniques. Bioactive compounds produced by
symbionts of marine invertebrates can mediate multi-trophic interactions and
potentially influence benthic community structure. There has been almost no
research, however, on how ecological and environmental parameters influence the
distribution of marine defensive endosymbionts.