* 1608151
* Facial Amphiphilic Antimicrobials Biomaterials Containing Fused Multicyclic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Alan Decho, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program to University of South
Carolina at Columbia is to advance the knowledge of a class of antimicrobial
agents. This award is co-funded by the following programs: 1) BMAT program in
the Division of Materials Research; and 2) Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical and Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG). Bacterial infections have now
evolved into a global healthcare crisis. The ever-increasing emergence of
bacterial resistance to traditional antibiotics is a puzzling issue in battling
infectious diseases. One direct outcome of this program would be the development
of prototype antimicrobial compounds and polymers. This project will provide
training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students in the polymer
synthesis, modeling and antimicrobial compounds. Several integrated educational
activities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students will be carried
out to stimulate their interest in science and technology. This project will
continue to expand the highly successful Project Seed Summer Research Program to
high school students from economically disadvantaged families. Other activities
involving K-12 students include a series of presentations called "Small World
with Big Impacts: Nanobiology" and biomolecular visualization workshops. This
project will also train students from underrepresented groups. These programs
would also serve as integrated educational experience for academically bound
graduate students. Research results and discoveries will be disseminated with
publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at national and
international conferences.

Technical: This project is an integrated research, education, and outreach
program in designing a class of multicyclic terpenoid-derived facial amphiphilic
compounds and polymers as robust antimicrobial agents, which could kill a
variety of bacteria, particularly multidrug resistant bacterial strains, while
maintaining minimal cytotoxicity against mammalian cells. The major approach
relies on a combination of hydrophobic fused multicyclic di- and tri-terpenoids
and ionic motifs. This project includes fundamental biomaterials research on
designing facial amphiphilic structures, uncovering mechanisms of action against
bacteria, and fighting vexing bacterial resistance. The main aims of this
project are to: 1) synthesize and characterize facial amphiphilic compounds and
polymers from carnosic acid, cholic acid and glycyrrhetinic acid, and evaluate
their antimicrobial activities; 2) design macromolecular nanostructures as a new
tool to fighting bacterial resistance; and 3) model mechanisms of action between
facial amphiphilic antimicrobial agents and bacterial cell membranes. The
ultimate goal is to translate the most desirable and unique properties of
terpenoid-based cationic compounds and polymers into new classes of
antimicrobial agents with functionality and performance that are unprecedented
for current antimicrobial materials.