* 1608880
* EPCN - Online Optimization for the Control of Small Autonomous Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joao Hespanha, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,838.00

This project aims at carrying out fundamental research towards taking advantage
of the opportunities enabled by low-cost and low-power microprocessors, digital
sensors, and communication devices for the design of feedback control systems.
While the project's goal is to develop methodologies that can find application
on a wide range of control systems, the control of small autonomous networked
mobile agents will be used to focus the research and to validate the
technologies developed. The interest in mobile agents for civilian applications
is at an all-time high, motivated by a large number of applications, including
mapping and surveying, infrastructure inspection, environmental monitoring,
agricultural monitoring, precision agriculture, livestock management, among many
others. In fact, it was foreseen that the legalization of commercial drones will
create an economic impact of $82 billion until 2025 and that agriculture would
provide the most substantial portion of that growth. This proposal is focused on
autonomous and networked mobile agents, as autonomy and network connectivity
allow groups of agents to carry out tasks faster and more reliably. The proposed
activities will have a strong educational component aimed at motivating students
to pursue advanced degrees in the sciences and engineering, through a
combination of activities aimed attracting high-school students to the STEM
disciplines through a Summer Internship program, exposing undergraduate students
to research, and expanding the opportunities for mentoring and professional
development for graduate students.

The wide range of small, low-power, low-cost microprocessors, solid-sate
sensors, and communication devices point to control architectures in which
feedback loops are composed of multiple units connected through shared
communication networks. These units will include controllers, sensors, and
actuators, each endowed with the ability to perform some level of local
computation. The use of shared networks results in architectures that are
extremely flexible, easy to deploy, and highly reconfigurable, but also
introduce additional challenges because the traditional unity feedback loop that
operates in continuous time or at a fixed sampling rate is not adequate when
sensor data arrives from multiple sources, asynchronously, delayed, and possibly
corrupted. However, this challenge is mitigated by the availability of
significant computational power at each node, enabling novel forms of control
design. An attractive alternative to traditional forms of feedback control
design relies in the use of online optimization algorithms that search directly
for control actions and directly incorporate in this search all (or most of) the
desired design constraints, including those constraints related to performance
and robustness with respect to faults. Until a few years ago, the use of online
optimization was mostly restricted to the control of slow processes, such as in
chemical process control, supply chain management, or enterprise control,
because of the long times required by the optimization engines. Nevertheless,
when sampling was sufficiently slow, techniques like Model Predictive Control
(MPC) and Moving Horizon Estimation (MHE) enjoyed an impressive success and
became the de-facto standard in many domains. The technological advances in
microprocessors, solid-sate sensors, and communication devices mentioned above
have the potential to enable online-optimization to reach a wide range of
applications with fast sampling times and limited energy budgets, including the
control of small autonomous networked mobile agents. The research proposed will
make significant contributions towards the development of principled approaches
for control based on the integration of Model Predictive Control (MPC) and
Moving Horizon Estimation (MHE) to achieve in stable and high performance
feedback control systems.