* 1608925
* EAGER Renewal: Bio-Inorganic Chemistry of the Rare Earth Metals: Chemistry Relevant to the Cerium-Dependent Methanol Dehydrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

With this award the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE) is funding Dr. Eric J. Schelter at the University of
Pennsylvania for studies on one of only two known rare earth-containing enzymes.
The rare earths are actually metals that are important to many of our modern
electrical devices but are rarely, if ever, found in biological systems. The PI
is studying an enzyme from a bacterium discovered in acidic volcanic mudpots,
found to have rare earth elements as an essential growth requirement. This
project is attempting to understand the unique characteristics and reactivity
conferred to an enzyme isolated from these bacteria through the presence of
cerium, one of the rare earth elements. The results are expanding understanding
of new and unusual biochemistry, particularly as it concerns metabolism and
energy. Students trained on this project are accruing skills in synthetic
bioinorganic chemistry and chemical analysis. Undergraduate and graduate
chemistry students from underrepresented groups are also benefiting from support
of the project.

A growing body of information suggests that rare earth elements play an
important role in the global carbon cycle. Rare earth elements can incorporate
the active site of a methanol dehydrogenase (MDH), encoded namely by the XoxF
gene of M. fumariolicum SoIV, that includes a pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)
cofactor. The central hypothesis of this application is that quinolone quinones
that replicate the electronic structure of PQQ, developed in the first stage of
the project, will similarly induce alcohol dehydrogenation reactivity upon
coordination with rare earth element cations in model complexes, and that the
strong Lewis acidity of rare earth metal cations enable fast and unique
reactivity for rare earth-XoxF-MDH. The overall goals of this proposal are to
use a combination of synthesis, electrochemistry, Density Functional Theory
(DFT) and high throughput experimentation to elucidate the unique
physicochemical characteristics of the rare earth element-XoxF-MDH active site
and to test functional model compounds of the active site in the catalytic
dehydrogenation of small molecules.