* 1608489
* Conference: 2016 Biointerface Science: Active, Adaptive, and Responsive Biointerfaces GRC &amp; GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Atul Parikh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 GRC in Biointerface Science will explore
Active, Adaptive, and Responsive Biointerfaces across natural and engineered
biomaterial systems. We reason that broad classes of complex, cooperative, and
adaptive behaviors in natural and biomimetic systems emerge through the central
roles of interfaces - both intrinsic and imposed. Biointerfaces on the one hand
compartmentalize disparate biological components within a functional living
module (e.g., a cell) and on the other hand facilitate integration. The
appreciation of how interfaces determine biological functions and how interfaces
must be considered in devising biomaterial alternatives to their living
counterparts requires an interdisciplinary discourse, ranging over
biomacromolecules and single cells to tissues and organs. The 2016 GRC seeks to
seed this discourse, help generate a common language across disciplines, and
foster interdisciplinary collaborations. The constituency of the Biointerface
Science GRC attendees is already multidisciplinary. The 2016 GRC and the
associated GRS will engage bioengineers, chemists, physicists, materials
scientists, and biologists - all participating in a meeting that addresses the
challenges in translating ground breaking fundamental advances in biology and
chemistry into products in biomaterials, biosensors, and the -omic sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The Biointerface Science GRC
and GRS play important roles in enhancing the development of researchers in
early stages of their careers. The GRC format is designed to foster an
environment of in-depth scientific discussion and relationship building among
participants. The associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will draw in young
scientists and researchers, and get them involved with one of the most lively
frontiers of science. Graduate students, post-docs, and other scientists with
comparable levels of experience and education will come together in a highly-
stimulating and non-intimidating environment to discuss their current research
and build informal networks with their peers that may lead to a lifetime of
collaboration and scientific achievement. The GRS is organized by young
investigators with the support of leading scientists from the associated GRC.
The majority of the GRS participants will participate in the GRC, which follows
immediately at the same site. The PI has made a concerted effort to achieve an
appropriate representation of women, racial/ethnic minorities and persons with
disabilities, and other individuals who in the past have been underrepresented
in science and engineering.