* 1608810
* Northwest Passage Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* David Clark, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,280,650.00

The Northwest Passage Project (NPP) is a collaborative effort between the
University of Rhode Island (URI), Inner Space Center (ISC), Graduate School of
Oceanography (GSO), the film company David Clark Inc., and several other
partners, including six Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and three informal
science education institutions. The project centers on a research expedition
into the Arctic's Northwest Passage, which will engage intergenerational cohorts
of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in hands-on research aboard
the U.S. tall ship SSV Oliver Hazard Perry (OHP). During the expedition, a
professional film crew will produce a two-hour documentary focused on the NPP's
innovative model of interdisciplinary informal STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) learning and highlight the expedition's research,
participants, and the sociological issues related to the changing Arctic
environment. Because the Canadian Arctic is remote and costly to access, the
project will maximize NSF's investment by giving broad audiences access to the
science and excitement of the expedition through the documentary. In addition,
this informal science learning opportunity will not only engage students with
scientists in authentic research, but also train the students to deliver daily
live broadcasts from sea to three well-established U.S. informal science
education institutions: the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH), the Exploratorium, and the Alaska Sea Life Center (ASLC). The daily
broadcasts will also reach the public in real time via the project's interactive
website, providing the opportunity for people to post questions to the
scientists and students onboard the ship. The NPP has great potential to benefit
society by enhancing awareness of the changing Arctic's ecosystems and
increasing science literacy. The hands-on research experiences will enhance the
college readiness of the participating high school students and encourage the
undergraduate students from the six partner MSIs to consider a graduate course
of study and/or pursue STEM careers. The graduate students will also be more
career-ready, as they gain public communication and leadership skills necessary
for 21st century scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northwest Passage Project
is designed to advance knowledge and understanding within the practice of
informal science education, as well as in the field of Arctic science. The
project goals include: increasing public awareness and understanding of the
changing Arctic ecosystem; increase public understanding about Arctic research
and the scientific process; increase the Informal Science Education (ISE)
field's understanding of the public's learning process when engaged in live
interactions with scientists and student 'science communicators'; increase the
ISE field's understanding of the value of immersive science experiences and
impact on students from underserved and underrepresented populations; and to
build or extend the capacity of ISE institutions to make connections between
polar scientists, students, journalists and the public. The NPP is creative in
that it combines the engagement of students in field-based scientific research,
live broadcasts from sea to ISE institutions, and the production of a full-scale
documentary for public audiences. A potentially transformative component to the
ISE activities involves six Minority Serving Institution partners--Florida
International University; University of Illinois, Chicago; California State
University, Channel Islands; Texas State University; Virginia Commonwealth
University and City College of New York--whose students will have the
opportunity for a life-changing experience that may tip the scale toward their
interest in STEM careers. Each of these students will develop news stories, host
screenings of the film at their respective campuses, and share their experiences
with peers, providing visual role models for other underrepresented students,
who may never have thought themselves capable of becoming a scientist or science
communicator. An additional project goal is to enhance the capacity and
infrastructure of the three ISE partner institutions so that they may receive
live broadcasts from the Inner Space Center in the future, beyond the funding
period of the project. People, Places &amp; Design Research will conduct the
project's front-end and formative evaluation; MEM &amp; Associates will conduct
the summative evaluation. Some of the key evaluation questions will be:
&lt;br/&gt;* Have ISE and MSI institution public visitors, who view either the
live broadcasts or the documentary film (or both), become more aware of the
changing Arctic ecosystem and the importance of scientific research in the
Arctic?&lt;br/&gt;* What is the relative impact of the live broadcasts compared
to the finished documentary, and the strengths and weakness of the respective
media in translating the on-board experience?&lt;br/&gt;* Does a real
environmental and social context for scientific evidence stimulate audiences to
become more interested in the role of science/STEM? &lt;br/&gt;* Have students
gained leadership skills and the ability to communicate science to their peers?
&lt;br/&gt;* Have students increased their motivation and interest in pursuing
STEM careers?&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.