* 1608211
* Non-Equilibrium Collective Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Sidney Redner, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2019
* USD 381,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to investigate emergent phenomena in condensed-matter,
ecological, and biological systems, with a specific emphasis on the brain.
Training in these fundamental topics will also help advance the careers of
junior researchers in the physical, mathematical, and biological sciences. The
overarching goal is to understand phenomena that emerge in systems with many
particles or components that interact with each other. These phenomena are a
reflection of the components acting in concert and are distinct from the
properties associated from an individual particle or component of the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In ferromagnetic materials, with the prototypical
example being a bar magnet, magnetism arises at low temperatures, where the
tendency for magnetism overwhelms thermal fluctuations. However, if such a
material is suddenly cooled to low temperature, barriers to ferromagnetism
arise, leading to the formation of a glassy state rather than the perfect
alignment of microscopic magnets across the material which leads to the
ferromagnetic state. A goal of the research is to determine the conditions under
which magnetic or glassy behavior arises. A major focus of the research is the
study of dense networks, in which the number of links is much larger than the
number of nodes. An important example is the human brain, which typically has
100 billion neurons and 100 trillion connections. The connectivity patterns of
these neurons contain a rich spectrum of local motifs that may underlie the
wondrous functionality of the brain. An important goal is to elucidate these
fascinating structures. Another focus is to understand the ecological interplay
between depletion of an environment by foraging, the nourishment of the forager
by resource consumption, and environmental replenishment by resource growth. An
important aim is to determine the conditions under which the forager and
resource densities remain in balance and when boom and bust cycles
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's efforts to develop
a massive open online course on topics related to statistical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education that involve applying the techniques
of non-equilibrium statistical physics to emergent phenomena in condensed-
matter, ecological, and biological systems, with a focus on the brain. While
ostensibly disparate, these projects all rely on common investigative tools,
including analysis of master equations, scaling theories, and large-scale
numerical simulations. Training in using these essential tools will also help
advance the careers of junior researchers in the physical, mathematical, and
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project is to understand the
dynamics of kinetic ferromagnetic systems that do not conform to conventional
power-law coarsening. Such systems may get stuck in complex metastable states
that consist of multiple "breathing" domains. Long-time properties are
controlled domain merging - either as isolated events or part of a macroscopic
cascade. The resulting ultraslow dynamics resembles that of glassy materials and
should provide new insights into glassy behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second
focus is dense networks in which the average node degree increases with the
number of nodes N. An important example is the brain. Human brains typically
have 100 billion neurons, each of which is connected to roughly 1000 other
neurons. The structural connectivity of the brain reveals a rich spectrum of
motifs in which small sets of nodes are densely interconnected; such structures
may underlie the wondrous functionality of the brain. These and related
features, such as multiple phase transitions in the density of fixed-size
cliques will be elucidated by the master equation applied to dense
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, a principled model of foraging, which is
based on the starving random walk model, will be investigated. Here the forager
consumes food upon encountering it, thereby depleting the resource locally.
Moreover, the forager starves if it wanders for too long without encountering
food. When regeneration and reproduction are also incorporated, an even richer
phenomenology arises - the dynamics can be steady or oscillatory, with a large-
scale spatial organization of foragers and resources. These features will be
elucidated by exploiting first-passage and stochastic processes and by large-
scale simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's
efforts to develop a massive open online course on topics related to statistical
physics.