* 1608058
* Automated Computational Design of Composite Li-ion Battery Electrodes Microstructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marcello Canova, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 319,995.00

PI: Soghrati, Soheil&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1608058&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to develop an integrated computational approach
to model and predict the performance of electrodes in Li-ion batteries. The
value of understanding and developing models for Li-ion batteries is very
significant, since these are very commonly used for energy storage. The proposed
research could lead to improved performance for applications in hybrid and
electric vehicles, by replacing the currently applied trial and error approach
to electrode design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will quantify the
optimal microstructural features of composite electrodes used in lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs) via an integrated computational materials engineering (ICME)
approach. While LIBs are the primary technology for secondary energy storage,
significant advancements are still needed to improve their power and energy
densities for application in the transportation sector. Remarkable improvement
in the LIBs performance can be achieved by optimizing the electrode design to
maximize the conductivity and surface areas. However, due to inability to
realistically model the intricate heterostructure of this composite material,
design processes are currently dominated by trial-and-error practices, often
leading to sub-optimal designs and significant development time and cost. This
proposal aims at overcoming this barrier by developing a new design optimization
framework consisting of: (i) extracting hierarchical multiscale imaging data of
the electrode microstructure; (ii) developing the ability to automatically
create realistic virtual models of the electrode heterostructure based on
imaging data; (iii) simulating the multiphysics response of the electrode using
an advanced finite element method; (iv) validating the models via experimental
testing of coin-cell prototypes; (v) identifying the optimal microstructures
that yield highest power and energy densities via a multi-objective genetic
algorithm. A hierarchical interface-enriched finite element method (HIFEM) will
serve as the main computational engine for simulating the multiphysics behavior
of the electrode during charge/discharge cycles. The HIFEM yields the same
precision and convergence rate as those of the standard FEM using simple
structured meshes that are completely independent of the problem morphology. The
HIFEM will be integrated with a virtual prototyping algorithm relying on Non-
Uniform Rational Basis Splines (NURBS) to create realistic 3D microstructural
models of the composite electrode based on hierarchical imaging data involving
x-ray microtomography, focused ion beam tomography, and electron microscopy. To
accurately predict the power and energy densities associated with various
designs of the electrode, a high fidelity computational model will be
implemented to simulate the electro-chemo-mechanical response of the LIB.
Furthermore, a fully parallel computing module will be deployed for this
automated computational pipeline to both create virtual microstructural models
of the electrode and simulate its multiphysics behavior. If successful, the
proposed project will lead to the development of a computational framework for
the virtual design of composite electrodes. The fundamental knowledge generated
through this research will benefit several industries heavily using LIBs in
their products, such as the automotive, aerospace, and portable electronics.
Moreover, the modeling capabilities that will be developed during the term of
this project can be employed for the treatment of a broader range of ICME
problems with similar microstructural complexities. To integrate the research,
outreach, and education in this project, these tasks will be pursued: (i) strong
www and social media presence to facilitate outreach to the public and
scientific communities; (ii) participating in K-12 outreach programs organized
by Ohio State University (OSU); (iii) training and mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students and integrating research outcomes into the curriculum;
(iv) outreach to middle school students via Translating Engineering Research to
K-8 program, which will also engage OSU's undergraduate research assistants as
career ambassadors.