* 1608022
* Nanostructured surface modification for antimicrobial effectiveness and cytocompatibility
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;Fighting infections with antibiotics and antimicrobials
has led to resistant "super bugs". On the other hand, bacteria do not build up
resistance to long-known, naturally occurring antimicrobial peptides (AMPs).
However, AMP structural complexity precludes practical preparation of large
quantities. Secondly, most attempts to make "AMP mimics" have resulted in
materials that are toxic to human cells. These bottlenecks prompted a search for
AMP-like antimicrobials that led to new molecular "brushes" combining chemical
species with opposite characteristics: alone, bristle "A" kills both bacteria
and human cells; alone, bristle "B" is friendly to bacteria and human cells.
Surprisingly, when A and B are combined in the same brush, A-bristles killed
only bacteria and B- bristles "protected" human cells. Going forward, research
is aimed at incorporating these AB-brushes into the surface of polymers used to
make medical devices. By "tuning" composition and processing, an economical
pathway will result in economical "overcoats" for reducing the incidence of
infections. Participation of women and underrepresented minorities (&gt;50%) in
research activities follows a parallel goal of contributing to achievement of
societally relevant outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is tailoring polymer surfaces and correlation of
physical properties with bio-interactions. The approach is surface concentration
of polymer brushes, which have been independently shown to have amphiphilic
character in solution that mimics naturally occurring antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs). These functional brushes are copolymers containing quaternary (or
related) side chains that introduce charge and cell membrane disruption and,
conversely, hydrophilic polyethylene glycol side chains that are biocompatible.
Brushes are incorporated into segmented or random copolymers followed by
combination into blends as a minor component. Thin films of brush-containing
overcoats on substrate polymers greatly change surfaces characteristics.
Substrate polymers for these investigations are polyurethanes and silicones,
which are often used in biomedical applications. Physical properties include
contact angles and accessible surface charge density (zeta potentials, dye
adsorption). Through interdisciplinary collaborations these results are
correlated with interfacial interactions with bacteria and human cells. This
interdisciplinary research provides a broadening educational experience for
chemical engineering students who become experts in polymer synthesis and
surface science. These students get to test new ideas for real outcomes in a
biosafety level 2 laboratory in the VCU School of Medicine (antimicrobials) and
the VCU Center for Engineering and Medicine (cytocompatibility).