* 1608559
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Dominic Evangelista, Evangelista             Dominic        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2018
* USD 197,616.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Dominic A. Evangelista&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1608559&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological
Collections. The fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow
to take transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ
biological collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan
for this fellowship to Dominic A. Evangelista is "Evolution and diversification
of Blaberoid cockroaches." The primary host institution for this fellowship is
Mus√©um national d'Histoire naturelle (MNHN) of Paris, France and the sponsoring
scientists are Frederic Legendre (of the MNHN) and Akito Kawahara (co-sponsoring
at Florida Museum of Natural History). Funding is provided in partnership with
NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how shifts in biodiversity are driven
by biotic and abiotic factors is a major goal of evolutionary biology. This
project explores phylogenetic diversification using as a model lineage the
cockroaches (the super-family Blaberoidea), a group that is ubiquitous, diverse,
and economically important. Blaberoid cockroaches are highly diverse (3600
species) and there are no tested hypotheses for what drove their
diversification. The Fellow is exploring three paradigms as diversity drivers:
1) Large changes in genital morphology that prevent interbreeding of lineages;
2) evolution of novel parental care strategies; and 3) invasion of new
biogeographical ranges. The questions addressed by this research include: (1)
What is the phylogeny of Blaberoidea?; (2) Where on the phylogenetic tree, and
when in evolutionary time, did the major increases in diversification rates
occur in Blaberoidea?; and (3) Which evolutionary events (as in the three
paradigms above) best predict increases in diversity? The first goal is being
achieved through phylogenetic reconstruction using thorough taxon sampling,
next-gen sequencing and phylogenomic methods. Using the phylogenetic tree, a
major product of this research, the Fellow is identifying points where there
have been increases in diversification rates. Shifts in these rates are then
being used in the context of trait changes to understand how traits may have
driven diversification in Blaberoidea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is
receiving advanced training in next-generation phylogenetic methods and engaging
in several broader impacts including: (1) mentoring students, (2) providing
science outreach to young people, and (3) generating intellectual products with
a societal impact. The Fellow is training undergraduate and graduate students in
state-of-the-art techniques including Illumina sequencing, library prep,
targeted enrichment and phylogenetic methodology. As an American scientist
travelling abroad, the Fellow is taking advantage of the opportunity to do
science outreach in a community where he has a novel cultural perspective.
Specifically, he is doing numerous outreach events at local grade schools,
including insect display exhibitions, interactions with live pet cockroaches,
and an age-appropriate research talk. The goals of these events are to expose
students to insect biodiversity, show science as an achievable career, and
communicate research findings. This project involves insects that illicit strong
reactions among the general population. By broadly publicizing the research
findings, the Fellow is teaching the general public about the amazing
biodiversity of cockroaches and providing more positive attention to these
interesting insects.