* 1608297
* Polypeptoids as model materials for studying the role of monomer sequence and chain shape on block copolymer self-assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Rachel Segalman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2022
* USD 671,378.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers that form patterns
on the nanometer scale are important components of adhesives and next-generation
flexible and rubbery materials. Being able to control this patterning in next-
generation polymers is important for applications such as nanolithography,
flexible electronics, and biomedicine. These polymers have much more complicated
chemical structures and molecular-scale shapes than typical polymer molecules.
This project is targeted at understanding how complexity in the molecule's
chemical structure and shape affects its ability to form patterns involving the
mutual packing of many molecules. To do this, molecules will be designed and
studied that are inspired by biological polymers (proteins) but allow for tuning
of their shape, stiffness, and chemical structure. Undergraduate and graduate
student researchers will be trained at national research user-facilities,
participate in local and national scientific meetings, and interact closely with
research collaborators. Combining both research and learning to interact in the
broader scientific community comprises an integral part of the educational
experience for graduate students bound for either industrial careers or the
academic world. Furthermore, the PI will partner with the UCSB Center for
Science and Engineering Partnerships to incorporate a diverse cadre of incoming
community-college transfer students into the research group to both ease
transfer shock and provide research experience. A robust program of "Science
Night" outreach activities at Santa Barbara/Goleta elementary and middle schools
will continue to generate excitement in STEM fields among a new generation of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equilibrium self-assembled mesostructures in block
copolymers arise from the competition between enthalpic segregation of
dissimilar blocks, liquid crystalline interactions, composition, and the
mismatch in scaling dimensions between blocks. The ability to synthesize
sequence-specific polypeptoids at gram scale presents a unique opportunity to
directly test predictions of copolymer self-assembly that suggest both
'blockiness' and gradient strength in a copolymer sequence impacts the chain's
ability to minimize free energy by sorting monomers to the preferred side of the
interface. Furthermore, the chain persistence length is tunable on a single
chemical platform by controlling the sequence, side chain chirality, and
bulkiness. This platform provides the conformational (persistence length)
control necessary to explore the continuum of semiflexible chain shapes between
the rod and coil limits. In addition, the fundamental role of asymmetry in
contributing long-range entropic effects to the free energy of mixing will be
explored. The goal of this project is to develop a deep understanding of how
sequence and chain shape impact the free energy contributions to block copolymer
self-assembly. It is expected that this fundamental understanding will guide the
design of semiflexible and sequence-defined block copolymers and ultimately
impact fields as diverse as organic optoelectronics and biomaterials.