* 1608843
* RET Site: Optics Research Experience for Teachers in Native American Schools (O-RETinas)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 499,038.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, entitled Optics Research Experience for Teachers in Native American
Schools (O-RETinas), at the University of Arizona (UA), Engineering Research
Center (ERC) for Integrated Access Networks (CIAN), will expose K-14 STEM
teachers and community college faculty, serving Native American communities and
students nationwide, to cutting-edge research on photonic materials and devices
for optical communication which will replace current electronic technology.
Keeping the U.S. in an information technology leadership position will require
developing dense, integrated optoelectronic systems that extend the capabilities
of the current fiber network core, while retaining the same cost as today's
electronic access network. The interdisciplinary nature of optics and photonics,
coupled with real-world industry experiences applied within the context of
Native American values will transform K-14 classrooms and provide fertile ground
for developing creative problem-based course modules in math, physics,
electrical engineering, optical engineering, and technology that align with
state and national standards, motivating students toward pursuit of STEM
degrees. CIAN will partner with the nationally acclaimed Teachers in Industry
(TII) program of UA's College of Education and local STEM companies in this
program. The program addresses identified barriers for precollege Native
American students who lag significantly behind other minority groups in college
matriculation, retention and graduation, particularly in engineering. The
industry exposure O-RETinas teachers will gain as a result of their
participation will provide tools to improve STEM curriculum and encourage the
pursuit of STEM education among Native American students, thus creating the
potential for local economic growth and a diverse engineering workforce. This
program has the potential to exhibit to the indigenous communities nationwide
that academic and industry stakeholders in communities are addressing the need
for more Native American students in higher education, which ultimately may
benefit their communities. Through the partnership with TII, RET participants
will learn transformative teaching techniques to transfer engineering and
industry knowledge to their students. The O-RETinas program is also addressing
the issue of retention of teachers in rural districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period this RET Site will offer an
intensive summer research program to a total of 30 STEM precollege teachers and
community college faculty who will join research teams performing hands on
research on topics including improved fiber optics, waveguide materials, short-
pulsed lasers, micro-fabrication, and silicon photonics and have opportunities
to apply research and lab techniques in industry settings. The research
experience will also include: an industry practicum; earning graduate
professional development credits through TII; attending Native American focused
workshops that discuss integrating optical sciences into Native American
culture; and receiving training in best practices for curriculum development
with the expertise of business and research communities, and applying these
experiences and knowledge in the context of Native American values to create
lesson plans, hands-on activities, and course units for their classrooms.
Dissemination of the results of RET participants' research projects, through
poster sessions and national conferences such as AISES and NSTA, will broadly
disseminate innovative lesson plans and course units.