* 1608398
* Structure, Composition and Ionic Conduction in Amorphous Lithium Solid Electrolyte
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Yan Wang, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 413,643.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A suitable solid electrolyte has become the
bottleneck for developing high-performance solid-state lithium ion batteries.
The knowledge gained from this project can give direct guidance to search for
and design solid electrolyte materials for lithium ion batteries. Such
advancements are crucial for solid-state lithium ion batteries requiring high
power and energy density, and further enable the use of a ceramic electrolyte in
other applications. The timely design and insertion of high-performance battery
materials are critical to the global competitiveness of US manufacturing as well
as minimization of the negative impact to the environment. The project is also
expected to have widespread impact on several scientific and technological
communities including electrochemistry, materials science, energy storage,
materials processing and synthesis, and solid-state devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: While there have been a myriad of
research activities into solid electrolytes, fundamental understanding on
amorphous phase materials has been lacking. This project is based on the
complementary expertise in simulations, syntheses, and evaluation of battery
materials. It is enabling the team to gain fundamental understanding of
chemistry-processing-structure-property-performance relationships for the
amorphous lithium lanthanum titanium oxide, and helping with the design of
better solid electrolyte materials with high ionic conductivity and stability.
In addition to safety impact of solid-state electrolyte on lithium ion
batteries, the project also a) educates students to be professionals mastering
experimental approaches with cross-disciplinary knowledge of materials and
batteries; b) encourages students to make presentations at professional meetings
to improve communication skills; c) fosters students' writing skills through
peer reviewed journal publications; d) participates in activities to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups through programs such as Frontiers at
Worcester Polytechnic Institute; e) creates three open mini-courses on
electrochemistry, lithium ion batteries, and ceramic electrolyte for solid-state
lithium ion batteries for engineers, scientists, and student self-learners; and
f) strengthens the K-12 outreach program with an emphasis on training women and
minorities in collaboration with Worcester Technical High School.