* 1608266
* Conference: International Congress Of Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions. Portland, Oregon, July 17-21, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Brett Tyler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

There is a growing awareness that the microbial populations that encompass them
are an integral component of the life history of plants and the functioning of
plant ecosystems. Understanding of how plants and their immune systems interact
with pathogens and symbionts continues to rapidly advance. At the same time new
understanding is emerging of how plants interact with broader populations of
environmental microbes, especially resulting from the application of genomics,
bioinformatics and systems biology. These new levels of understanding are
leading to safer, more effective and more sustainable ways to manage plant pests
and diseases in crops and natural ecosystems. The latest research findings on
these topics will be presented and discussed at the 17th International Congress
on Plant-Microbe Interactions in Portland, Oregon from July 17 through July 21,
2016. This grant will provide partial financial support for 20 promising U.S.
students and postdoctoral scholars to attend this conference. These young
scientists will participate in a small meeting workshop designed to enrich their
engagement and participation. Established scientists and the supported
participants will work in teams throughout the meeting to critically discuss the
research findings. In addition, the students and postdocs will be contribute to
the dissemination of the conference findings by releasing daily meeting
highlights via social networking and publishing a final congress report.

Throughout its history since 1982, the International Congress on Plant-Microbe
Interactions has been a unique and comprehensive congress covering both plant-
pathogenic and plant-beneficial microbial interactions in both model and major
crop plants, which distinguishes it from more specialized meetings. The 17th IC-
MPMI will convene in Portland, Oregon from July 17 through July 21, 2016. In
this meeting, the plenary and concurrent sessions will highlight the latest
advances in fundamental research as well as translational studies critical for
advancements in agricultural science. Highlights include a strong focus on the
plant microbiome and multiway associations, a renewed focus on symbiotic
associations, and new sessions on RNA-mediated interactions, population
genomics, modeling and systems biology, and problems in the developing world. As
with previous IC-MPMI congresses, the broader impacts of the 2016 congress will
include the sharing of emerging data, the establishment and strengthening of
international collaborations, and development of innovative strategies and
technology to improve plant health, productivity and security. The participation
of US scientists, especially graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, will
be critical for the success and vitality of this congress. The workshop
activities planned for the participants supported by this grant will enhance
participation and learning by these young scientists, help them build their
professional networks and communication skills, as well as inform others who are
not able to attend this meeting.