* 1608691
* Future Internet Architecture Fall 2015 Investigator Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2017
* USD 31,760.00

This award supports a Future Internet Architecture Next-Phase (FIA-NP)
investigator meeting in November, 2015. This meeting focused on lessons learned
and open issues, including metrics for evaluation and availability, a
presentation of network requirements by DARPA, and status reports on
environments where the FIA-NP architectures are being deployed, experimented
upon, and tested.

Intellectual Merit: The range of topics discussed represent important aspects of
the FIA-NP program. The discussions are intended to bring out implications of
the design decisions within each of the funded network designs. Cross-
fertilization of the projects is an important aspect of the overall program, and
these workshops are a critical means to do so.

Broader Impacts: The broader goal of the NSF FIA-NP program is enhancing the
relevance and impact of the NSF program of network research, intellectual
enrichment of the network research community, and the contribution of new
concepts and thought leadership to the future of the Internet. The program, and
the workshops in particular, are a means to train a cohort of academic network
researchers in the practice of long-range architectural thinking. The program
has the potential to contribute to a future Internet that is materially more
secure, robust, economically viable, and fit for the needs of society than the
Internet of today. The summary of this workshop, which is posted on the FIA
website http://www.nets-fia.net/ for public dissemination, will be a
contribution to this broader goal.