* 1608714
* OP: Towards high performance nanowire photonic devices: Novel testing techniques and device structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Thomas Boggess, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2019
* USD 374,920.00

Abstract title: Towards high performance nanowire photonic devices: Novel
testing techniques and device structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Non-
technical: &lt;br/&gt;This grant will focus on research and development of
semiconductor nanowires, materials with diameters just a few tens of nanometers
but lengths of microns. Semiconductor nanowires create the possibility of
structuring materials in all three dimensions, with a greater range of elements
and compounds within the nanowire, and through ordered arrays and patterns of
nanowires. The importance of structuring semiconductor materials for photonic
devices (devices that work with light) is illustrated historically. For example,
semiconductor heterostructures have made possible solid state lighting, high
efficiency light emitting diodes that are replacing incandescent and fluorescent
lighting (2014 Nobel Prize in Physics). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For semiconductor
nanowires to become competitive, a number of challenges need to be overcome. One
is that the quality of semiconductor nanowires are currently far below that of
conventional planar materials (semiconductors arranged in layers). In this
grant, we will use a novel optical technique to resolve the nanowire quality in
different parts of the wire, e.g. sides, ends, interior. Second, we will seek to
develop semiconductor nanowires that emit at mid-infrared wavelengths with novel
semiconductor materials combinations, such as layering within the nanowires and
further reducing the nanowire diameter. Third, we will seek to modify and
control the light emission characteristics of the semiconductor nanowire devices
through patterning and positioning of nanowires in arrays.&lt;br/&gt;The
rationale for the proposed study is that it will establish a strong scientific
framework by identifying the key mechanisms needed to develop high performance
mid-infrared III-V nanowire photonic devices. Furthermore, the project goals are
synergistic with our broader impacts goal of generating more public awareness,
excitement, and understanding in how physics, engineering, and computer modeling
can be used to develop technologies that we use in our daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Technical: &lt;br/&gt;A multi-faceted
program is proposed to investigate mid-infrared emitters and metamaterial
optical components from bottom-up, III-V nanowires and nanowire
heterostructures. Due to a capacity to accommodate strain through lateral
expansion, new material combinations become possible in nanowires. New alloy
compositions and substrate materials can be contemplated in indium arsenide
(InAs)/indium arsenide antimonide (InAsSb) superlattice nanowires compared to
planar materials, a promising mid-infrared material due to remarkably a small
non-radiative Shockley-Read-Hall recombination coefficient but unfortunately
high non-radiative Auger recombination coefficient. New material combinations
and lateral quantum confinement in nanowires give new possibilities to suppress
Auger with bandstructure engineering. Radiative recombination of carriers in
nanowires will be modified and controlled by variation of nanowire size,
pattern, and periodicity. Mid-infrared III-V nanowires will be grown using
selective area epitaxy, a technique giving precise control over nanowire pattern
and size. A novel optical measurement technique will be used to spatially
resolve recombination coefficients (Shockley-Read-Hall, Auger, radiative) inside
nanowires. Nanowire emission from light emitting diodes to amplified spontaneous
emission to lasing will be measured. Nanowires will also be investigated as
passive mid-infrared optical components to improve light extraction and
collimation from light emitting diodes. Nanowire filters and 2D photonic
crystals will be modeled, grown, and measured.