* 1608725
* Designing Highly Polar Self-Assembled Molecular Piezoelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Geoffrey Hutchison, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in flexible electronics offer
tremendous promise for lightweight devices, enabling applications from mobile
computing to medical implants. Simultaneously, the demand for portable energy
solutions has risen, since integrated energy storage or conversion is critical
to power these technologies. Mechanical energy is ubiquitous but challenging to
use effectively. Capturing this inexpensive and readily available energy source
by converting between mechanical force and electrical current can lead to
innovative advances such as self-powered sensors for touch, vibration or force,
or flexible touch screens. Existing materials used to harvest mechanical energy
are often inflexible, brittle, and hard to process. The vast potential
applications, coupled with key limitations of current materials, create a
compelling need for a new perspective on the conversion of mechanical energy,
from the bottom up. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, this project focuses on fundamental understanding and optimizing these
materials first as molecules, then as single molecular layers, and then in films
and devices. The result will be a new family of flexible, compressible materials
for microscale energy generation and energy harvesting. Beyond the research
component, the project provides training to high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in both the interdisciplinary field of nanomaterials and the
combination of experimental and computational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project integrates synthesis, characterization, and simulation-driven materials
design to develop a family of molecular solid piezoelectric materials for energy
harvesting applications. The central hypothesis underlying the research is that
directed self-assembly of conformationally-driven molecular piezoelectrics based
on peptides and related bio-inspired oligomers leads to materials with far
superior characteristics (piezo response, electrical properties, flexibility)
than current piezo materials. The project builds on an existing collaboration
and strong preliminary results that predict high piezo response from
conformational changes of polar molecules in an applied electric field. The
project advances the synthesis, modeling, and characterization of new
electroresponsive bio-inspired materials. At each stage, the research identifies
responsive molecular targets as well as the properties needed to produce optimal
layers and films. These results contribute to the fundamental understanding of
electromechanical properties of biomaterials, including accurate geometries of
molecules in the condensed phase surrounded by nanoscale electric fields, such
as ions or dipoles.