* 1608327
* RUI: Electrochemically Modified Electrodeposited Alloy Materials for Energy Storage Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Hampton, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 169,279.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of energy storage
materials will be essential in years to come as alternative energy sources
become an increasing part of the world's energy portfolio. Stable, high-
capacity, efficient, and inexpensive battery materials are needed, but no one
type of storage solution will the best for every type of application. The focus
of this research program is to study a class of compounds called metal
hexacyanoferrates (HCFs), which show promise as battery materials. HCFs consist
of more earth-abundant elements, which will decrease the cost for future device
implementations, and because of their open crystal structure, they have
increased stability over many charge-discharge cycles. With support from the
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program of the Division of Materials
Research, Associate Professor of Physics Jennifer Hampton and a team of
undergraduate students at Hope College will fabricate HCF thin films using
electrochemical methods. They will quantify the effects of both composition and
structure on the energy storage properties of the resulting materials. By doing
so, they will increase our understanding of these HCF films, opening up a
broader range of materials available for use in advanced battery technologies.
This interdisciplinary research program will involve undergraduate students with
interests in physics, chemistry, and materials engineering. The students will
contribute to research at the boundaries between the different disciplines and
will receive training in a significant area of new science which will be broadly
applicable to a variety of careers in the modern
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open-
framework intercalation compounds such as metal hexacyanoferrates (HCFs) have
gained increasing interest as materials for energy storage applications. The
goal of this research program is to characterize HCF films made by
electrochemically modifying metal thin film substrates. Associate Professor of
Physics Jennifer Hampton and a team of undergraduate students at Hope College
will fabricate HCF films and characterize their charge storage and charge
transport properties. Specifically, by taking advantage of the wide array of
deposition and post-processing techniques available with electrochemistry,
starting materials with varying metal composition and deliberately controlled
microstructure will be produced for the subsequent HCF formation step. By
quantifying the effects of both composition and structure on the resulting
charge storage properties of the HCF films, the team will advance the
fundamental knowledge of charge transport in this class of open-framework
intercalation compounds and will assist in the development of advanced battery
technologies for specific applications. Additionally, a new laboratory unit on
AC electrochemical analysis will be developed for use in an upper-level physics
laboratory course at Hope College, strengthening the connections between current
research and education in the context of an undergraduate institution. This work
is funded by the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program of the Division of
Materials Research.