* 1608760
* Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study of Emergent Orders
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Vesna Mitrovic, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: The technological drive to find new materials with
controllable desired properties for advanced applications in information,
sensing, and energy technologies, requires understanding of the new forms of
quantum matter. A central issue in quantum materials research is study of the
combined effects of strong electronic correlations with local entanglement of
spin and orbital degrees of freedom, so-called spin-orbit coupling (SOC).
Predicting emergent properties represents a huge theoretical problem since the
presence of SOC implies that the spin is not a good quantum number. Existing
theories propose the emergence of a multitude of exotic quantum phases,
distinguishable by either local charge/orbital or local spin properties. This
award supports research on extensive study of these emergent phases using local
microscopic measurements, designed to concurrently probe spin, charge/orbital,
and lattice properties. The transformative goal of this research is to identify
an appropriate theoretical framework for describing systems with both strong
correlations and SOC and so promote the discovery of materials with designed
properties. The researchers at Brown University and National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory simultaneously probe magnetic and orbital/charge properties while
subjecting the samples to uniaxial stress, strain, and applied magnetic field,
to tune competing interactions. A strong educational component is imbedded in
the project by establishing a challenging training ground for students, both
graduate and undergraduate, who will be involved in the scientific, modeling,
and technical developments.

Technical Abstract: This research program focuses on the experimental
investigation of emergent orders in strongly correlated electron systems with
notable spin-orbit coupling (SOC) using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques with the goal to decipher the complex interplay between different
interactions that leads to the emergent quantum states of matter. These NMR
measurements are designed to concurrently probe spin, charge/orbital, and
lattice degrees of freedom at the relevant low energy, while subjecting the
samples to symmetry-breaking uniaxial stress, strain, and magnetic field. To
achieve these objectives, the researchers develop a novel NMR approach, based on
the use of surface coils, to allow for both in-situ stress and strain variation.
Initial emphasis of the research is on Fe-based superconductor model systems.
The team performs NMR in the same experimental conditions of applied uniaxial
stress and strain as those of transport properties. Correlating these findings
provides a picture of the microscopic nature of electronic liquid crystals
(nematic) and magnetic states; the coexistence of the multiple order parameters,
and of the role their associated fluctuations play in establishing
unconventional superconductivity. To provide general understanding of intrinsic
properties of electronic nematic phases, this work extends from unconventional
superconductors (doped Mott insulators) to the magnetic Mott insulators with
strong SOC (e.g. 5d-electrons double perovskite systems). The transformative
goal of the research is to understand electronic mechanism of nematicity in
systems with both localized and itinerant electrons, and to help identify an
appropriate theoretical framework for describing systems in which correlations
and SOC are of comparable energy scale and neither can be treated
perturbatively. The participating graduate and undergraduate students will gain
valuable research experience at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.