* 1608926
* SusChEM: Mechanistic Investigation of CO activation by Vanadium Nitrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yilin Hu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,996.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division funds Drs. Markus Ribbe and Yilin Hu from the University of California,
Irvine to investigate the mechanism of carbon monoxide activation by a unique
enzyme. The world is in need of sustainable supplies of carbon fuels while at
the same time needs to address the accumulation of carbon wastes which result
from the incomplete or complete combustion of carbon fuels. The ability of the
enzyme to convert these carbon wastes back into hydrocarbon fuels under mild
conditions may be an effective strategy to recycle them back into the usable
fuel sources. Drs. Ribbe and Hu are studying how the enzyme may accomplish these
goals. Additionally the multidisciplinary nature of the project and the wide
varieties of techniques employed are providing abundant opportunities for the
education and training of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined
biochemical and spectroscopic approaches are being used to investigate the
mechanism of CO activation and reduction by V-nitrogenase, with an emphasis on
defining the complete product profile and the reaction pathway of this process.
Knowledge acquired through this research is being used to provide mechanistic
insights into the reaction of enzymatic CO conversion, enable engineering of
nitrogenase-based hydrocarbon-producing microbes, and inform designs of novel
CO-and CO2-reducing catalysts. Research and education is being integrated
through the project by (i) training undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate
researcher on the bench, where all individuals engage in joint efforts that
enrich the proposed research through the diversity of learning perspectives, and
where underrepresented groups of individuals are incorporated to further improve
the diversity of the proposed activities; and (ii) organizing outreach events
and designing relevant courses that focus on nitrogenase and related research,
where students are introduced to the broad topic of global energy/environmental
problems and potential biotechnological solutions to these problems, and where
motivated students are recruited for the research activities.