* 1608258
* OP: Coherence and Energy Transfer Processes in Lattice Plasmon Lasers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,985.00

Nontechnical description: Lasers are ubiquitous in products such as readers for
Blu-ray discs and bar-code scanners at supermarkets. Shrinking the size of
lasers will enable their use in exciting new applications, from ultra-sensitive
miniature sensors to faster computer chips to broadband wireless networks.
However, understanding how nanoscale-sized lasers operate and amplify light
remains a challenge. This work aims to uncover the fundamental operational
principles of nanoscale lasers, given that their physical structure is
significantly different from that of traditional lasers. Optics and photonics is
a major NSF and US initiative, and broader impacts of this project focus on
light and nano-photonics activities. Examples include introducing ideas in nano-
photonics to the public by writing opinion pieces, serving the scientific
community through editorial roles, and hosting hands-on activities on lasers and
other optical phenomena for local high school students and teachers. Finally,
drawing upon their editorial experience, the project leaders participate in
workshops that focus on ethics in publishing and handling of controversial
research topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project
addresses experimental and theoretical studies of the mechanisms of coherence
and energy transfer processes in nanoscale lasers comprising arrays of metal
nanoparticles, in which surface plasmon excitations drive stimulated emission in
organic dyes. To date, only a cursory understanding of how dye molecules affect
population inversion at the nanoscopic level and lasing at the macroscopic level
exists. This research aims to address this knowledge gap in nano-lasers using
lattice plasmons as a model optical feedback system. Unlike in conventional
lasers, quantification of loss in the cavity structures studied here is not
straightforward. This project addresses a new approach to understanding
competing energy transfer processes in the lasing action of lattice plasmon
lasers based on coherence, cavity size, and ultra-fast characteristics.
Electrodynamics coupled to density matrix methods serve to model coherence
effects in these lasers.