* 1608834
* Collaborative Research: A New Instrument for the Large Binocular Telescope to Expand Study of the Composition of Exoplanetary Atmospheres
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Michael Skrutskie, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 675,618.00

During the past 20 years, astronomers have discovered thousands of planets
around other stars. It is extremely hard to study these so-called "exoplanets,"
because the glare of light from their parent stars hides them. Turbulence in
Earth's atmosphere greatly complicates studies using large ground-based
telescopes. To counteract this effect, most large telescopes now employ a
technique called "adaptive optics," or AO, to stabilize the image of a star.
With the image stabilized, astronomers can use other devices to suppress most of
the starlight, enabling them to study the much fainter exoplanets around them.
Many of the giant exoplanets radiate at thermal infrared wavelengths.
Capitalizing on this fact, the Investigators will develop a spectrograph to
operate at these wavelengths for installation on the Large Binocular Telescope,
or LBT. The LBT, located on a mountaintop in Arizona, consists of twin
8.4-meter-diameter telescopes that already use AO. A prototype of the new
spectrograph is already in operation on the LBT. This project serves the
national interest by developing a state-of-the-art instrument that will be used
to promote our knowledge of the composition of exoplanets. The Intellectual
Merit of the project comes from the ability of the new spectrograph to carry out
studies of exoplanets, disks around young stars, and bodies in our Solar System.
The Broader Impacts involve the training of graduate students who will become
the next generation of instrument developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Investigators will develop the world's first adaptive-optics-fed, integral-field
spectrograph for the thermal infrared and integrate it into the twin 8.4-meter
Large Binocular Telescope. A prototype of the instrument, dubbed "ALES,"
developed by the same team, is already in operation and producing high-contrast
imaging and spectroscopy. The modular aspect of the instrument, which is
afforded by filter wheels that contain a variety of optical components, is a
novel and flexible feature. The Intellectual Merit of the project derives from
its potential to obtain spectra of gas-giant exoplanets and other astronomical
objects that radiate in the thermal infrared, pointing the way to interesting
science observations in the future. The Broader Impacts are focused on
developing graduate students with the skills necessary to design the next
generation of astronomical instrumentation.