* 1608628
* From Carbon-Rich Bowls to Nanobelts and Warped Nanographene: Self-Assembly and Metal Ion Intercalation Upon Multi-Charging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Marina Petrukhina, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This NSF award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division supports the project by Professor Marina A.
Petrukhina, a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at the State
University of New York at Albany. This project is to explore a diverse set of
novel nanocarbon materials ranging from carbon bowls to nanobelts and warped
nanographene. Studies of the addition of several electrons by novel
nanostructured systems may improve our understanding of their fundamental
properties. The research may also expand the applications of carbon-rich
materials in several technological fields ranging from electronics to energy
storage. This research lies at the interface of organometallic, supramolecular
and nanochemistry and provides unique educational and research experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students at the University at Albany. The project is
designed to engage the students in a modern interdisciplinary research in
synthetic, structural and materials chemistry and thus, to prepare them for
successful careers in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes a
broad fundamental investigation of chemical reduction processes occurring on
novel curved and strained nanocarbon systems with different structural
topologies ranging from carbon-rich bowl-shaped polyarenes to nanobelts and
warped nanographene sheets. This diverse set of structurally well-defined carbon
materials provides unique opportunities to study their multi-electron uptake
properties at the molecular level. Specifically, investigations of the
structural consequences of adding multiple electrons to the curved and bent
surfaces are being pursued. Studies of alkali metal intercalation and self-
assembly trends related to the non-planar and highly charged carbanions is also
studied. As a result, this research may improve our fundamental understanding of
the redox behavior and electron transport properties of carbonaceous
nanomaterials having different structures and nanosized dimensions. The project
may assist in describing alkali metal ion intercalation in between non-planar
carbon surfaces, which is important for the advancement of carbon-based anode
materials in energy storage devices. This fundamental research may advance the
materials chemistry applications of curved carbon-rich polyarenes and enhance
education opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at the
University at Albany. The education plan targets training of the next generation
of materials chemists, including women and minorities, and is well integrated
with the research.