* 1608236
* US-French Research Proposal: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of the Multi-Scale Emergence of Parametric Working Memory in Prefrontal Cortex Recurrent Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jeanne Paz, The J. David Gladstone Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 610,001.00

The prefrontal cortex of the brain controls how people remember sizes of things,
such as a number of items or the pitch of a sound, within a short time frame of
about a few seconds. This ability, called parametric working memory (PWM), helps
people to interpret their world, make decisions, and act or behave. Dysfunction
in PWM may be involved in many brain diseases, including Alzheimer's disease,
schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and bipolar disorders.
These diseases affect more than 200 million people worldwide. Through this
research project, researchers will learn more about how the prefrontal cortex
controls PWM in healthy and diseased brains. With this new information, they may
be able to create new treatments for many people suffering from brain diseases.

PWM relies on the persistent activity of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. This
persistent activity is graded such that the firing rate of neurons correlates
with the quantity of things to be remembered, which can emerge from network
interactions with the local microcircuitry. Yet, to robustly display graded
persistent activity, these networks must incorporate neurons with bistability,
such that stable quiescence and activity coexist in their range of input.
Neurons in the prefrontal cortex can display bistability that depends on non-
selective cationic (CAN) currents activated by calcium. However, cellular
bistability in the prefrontal cortex occurs under very specific experimental
conditions of stimulation and neuromodulation. The researchers' overall goal is
to determine whether CAN-mediated conditional bistability in the prefrontal
cortex is a genuine physiological property of neurons and whether it supports
graded persistent activities within local recurrent networks. They will develop
a multidisciplinary research program of computational and experimental analysis
to study properties ranging from molecular interactions to the behavior of
neural networks. With theoretical modeling at the molecular, cellular, and
network levels, extensive numerical simulations, intracellular recordings, and
optogenetics, the researchers will identify and control neural substrates that
mediate PWM. In this way, they will learn the causal mechanisms and dynamic
principles of PWM in the prefrontal cortex, including the multi-stability that
characterizes its graded persistent activity. These efforts will help
researchers to better understand higher cognitive and behavioral functions and
pathologies related to PWM, and also advance theories of fundamental properties
in neuroscience. A companion project is being funded by the French National
Research Agency (ANR).