* 1608509
* Collaborative Research: Towards Communication-Cognizant Voltage Regulation and Energy Management for Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Na Li, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 221,111.00

Power distribution systems have continued to witness transformation in
generation, consumption, and operational landscapes. Sustainability concerns are
driving widespread integration of distributed renewable generation, plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles, demand-response programs, and advanced metering
infrastructure. These emerging devices and resources have the potential to
greatly improve operational efficiency and reliability with the aid of advanced
communication, sensing, and computation capabilities. Nonetheless, distribution
systems are equipped with limited cyber resources in communication, sensing, and
computation. By and large, their supporting cyber infrastructure is, and
continues to be, less reliable and less ubiquitous as compared to that for the
bulk power transmission grid. Challenged by this status quo, this project will
develop novel coordination algorithms for operating distribution systems, which
are cognizant to the limited availability and low quality of the underlying
communication and the cyber infrastructure in general in the foreseen future.
Successful completion of this project will promote increased deployment of
distributed energy resources and cyber infrastructures in distribution systems.
In addition, results from this project will be shared with industry in order to
have an impact on practice. Project results will also be employed in the
development of educational materials for middle school students and a new
undergraduate course.

This project will develop communication-cognizant algorithms with provable
performance in terms of stability, efficiency, and reliability. The algorithms
will be designed to be robust to different imperfect communication scenarios,
such as limited bandwidth, link failures, and communication delays, with
graceful degradation performance. One key feature of the algorithms is the
coordination between the coupled physical distribution systems and cyber
communication networks. Building upon mathematical tools from optimization and
control, the team plans to revitalize the algorithmic design by leveraging
physical measurements to complement the cyber communication networks for
accelerated information diffusion. The research project consists of four
cohesive thrusts: (1) Developing and analyzing algorithms that use no
communications; (2) Designing distributed algorithms to approach global
efficiency; (3) Enabling robust designs against imperfect communication; and (4)
Unifying theoretical analysis with real-world implementations, and coordinating
the design of cyber-physical architectures. The project will deliver: (i) a
suite of algorithmic tools under various realistic communication scenarios that
incorporate models of key system components; (ii) performance analysis for the
developed algorithms in an online and uncertain implementation; and (iii)
algorithmic validations in a realistically represented numerical environment.
The research will fulfill the objectives of advancing the operational goals of
power distribution systems while allowing for practical communication
architectures and algorithmic implementations under a more versatile and low
investment environment.