* 1608762
* CDS&amp;E: Enabling Time-critical Decision-support for Disaster Response and Structural Engineering through Automated Visual Data Analytics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Bedrich Benes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

After a disaster, teams of trained engineers are charged with the task of
collecting perishable data. These building reconnaissance teams collect data and
information from the buildings that experienced the disaster, including
photographs and measurements in the region. This information is collected to
better understand the consequences of these events, and to improve the design of
future structures. An enormous amount of images and videos is generated in just
a few days, and to gather the most critical information in the time allowed, the
engineers on these teams must quickly make daily decisions on where and what
data to collect to achieve their mission. This research, which harnesses
powerful computer vision methods to address real world civil engineering
problems, aims to develop efficient methods to analyze and organize the
collected images in the field, thereby enabling teams to collect the most useful
data for building resilient communities worldwide. The project will leverage
decades of experience in field missions from project researchers and domestic
and international collaborators. A diverse set of students will be engaged in
interdisciplinary research with international
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of computer vision methods
to address disaster response and structural engineering problems is not simple
or straightforward. This project will systematically build the knowledge needed
for their successful implementation in time-critical situations. Engineers with
significant field-mission experience will annotate images. These records will
provide the basis for determining the visual contents needed to make decisions
in the field and how the contents are spatially interconnected in the images.
This forms the foundation for determining the prior knowledge that can and must
be included in the deep neural network structures to facilitate rapid decision-
making in the field. To quantitatively evaluate the approach, a reconnaissance
testbed will be established using a diverse set of images from past data
collection missions. The computational time and accuracy will be measured and
documented to establish a detailed profile of the classification results. This
knowledge will enable the team collecting data during a reconnaissance mission
to maximize the value of the data they collect by ensuring that they can
successfully perform a given task, in a certain amount of time, applied to a
suite of images. This capability will provide the evidence on which to base
recommendations for further investigations and/or changes to design guidelines.