* 1608338
* Intrinsically Switchable Ferroelectric Filter Banks for Frequency Agile and Reconfigurable Radios
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 310,000.00

The next generation of wireless communication systems should be able to
intelligently adapt to the environment and reconfigure themselves to exploit
available communication channels while maintaining connectivity, quality of
service, and a long battery life. Such systems must be able to rapidly switch to
different modulation schemes and carrier frequencies to accommodate the required
bandwidth, minimize power consumption and interference. The performance and
functionality of integrated circuits used in radios has steadily improved mostly
as a result of device scaling. In contrast, passive devices such as frequency
selective components (like filters) and radiating elements do not follow
advances predicted by Moore's law for active devices. Currently, filters,
switches and antennas contribute to a large portion of the communications
systems size, complexity and cost. The goal of the proposed project is to
develop high-performance and compact voltage controlled acoustic resonators and
filters operating at radio frequency (RF) and microwave frequencies for the next
generation of communications systems. Developing an understanding of acoustic
wave generation in electrostrictive thin film ferroelectrics will impact other
areas such as acousto-optics and sensors. An important component of this
proposal is the research-based education of both undergraduate and graduate
students. The research is of particular value for students due to its
multidisciplinary nature, involving thin film materials deposition and
characterization, RF filter design, microelectromechanical device fabrication,
acoustic resonator design, fabrication and characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed project is to develop
voltage-controlled bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR) filter banks by employing
the electrostrictive property of thin-film barium strontium titanate (BST).
Ferroelectric BST is a multifunctional material exhibiting many desirable
characteristics that can be exploited for the design of intrinsically switched
resonators and filters. The application of a DC voltage can be used to change
the polarization in ferroelectric material, thereby changing the strength of
electrostriction. This effect is unique, and offers a means of controlling the
generation of acoustic waves through application of a DC bias. The research
approach for the design of novel ferroelectric BST FBAR filter banks will
combine thin-film material growth with filter design based on specific
properties that are unique to thin-film ferroelectrics. In conjunction with
circuit-level design, structural multi-physics simulations will be conducted to
optimize the device structure for best performance. The design for switchable RF
resonators will utilize the high quality factor, high effective
electromechanical coupling coefficient and bias-voltage-dependent piezoelectric
response of optimally designed thin-film BST FBARs. The design approach will
lead to the development of high-performance switchable resonators, filters, and
ultimately filter banks at radio frequencies.