* 1608171
* Transition Metal Doping in Two-Dimensional, Atomically Thin Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,802.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Controlling electrical transport in
semiconductors by impurity doping has enabled an entire generation of
technology. As device length scales shrink, pushing the limits of silicon
technology, new atomically thin semi-conducting materials such as two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides are emerging as a potential
replacement to silicon. While doping control has been perfected for silicon
technology over many decades, controlled synthesis and doping strategies for
atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides are still in their infancy. In
this project, the investigators propose to demonstrate a stable doping strategy
for such materials which involves substitution of the transition metal atom by
an impurity metal. The investigators propose to show how both hole and electron
doping is possible using such an approach. This work could enable controllable
and stable doping of transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets to tune their
carrier type and density, thereby paving the way for next generation electronic
and optoelectronic devices constructed from atomically-thin semiconductors. To
integrate research and teaching, the investigators propose specially designed
interactive learning modules (virtual labs) which will be integrated into the
curriculum at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Outreach includes
demonstrations of the interactive modules to students and teachers from local
area high schools; this will help to popularize science and attract
underrepresented groups to careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;There are
very few reports of direct substitution (doping) of transition metal atoms in
atomically-thin transition metal dichalcogenides. This is likely due to the fact
that transition metal atoms are far more stable than chalcogens and hence much
harder to replace. However initial results by the investigators indicate that
large-area (in situ) transition metal doping for monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides is indeed possible during the chemical vapor deposition growth
process. In this project, the investigators propose first-principles density
functional theory calculations over a wide range of doping concentrations to
understand how the semiconducting and optoelectronic properties of such
materials are affected by transition metal doping. On the experimental side, the
investigators propose to demonstrate that the doping can be systematically tuned
over a wide range. Variable temperature electronic transport measurements, using
a back gated field-effect transistor configuration will be performed to
establish how the material's electronic properties are influenced by doping.
Further, photoluminescence and differential reflectance spectroscopy over a wide
range of temperatures and dopant concentrations will be carried out to
understand how doping affects the optoelectronic properties of the material. The
project will culminate in a technology demonstration featuring an atomically
sharp p-n junction device. To accomplish the above tasks, the investigators have
assembled an interdisciplinary team with complementary expertise. Collaboration
between experimentalists and a theorist will enable the team to develop an in-
depth understanding of the underlying physics and make rapid progress towards
controllably and stably doping atomically-thin transition metal dichalcogenide
materials.