* 1608866
* Ionic competition in protein-nucleic acid interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Junji Iwahara, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,652.00

With this award, Dr. Junji Iwahara from University of Texas Medical Branch
(UTMB) at Galveston is supported to investigate ionic interactions of proteins
and nucleic acids. These proteins and nucleic acids form ion pairs that involve
strong electrostatic interactions between positively and negatively charged
groups. Ion pairs are important for biological molecular functions; however, it
is not well understood how the macromolecular ion pairs are influenced by free
ions in solution. The project team is using light-based methods (nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy) to study the interplay between free ions
and macromolecular ion pairs at protein-DNA interfaces. Because ion pairs are
important for many specific molecular association processes, deeper knowledge of
the ion pairs at molecular interfaces facilitate development of synthetic
compounds in the agricultural, pharmaceutical, and biotechnological industries.
This project enables high school students to participate in the
interdisciplinary research in the investigator's laboratory. Tours of the NMR
facilities are offered to all high school students in UTMB's summer research
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal in this research project is to
understand competition between free ions and macromolecular ion pairs at an
atomic level in a biological system. In particular, the project aims at
understanding the relationship of the ionic competition to the molecular
properties of protein-nucleic acid complexes. In forming intermolecular ion
pairs, the charged moieties of protein side-chains and DNA phosphate groups
compete with free cations (e.g. potassium ions) and anions (e.g. chloride ions)
in solution. The research team is studying the ionic competition at molecular
interfaces in the DNA complexes of the homeodomain DNA binding protein HoxD9 and
the methyl-CpG-binding domain of MeCP2. NMR spectroscopy is used to study the
influence of ionic competition at an atomic level. Isothermal titration
calorimetry and stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy are used to study the
influence of ionic competition on the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of
the complexes at a molecular level. This research project is integrating
biophysical methods with mutagenesis, to delineate the ionic competition and its
role in the protein-nucleic acid interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.