* 1608962
* Spatiotemporal Measurements of the Kondo Cloud
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Goldhaber-Gordon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 339,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Materials at the focus of modern physics
research often feature competition among several ways electrons can organize.
This is both a blessing and a curse, opening rich possibilities but also
hindering basic understanding of these materials. What if one could build an
experimental system which displays the key features believed to drive behavior
of a material of interest, while discarding other effects which might obscure
the fundamental mechanism?&lt;br/&gt;Modern technology such as transistors and
lasers depends on the fact that adding even a small amount of impurities to a
material can drastically alter its properties. Another example of such
sensitivity is the Kondo effect: a few parts per million of magnetic impurities
added to a metal drastically change its low-temperature electrical behavior.
Such an impurity creates a "cloud" of electrons around it, which shields the
magnetic moment of the impurity. This project aims to nanofabricate a device to
measure the spatial extent of this cloud, and to study the competition between
impurity-cloud and impurity-impurity interactions when two such impurities are
brought together. This will shed light on a class of materials known as heavy
fermion metals, in which exactly this competition is suspected to be key, by
realizing the competition in a simplified and highly-controllable
system.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research component, both the principal
investigator and the students have a track record and plans for active
involvement in outreach regarding nanoscience, including short programs for
middle school teachers, and involving high school and college students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
determine the spatial extent of the Kondo screening cloud and study the Kondo-
RKKY competition using a carefully-engineered model system based on gate-defined
quantum dots in a GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure. While the Kondo effect has been
seen and studied in many different systems, a clear measurement of its spatial
extent is still lacking. In the proposed device, the competition between the
inter-impurity interaction and the impurity-bath interaction, suspected to be
key to the behavior of several heavy-fermion compounds, is gate-tunable.
Realizing the effect in a much more controllable nanostructure may elucidate the
rich behavior occurring in those materials, including a quantum phase transition
which could play a key role.&lt;br/&gt;As a complement to precision transport
studies, a scanning gate experiment, where a metallic tip is scanned over the
surface of a nanopatterned bilayer heterostructure, can perturb the Kondo cloud
at a controlled location, providing a direct mapping of the spatial extent of a
quantum many-body state.