* 1608002
* Student interactions with and learning from mastery-inspired online activities
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses an important and widespread deficiency in current online
homework systems that may be reducing the success rate of students interested in
STEM. It will introduce an evolving type of online homework activity that
incorporates results from cognitive science and multimedia learning on the
importance of practice, feedback and worked examples to enable student learning.
A key feature of these activities is that students are given as much (or as
little) practice and support as they need to master the concepts in the
homework. These activities will be incorporated into an introductory physics
course designed for students that are concerned about their ability to succeed
in Engineering at Illinois. Results from this work will serve as a guide for the
development of a complete set of materials to transform the teaching of
introductory physics and improve student outcomes.

The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of the conditions under
which a mastery style online homework activity can improve student learning.
Clinical studies have shown that providing students multiple opportunities to
demonstrate mastery, with animated and narrated solutions between attempts
provides significantly improved learning compared with traditional multi-attempt
homework. However, in-situ studies have shown the mastery requirement can be
frustrating to students. This project will investigate the impact that
improvements in the messaging, delivery and content of the activities have on
student experience and learning. In particular, students will begin with an
activity that allows them to self-identify the advantages of the new approach.
The content will be modified based on student data to ensure that the mastery
goals are attainable. Students will also be given partial credit for partial
mastery. Understanding the impact of these changes will provide guidelines for
creating and implementing effective mastery activities.