* 1608720
* Engineering Phonons in Hybrid Nanostructures by Design and Understanding Their Roles in A Few Physical Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Min Ouyang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 441,641.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Phonons are the collective vibrations of the
atoms in a solid and can be thought of as particles moving though the solid.
They are responsible for many properties such as the thermal conductivity and
thermal expansion of materials. They even play a role in how materials will
perform in new applications such as for quantum computing. Understanding, and
even harnessing, how these particles interact with each other is essential for
designing and optimizing new materials. This project focuses on understanding
how phonons interact in a few select physical processes. This research is
accomplished by employing multidisciplinary experimental tools, ranging from
materials design and synthesis of colloidal quantum structures to ultrafast
optical spectroscopy, and it thus provides a fertile ground for students'
training, K-12 outreach and curriculum development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project supports an
experimental activity with a goal to understand phononic interactions at the
nanoscale and to address a few phonon-mediated fundamental processes by adopting
a multi-pronged experimental approach. It particularly combines ultrafast
optical spectroscopy with pre-designed colloidal hybrid nanostructures that can
possess well-defined nanoscale interface topology for phonon engineering. This
research directly involves graduate students training in tools and techniques
needed to address a few fundamental issues: effect of interfacial symmetry
(centrosymmetric vs. non-centrosymmetric interfaces) on nanoscale phonon
characteristics; all optical control of interfacially coupled phonons and their
interplay in time domain; understanding interactions between optically excited
phonons and other quantum dynamics. Accomplishment of this project should
advance our nanoscale materials engineering capability and new design guidelines
for desirable phonon properties, as well as our understanding of phonon-
dependent physical processes. This work is additionally important because hybrid
nanostructures with well-defined interface topology for phonon engineering can
be utilized as building blocks for functional phononic devices. In addition to
graduate and undergraduate students' laboratory training, this project also
allows for integrated education platform with cutting-edge research activities
in classroom and various outreach activities with particular focus on
underrepresented minority students' education.