* 1608959
* RUI: Probing Quark Matter through Compact Star Oscillations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Prashanth Jaikumar, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,000.00

The recent discovery of gravitational waves from Black Holes by the NSF-funded
US-based LIGO observatories has captured the public imagination and opened a new
observational window to our Cosmos, much like the discovery of the telescope did
in Galileo's time. There is broad consensus in the scientific community that
LIGO will soon detect gravitational waves from numerous neutron stars in our
Galaxy, which were first observed by radio pulses in the 1960s. Unlike radio
waves however, gravitational waves carry information about the interior of
neutron stars, which will reveal new insight into nuclear physics at high
density and temperature. This project is focused on improving the odds of
detecting the gravitational waves from neutron stars by constructing accurate
mathematical models of neutron stars and the signals they emit. Integrating
nuclear physics and astrophysics, the PI will use modern computational
algorithms to estimate key parameters that affect the spectrum of gravitational
waves emitted by neutron stars. Results from this research will reduce the
computational cost of searching for gravitational wave signals, refine existing
models of nuclear physics, and train several graduate students from CSU Long
Beach in the methods of scientific research.

In this project, the PI will calculate the non-radial oscillation modes of
compact stars made in part or entirely of strange quark matter and will study
their relevance to gravitational wave signatures. The goal is to discover trends
in the mode spectrum that can be used as gravitational wave fingerprints of the
inner structure of neutron stars. Using theoretical principles of fluid dynamics
and general relativity, supplemented by numerical routines, this research will
advance the understanding of nuclear physics at high density and its
implications for compact star oscillations. Novel aspects of this research
include investigating the impact of composition gradients, superfluidity, and
mixed phases in quark matter on the oscillation spectrum of multi-component
strange/hybrid stars. The proposed methods for this research involve numerical
coding to solve coupled equations of fluid dynamics in strongly gravitating
spacetime inside compact stars. Through these tasks, this project will help
quantify the non-radial oscillation modes for realistic quark matter equations
of state, identify robust and model-dependent features of the oscillation
spectrum and propose distinguishing features between neutron stars and strange
stars that can be tested by gravitational wave detectors.