* 1608111
* US-German Collaboration: Testing Muscle Synergies in a Neuromechanical Rat Model for Nominal and Perturbed Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Hillel Chiel, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 584,136.00

This project focuses on the neural and biomechanical principles that result in
dynamic stability during locomotion. Medical treatments and diagnosis for
neurological conditions that affect balance and coordination (e.g. spinal cord
injury, stroke, Parkinson's) can be improved with a better understanding of
mammalian spinal cord circuits. Neuromechanical models will also inspire
improvements to the design of mechanical systems and controllers for assistive
exoskeletons for human stability and mobility. For example, such a neural model
could be effective for controlling a person's muscles in tandem with control of
an exoskeleton's motors and with the person's intact systems. Control systems
derived from this work may also provide autonomous legged robots greater
mobility and adaptability for movement in unknown terrain. This project will
also involve international collaboration and interdisciplinary education and
training at the intersection of neurobiology, zoology, mechanical engineering,
and system control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand how the mammalian
nervous system processes multi-sensory feedback for dynamic control of the many
degrees of freedom in the rear legs, the investigators will: 1) Use simultaneous
two-plane X-ray videography, force plates and EMG recordings to measure the
kinematics, ground reaction forces, and muscle activations of rats running in
various environments (treadmills of different speeds and flexibility, and on
substrates with unexpected disturbances such as holes, a trapdoor and a shifting
ground condition); 2) Use these data to expand a sagittal plane biomechanical
model and conductance-based neural model of the rat to produce self-supporting
walking of the hind legs in three dimensions; and 3) Investigate mechanisms for
control of synergistic muscle groups by exploring different organizational
models and testing the capability of these models for adapting to perturbations
and maintaining dynamic control of walking behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
companion project is being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, Germany (BMBF).