* 1608210
* I-Corps:  Ophthalmic Cold Plasma Probe for Reduction of Corneal and Scleral Infections
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Gregory Fridman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed project entails the commercialization of a device intended to
reduce infections caused by surgical procedures of the eye. The significance of
this device is its potential to address the problem of drug-resistant infections
by using electric pulses at specific parameters to sterilize tissues of the eye
without causing structural damage. Conventional antibiotic eye drops that are
currently used in operative procedures fail to address this growing problem of
drug-resistant infections and surgeons today are actively seeking alternative
solutions. This I-Corps team's fundamental research results show the proposed
device to be highly effective as an antimicrobial treatment and indicate
promotion of wound healing as well. Introduction of the proposed device to the
operating room could minimize the need for the conventional antibiotics and
would provide significant cost savings while reducing the risk of further drug
resistance development.

The goal of this project is to successfully introduce the proposed ophthalmic
cold plasma probe to the market as an antibacterial treatment for the corneal
and scleral regions of the eye. The team will accomplish this task by
approaching surgical centers, hospitals, private practices, and ophthalmic
instrument manufacturing companies. The team intends to demonstrate to these
contacts that it has developed an instrument that shows potential to provide
antibacterial treatment of ocular tissue for surgical procedures involving
surgical cataract corneal wounds, retinal surgery scleral wounds, and
intravitreal conjunctive-scleral injection sites. Successful completion of the
proposed project will include a redesign of the proposed test bench prototype to
present as a sophisticated surgical system and using the outcomes of the program
as a basis of a provisional patent and SBIR proposal. The proposed project
carries significant potential immediate contributions for reducing risk of
ocular infections and addressing drug-resistant pathogens. This I-Corps team
also expects this project to have long-term contributions in the design,
development of novel plasma devices in the medical industry.