* 1608344
* Exploring Controlled Drug Release from Magneto-Liposomes using Ultrsound Generation by High Frequency Pulsed Magnetic Fields.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Viktor Chikan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 345,000.00

The proposed work investigates how sound waves from the combination of tiny
magnetic particles and magnetic fields can be utilized to provide efficient
delivery of small drug molecules. This experimental approach has a potential to
carry out task deep inside the human body in a very fast manner compared to
existing technology. The objective of the research is to explore the precise
underlying physics and chemistry that controls the effectiveness of this
proposed drug delivery methodology and push its limits to be able to engineer a
practical medical device. How much of this ultrasound can be generated and how
the magnetic particles need to be placed for effective drug delivery will be
addressed in this work. The proposed work will provide unique training
opportunity to undergraduate and graduate research assistants in theoretical and
experimental tools of multidisciplinary fields of chemistry, physics, and
medical sciences.

The key objective of the proposed research is to assess the drug delivery
capability of a new improved magneto-liposome structure that aims at addressing
the shortcomings of previous magneto liposome designs. In this new magnetic
liposome structure, gold coated iron oxide nanoparticles will be used as a
source of ultrasound for triggering drug delivery in the liposomes. The gold
surface of the magnetic particles facilitates a strong attachment of chemical
linker via thiol functional groups. The magnetic structures that produce local
ultrasonic vibrations are attached to the liposomes via thiolated polyethylene
glycol derivatives of cholesterol and phospholipids. As a secondary objective of
the proposed research, the PI aims at exploring a potentially more efficient
ultrasound generation process from non-spherical magnetic nanorods in rotating
magnetic fields. The proposal describes a pulsed magnet capable of mechanically
turning colloidal nanostructures. A course-grained molecular dynamics simulation
will be developed to provide physical insight into the mechanism of ultrasound
generation in colloidal magnetic solutions. It has been found recently that
colloidal magnetic nanostructures are able to produce sufficiently large amount
of ultrasound that can induce drug release in magneto liposomes from high
frequency magnetic fields. The key hypothesis is that once the magnetic
particles are moved outside the liposomes structures, one can trigger more
efficient drug release, and can carry larger drug delivery capacity from the
same sized magneto liposomes when compared to previous designs. It is
anticipated that the drug molecules from the liposomes can be released in a very
short time (sub millisecond timescale) without significant temperature rise,
which will create a new platform for practical delivery of short lived
temperature sensitive drug molecules. The proposed work also addresses
ultrasound generation in different ways compared to the previous discoveries. It
is hypothesized that ultrasound may be generated from anisotropic magnetic
nanostructures (nanorods) more effectively in rotating magnetic fields than from
spherical magnetic particles in inhomogeneous non-rotating magnetic fields.