* 1608917
* OP: Ultrafast and Optomechanical Properties of Individual Plasmonic Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Stephan Link, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

Title: Understanding the energy relaxation pathways in optical antennas made
from assemblies of metal nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoparticles support the collective motion of their
conduction band electrons in response to incident light, an effect known as a
surface plasmon resonance. When those nanoparticles approach each other to
within distances of less than their diameters, the surface plasmons start to
couple just like connected harmonic oscillators, making it possible to engineer
the overall optical response and design antennas that operate in the visible
frequency range in complete analogy to radio frequency receivers and
transmitters. The difference to radio antennas is that the dimensions are
reduced to tens of nanometers (10-9 meter). While this concept of plasmon
coupling and its use to receive and transmit radiation is fairly well
understood, our understanding of heating losses (i.e. Ohmic resistance), which
always occur in metals and are even more important in nanoparticles interacting
with visible light, is limited for assemblies of nanoparticles with specifically
designed plasmon resonances. This project aims to address this question and to
provide detailed insight into how the overall geometry of the nanoparticle
antenna affects the energy relaxation of absorbed photons that eventually
produce heat by directly following the fate of the excitation energy with very
short laser pulses. The knowledge gained through this work will make it possible
to potentially minimize heating losses, but also and more importantly exploit
the dependence of the energy relaxation dynamics on the antenna geometry to
design fast opto-electronic switches and
modulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposal is to determine the effect of the geometry of antennas made from
different arrangements of metal nanoparticles that have various sizes and shapes
on the electron-phonon coupling and acoustic vibrations. Specifically, the
proposed project will address the following two objectives: (1) Establish the
dependence of electronic energy relaxation on the nanoparticle antenna geometry
and the type of the excited surface plasmon mode; and, (2) Investigate the
mechanism for the excitation and damping of acoustic vibrations of strongly
coupled nanoparticle antennas. To accomplish these goals, electron microscopy
will be combined with single-particle transient extinction spectroscopy
employing wavelength tunable pulses to investigate the same individual
nanoparticle antennas. Single-particle spectroscopy techniques are necessary to
correlate the optical and structural properties of individual nanoparticles
antennas having different geometries because especially the damping of the
acoustic vibrations is otherwise determined by extrinsic factors, i.e.
nanoparticle size polydispersity. It is expected that the outcomes of the
proposed studies will yield a detailed insight into how the structural
parameters of a nanoparticle antenna, including the surrounding medium, can be
engineered to optimize desired electron-phonon relaxation times and how
impulsively launched acoustic vibrations can be exploited to modulate the
optical signal from the antenna itself as well as quantum emitters located in
the antenna gaps. These research efforts will lead to important contributions
toward understanding the relationship between the ultrafast energy relaxation
dynamics and the structure dependent collective plasmon modes in nanoparticle
antennas.