* 1608865
* Investigation of Interface Structure-Property Relationship of Transition-Metal Oxides by in-Situ Materials Growth with Atomic Precision
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jiandi Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 447,938.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Future electronics will require novel
materials and material interfaces. This project combines material growth with
characterization to construct interface structures with atomic-scale precision.
Such materials and interfaces provide new and often unexpected functionalities
which can be utilized in future electronic devices. The broad goal of this work
is to develop the science and technology arising at interfaces of this class of
novel materials. The research team intends to advance the fundamental design
principles, which can in turn inspire the creation of new electronic and
magnetic states for technological applications. Furthermore, a significant
product of this endeavor is to integrate material growth, characterization and
design into a research and educational program for the training of the future
science and technology workforce that meets new challenges in this technology-
driven society. Both graduate and undergraduate students are involved in
material fabrication and characterization efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project
lies in the novel proximity effects and related exciting structure-property
relationship of novel ferromagnet-superconductor junctions. By taking advantage
of the project's in-situ growth and characterization capability, this research
team intends to uncover the structure-property relationship of the novel
interfaces of transition metal oxides. Specifically, by exploiting expertise in
creating atomically sharp interfaces between half-metallic manganites or
ordinary ferromagnetic oxide films and unconventional superconductors, the team
aims to resolve the outstanding issue of realizing long-range spin-polarized
supercurrent, as well as determining the correlation between ferromagnetic layer
structure and the coherent length of spin-polarized supercurrent by varying
ferromagnetic layer thickness. Furthermore, the ability to achieve in-situ
growth and characterization with atomic precision allows addressing several
fundamental issues in metal-superconductor junctions, including atomic-level
controlled tuning of barrier transparency on Andreev reflection, and conceptual
validation of triplet Josephson junctions.