* 1608423
* RUI:   Multi-Messenger Astronomy and Detector Characterization in LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Michele Zanolin, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 39,999.00

With Advanced LIGO's recent direct observation of gravitational waves, the
current era of advanced gravitational wave interferometers is the most exciting
period in the history of gravitational wave astrophysics. Efforts in detector
characterization such as those undertaken in this project and multi-messenger
astronomy will enhance LIGO science and its ties to the rest of the astronomical
community while providing many opportunities for student engagement. Researchers
supported by this grant are involving students at various levels of education,
from elementary class visits, to high school research internships, to the first
physics PhD candidate on Embry-Riddle's Prescott campus. Undergraduate research
remains a particular focus at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, and multiple
senior theses and other undergraduate projects will benefit from NSF financial
support. Embry-Riddle's LIGO group continues to increase its outreach efforts,
taking advantage of opportunities in northern Arizona, including close proximity
to the Navajo reservation.

Identification of a gravitational wave transient consistent with the time and
location of an electromagnetic (e.g. optical or radio) signal will provide a
wealth of information about the source that would not be available through means
of a single astrophysical messenger. Core Collapse Supernovae are an exciting
target for this multi-messenger astronomy approach. The combination of a
gravitational wave and optical observation from the same supernova would address
a number of open questions in astrophysics, including the mechanism of the
explosion itself as well as fundamental questions about neutrino interactions
and the neutron star equation of state. Another area of multi-messenger
astronomy that LIGO has begun to investigate is the search for gravitational
waves in coincidence with astrophysical sources of radio transients of duration
on the scale of milliseconds. These could be emitted simultaneously with
gravitational waves due to scenarios ranging from neutron star asteroseismology
to cosmic string cusps. Gravitational wave astronomy has the potential to shed
light on several types of radio emission, possibly including fast radio bursts.
The search for gravitational wave bursts is made more difficult by the presence
of transient terrestrial background, resulting from a combination of
environmental disturbances and behavior of the interferometers themselves.
Understanding these environmental disturbances and removing them from
interferometric data is critical in conducting sensitive searches for
gravitational waves. This grant funds substantial effort in identifying and
mitigating the non-astrophysical background in the interferometers and
application of vetoes to eliminate them through participation in LIGO's detector
characterization working group.