* 1608928
* Bridge to Doctorate: WAESO LSAMP, Self Efficacy and Academic Community for Underrepresented Minority Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Karl Flessa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,075,000.00

For the U.S. to lead the world economically, we must have a strong and vibrant
scientific and technological workforce who can create, innovate and lead on the
global stage. Hispanic/Latino, Black/African American and Native Americans still
currently obtain doctoral degrees in science, technology, engineering, and
technology (STEM) in low numbers that are very disproportionate to the overall
U.S. population. However, over the past 24 years, the Western Alliance to Expand
Student Opportunity (WAESO) LSAMP alliance has demonstrated unparalleled success
in recruiting, retaining, and graduating Bachelor's degree level scientists and
engineers from currently underrepresented populations. This Bridge to the
Doctorate (BTD) project at WAESO LSAMP's alliance member University of Arizona
will further expand efforts beyond the baccalaureate to recruit, admit, enroll,
graduate with thesis masters degrees, and fully prepare for admission to
doctoral programs, 12 underrepresented minority STEM students who have
previously graduated with a Bachelor's degree in STEM from LSAMP participating
colleges and universities. This new cohort of 12 students will engage in peer
mentoring, challenging research and academic study opportunities, activities,
and receive intensive support from their mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to recruit and retain a BTD cohort of 12
underrepresented minority STEM Master of Science (M.S.) students who have
graduated from LSAMP participating colleges and universities and prepare those
12 STEM M.S. students to be highly competitive in order to enter and succeed in
high quality STEM PhD programs. The long-term goal is that the 12 STEM students
in this BTD cohort obtain fellowships or research assistantships, be admitted,
enroll, and succeed in graduating with a PhD degree and enter into the STEM
workforce. The scope of this project is to achieve this overarching goal through
5 tasks before and during two years of full-time graduate study at WAESO LSAMP's
alliance member University of Arizona campus: 1) recruit 12 high quality
underrepresented minority STEM students who have graduated from LSAMP
participating institutions; 2) ensure these students succeed in obtaining an
M.S. degree with a thesis; 3) increase each student's research self-efficacy; 4)
build a welcoming academic community; and 5) provide coaching for fellowships,
PhD program applications, and manuscript writing. This project will utilize two
hypotheses derived from the evidence gleaned from the research literature: 1)
Improvements in a underrepresented minority student's research self-efficacy
will increase the likelihood that a student will pursue a PhD in a STEM field.
The student's research self-efficacy will be enhanced by professional
development workshops, research experience, and mentoring, which collectively
increase student self-confidence and bolster the student's identity as a
scientist. 2) Providing a welcoming academic community will decrease the
attrition of underrepresented minority graduate students by counteracting
isolation of underrepresented minority graduate students. The formation of a
tightly knit community will be centered around the regularly scheduled
professional development workshops and community building social events. The
main approach is to build the self-efficacy of the students by: 1) strengthening
their professional development skills; 2) providing them with experience
utilizing research tools and skills of their discipline; 3) having students
engage with mentors and peers in an academically stimulating community promoting
scientific immersion; and 4) exposing students to successful and inspirational
underrepresented minority professionals that have already earned a PhD. During
the course of two years, after being paired with a faculty mentor, each STEM
student will perform research on a regular basis similar to peers with a
research assistantship with summer support, write-up their research findings in
a masters thesis, defend their research results, and prepare them for
publication as a scientific peer-reviewed paper.