* 1608364
* SusChEM: Understanding Microwave Interactions to Control Magnetic Nanocrystal Growth from a Single Source Precursor
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Geoffrey Strouse, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Sustainable and cost-effective nanomaterial production requires synthesis
methods that demand small amounts of energy, rapid reaction rates, and
recyclable components. For industrial applications, these synthesis methods must
also be scalable and reproducible. Microwave (MW) chemistry methods may achieve
these performance demands. Dr. Geoffrey Strouse is investigating microwave
chemistry to develop new methods for the synthesis of magnetic alloys with very
small dimensions (nanoparticles). He is particularly interested in determining
the effects of MW frequency, power, and optical properties on the rate of
thermal decomposition of molecular clusters based upon the Prussian blue
molecule. Prussian blue molecules have are two different transition metals
which, when decomposed by MW heating to form a metal alloy, create a
nanoparticle with extremely strong magnetic properties. These magnetic
properties may be useful in many technological applications. By judiciously
choosing the MW variables, Dr. Strouse is able to control the composition and
size of the nanoscale magnet, carefully tailoring its magnetic properties to the
task at hand. The research uncovers knowledge that is broadly useful in
bimetallic nanoparticle synthesis and establishes new synthetic routes for nano-
metal systems that are sustainable and can be scaled to industrial applications.
The MW methodology developed in this research impacts not only the fields of
magnetism and magnet technology, but may offer routes to new catalysts as well.
Dr. Strouse's research has significant broader impacts, since it is attractive
to students at many levels. He is actively involved in training students
underrepresented in the STEM fields. He interacts with high school and middle
school scientists by providing learning experiences for them with hands on
scientific activities. Dr. Strouse maintains up-to-date details on MW
methodolgy, microwave effects, and structural properties of the new materials on
his publically-accessible website at Florida State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division at NSF, Dr. Geoffrey
Strouse of Florida State University employs microwave (MW) chemistry to develop
new synthesis methodologies for nano-scaled bi-metallic magnet alloys. His MW
synthesis uses recyclable supercritical CO2 solvent and a shelf-stable single-
source precursor, (M'[M(CN)6])n, where M', M are transition metals chosen for
their magnetic properties in the metal alloy form. By careful selection of
microwave power, frequency, and molecular design, Dr. Strouse is able to control
the rate of the reaction by selectively coupling to electric and magnetic
dipoles in the precursor. In conjunction with computational studies, dielectric
spectroscopy and magnetic measurements, instrumental design, and materials
characterization of the nanosized bi-metallic alloys are used to fabricate a
series of advanced magnetic materials and to investigate MW-induced reaction
mechanisms. The research has significant broader impact on industrial magnetic
and catalytic applications, since the methodology is scalable and may be
translated to new materials and larger quantity applications. Dr. Strouse
involves young students, science teachers, undergraduate and graduate students
in his research, and serves as a mentor of students underrepresented in STEM
fields. He is actively engaged in outreach to high school and middle school
students, and provides learning experiences for these students with hands-on
science activities. He actively maintains a website for dissemination of data,
experimental methodology, and detailed MW analysis, accessible to the general
public through Florid State University web pages.