* 1608757
* Expanding the Use of Liquid Chromatography Through Active Temperature Control
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Stephen Weber, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 422,544.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation. Professor Stephen
Weber and colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh address limitations of
liquid chromatography. The team is improving the ability of liquid
chromatography techniques to distinguish one substance from another, as well as
improving the ability to measure trace concentrations in a variety of samples.
Chromatography is based on the principle of partitioning, the tendency of a
substance to prefer an oily substance to water-based solution. The outcomes of
this project include obtaining more and better information from samples with
lower cost and lower environmental burden than has been previously realized.
Collaborations with scientists in the fields of proteomics (for example, health,
pharmaceuticals, and biochemistry research) and two-dimensional liquid
chromatography (for example, pharmaceuticals, chemical industry, agriculture,
and the environment) demonstrate the effectiveness of the project goals. The
broader impacts are evidenced in that improvements in chromatographic processes
that are useful across many fields and applications. Liquid chromatography is
used in virtually every industry, for example, environmental, pharmaceutical,
nutritional, forensic, toxicology, polymers, chemicals, and cosmetics. A Girl
Scout merit badge project is also being developed by Dr. Weber to explore
chromatography methods and its uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses
temperature control of the column to achieve greater solute focusing and to
control retention in a predictable way. Retention enthalpies, which control the
sensitivity of a particular compound to changes in temperature, are determined
for a number of related organic compounds. These data are used to determine
molecular fragment enthalpies. The temperature dependence of the retention of
novel compounds are then predicted. Software to predict chromatographic behavior
in the face of changing column temperature aids in chromatographic method
development. The temperature control, when used to aid solute focusing,
significantly improves concentration detection limits.