* 1608735
* Collaborative Research: Determination of the Optical and Reactive Properties of Water Vapor of Relevance to Atmospheric Radiation, Cloud Physics and Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Qilong Min, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 404,701.00

This project is investigating water vapor absorption of near ultraviolet (NUV)
solar radiation in the atmosphere. The results of this research may help resolve
a long-standing discrepancy between modeled and observed solar energy absorption
under clear sky conditions in the atmosphere. This research combines laboratory
experiments, field measurements, and modeling to investigate critically
important issues regarding the role of water vapor absorption in determining the
radiative equilibrium of the atmosphere.

The objectives of the project are to make laboratory measurements of water vapor
near UV absorption cross sections and their temperature dependence at spectral
resolution and intervals comparable to existing satellite/surface ozone
monitoring instruments, to monitor water vapor near UV spectral absorption in
the tropical atmosphere, and to evaluate the consequences of including this near
UV absorption by water vapor on satellite/surface ozone retrievals and on models
of atmospheric radiation, circulation, and climate. Field measurements will be
acquired by piggybacking a UV radiation spectrometer on the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) project, the AERosols and Ocean Science
Expeditions (AEROSE) field campaign in the equatorial Atlantic. A different
partitioning of atmospheric absorption by ozone and water vapor could alter
model simulations of large-scale atmospheric circulation.