* 1608576
* IT-C: Differences and Deficits Affecting Women STEM Faculty: Creating a Framework for Change at a Rural Public University
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Stephen Cobb, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2020
* USD 249,204.00

Murray State University (MSU) will implement an ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation-Catalyst (IT-Catalyst) project to undertake institutional self-
assessment activities. MSU will conduct surveys of faculty and interviews,
review existing institutional data and policies, conduct site-visits to ADVANCE
institutions, invite speakers to campus to inform and educate the administration
and faculty, and conduct mentoring circles to support junior STEM faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSU provides a unique opportunity to examine the
recruitment, retention and promotion of women faculty in STEM disciplines at a
regional comprehensive and primarily undergraduate public university in rural
western Kentucky. MSU serves a region that has been historically underserved in
STEM education and has been challenged to recruit and retain female faculty and
students in STEM. The Murray State University project will add to our
understanding of the factors that impact women in a rural academic environment.
This project may serve as a model for other rural regional universities where
women faculty are commonly underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ADVANCE program is focused on developing systemic approaches to increase the
participation, retention, and advancement of women in academic STEM careers. The
IT-Catalyst track funds projects to conduct institutional self-assessments as
well as implement strategies that have been shown to be effective to address
gendered issues for STEM faculty.