* 1608568
* Chemical Imaging of Elementary Steps in Hydrogenation Reactions of Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 02/28/2018
* USD 150,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Schwarz and Altman at Yale University are developing a
new approach for the visualization and characterization of single molecule
surface chemistry. This new approach offers dramatic advances over existing
pathways to explore surface chemistry over large ensembles of molecules and
reactions; instead each step of a reaction is individually induced by the tip of
a scanning probe microscope, the specific and unique reaction pathway is chosen
at will, and energy barriers between potential minima on that pathway are
quantified. During each step, the interactions responsible to drive the reaction
are characterized with unprecedented precision, which has the potential to
reveal the influence of nearby surface defects or other molecules, thereby
opening a whole new avenue to the study of surface chemistry and catalysis. The
technique and the novel results it can generate are being illustrated using
hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, and carbon-carbon bond formation in aromatic
compounds as examples. These reactions are chosen because of their extraordinary
technological importance for the world's chemical and petrochemical industry.
The ability to "see chemistry in action" combined with controlling and
quantifying every detail of it is expected to facilitate outreach to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the new approach builds on
recent advances in scanning probe microscopy, which have made it possible to not
only image molecules on surfaces, but also to 1) map the entire surface
potential around the molecule, thereby uncovering sites of enhanced local
reactivity; 2) translate molecules, atoms, and clusters while measuring the
diffusion barrier between sites, thereby detecting these barriers as a function
of the chemical environment; 3) split molecules (dissociation) using energy
provided by the tip; and 4) form molecules and molecular bonds through voltage
pulses induced by the tip after the reactants have been arranged properly on the
surface. This research, for the first time, combines these elements to achieve a
complete quantitative picture of all of the elementary steps involved in surface
reactions. The new approach is centered on measuring the force needed to push
molecules and/or atoms together so that they can react; by integrating along the
path, the energy barriers and depths of the potential minima can be recovered.
To achieve the necessary stability of the molecules on the surface, all
investigations take place at low temperatures using a home-built combined
scanning tunneling/atomic force microscope. First, benzene, iodobenzene, and
hydrogen are deposited on the (111) surface of platinum. Subsequently,
individual H and I atoms are produced by applying voltage pulses and the
resulting radicals and atoms are manipulated to determine possible manipulation
paths and diffusion barriers between potential minima while the potential energy
landscapes are being mapped. Finally, biphenyl are produced by linking two
benzyl radicals or benzene by hydrogenating benzyl, either spontaneously or
through the application of bias voltage pulses once the species are brought
close together. As a result, complete energetic information is obtained on a
single-molecule level.