* 1608581
* I-Corps: Solar Optics Active Panels (SOAP) for Water Recycling
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Slawomir Hermanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Water scarcity will be a defining characteristic of our lifetime - 2.5 billion
people are expected to live under water stress by 2050 - and will be exacerbated
by rapid urbanization and energy scarcity. It is projected that majority of
future population growth will be concentrated in cities, resulting in more
people drawing water from the same, already-stressed water resources. The energy
intensity of water treatment and distribution further complicates the issue:
distribution of water in California accounts for nearly 20% of the state's
energy budget; treatment represents nearly 3% of United States power output.
This energy-water nexus will be centered on cities, and drive scarcity to more
extreme heights. The proposed technology has the potential to turn these drivers
of scarcity into opportunities for innovation. The proposed system uses
photocatalysis via nanostructured titanium dioxide (TiO2) and sunlight to
destroy pollutants and pathogens of concern in water, all in an envelope that
integrates directly into the building façade. This team's key innovation lies in
the integration of photocatalytic water treatment into the building envelope,
affording low-footprint, low-energy water treatment. The team believes that a
wide range of stakeholders - from city planners to water engineers to building
designers - will have a strong interest in seeing the proposed research come to
market.

The proposed work will explore the viability of a building façade-integrated
solar photocatalytic water treatment system as a deployed technology and as
commercial product. In laboratory and real solar conditions, this I-Corps team
has demonstrated promising solar photocatalytic treatment of water (as proxied
by an organic probe compound) at a representative sub-pilot scale - reactors of
0.5m x 0.5m. Thus, the scope of this research is to understand the customer
requirements of various sectors - e.g. residential buildings, municipal
buildings, industrial users - while establishing how our technology can achieve
those targets, be it in its current state, or through significant redesign.
Technically, the methods in the proposed research will involve redesign,
development and treatment characterization of prototype reactor systems, with
the aim of demonstration studies using real and synthetic greywater. As
described by California Title 22 Regulations, this team aims to demonstrate a
reduction of pathogen load and organic pollutants (as represented by chemical
oxygen demand). This will be demonstrated through experimental characterization
of scale prototypes developed through the course of the I-Corps program. First,
this work advances the field of environmental engineering by describing solar
photocatalytic treatment of real and synthetic greywaters, which has thus far
been demonstrated only with energy-intensive UV lamps. Second, this work
advances the field of building science by exploring integration of water
treatment systems into the building façade, an area that has received little
attention from the field. Finally this team aims to contribute its insights as
best-practices of the innovation process applied to the water sector - a sector
that has historically embraced new technologies reluctantly, but given today's
crisis, must adapt to pursue innovation vigorously.