* 1608003
* Synergistic or Antagonistic Effects of Polymer/Surfactant Supramolecular Assembly on the Colloidal Depletion Force
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Robert Tilton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 365,000.00

CBET - 1608003&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tilton, Robert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
microscopic "colloidal" particles are suspended in a solution containing
polymers, the polymers tend to be excluded from the gaps between particles. This
exclusion gives rise to a force called the depletion force, which can draw
particles together to form aggregates. Some industrial processes take advantage
of the depletion force by promoting aggregation of contaminant particles to
remove them from solution. However, the depletion force may be undesirable in
other processes where ingredients must remain in solution, such as paint pigment
particles or active agents in pharmaceuticals. Such liquid products must be
formulated to prevent depletion-induced aggregation. When ionic surfactants are
also present in the polymer solution, they can bind to the polymers and alter
the depletion force in ways that are not completely understood. This project
will examine various kinds of polymer/surfactant mixtures to better understand
how polymer-surfactant binding influences the depletion force and the stability
of the suspension. A colloidal probe atomic force microscope will be used to
measure the depletion force in the polymer/surfactant mixtures. The results of
the project will be useful to engineers who manufacture and process colloidal
fluids, including paints, coatings, topical medications, and personal care
products. The project will provide research opportunities for students at
various academic levels, including middle school students who participate in the
university's Physics Concepts Programs by designing experiments to examine the
physical chemistry of liquid product formulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the role of polymer/surfactant complexation on depletion
forces in colloidal suspensions. Colloidal forces in polymer/surfactant mixtures
will be measured by colloidal probe atomic force microscopy. The project will
reveal how complexation between ionic surfactants and either nonionic polymers
or oppositely charged polyelectrolytes can amplify or suppress depletion forces.
Experimental data will be interpreted in terms of a model that predicts
depletion forces based on polymer/surfactant complex stoichiometry, charge and
size. Results will be correlated with colloidal stability phase diagrams for a
series of systems that represent canonical categories of polymer/surfactant
association behavior. The outcomes of the project will benefit industrial
practice where complexation is used in multicomponent liquid mixtures to produce
novel material properties and products with diminished environmental impacts.