* 1608801
* The origin of the catalytic efficiency and the plasmonic optical properties of different types of hollow nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mostafa El-Sayed of the Georgia
Institute of Technology develops nanoparticles as catalysts. Nanoparticles are
tiny particles that contain thousands of atoms. While they are much larger than
chemical molecules, which contain only a few atoms, nanoparticles are smaller
than solid materials that are large enough to see with the naked eye.
Nanoparticles are also unusual in that a large fraction of the atoms are at or
very near the surface, so rearrangement, exchange and addition of atoms in the
particle with the atmosphere or a surrounding liquid is much easier for a
nanostructure than for a bulk solid in contact with the same gas or liquid,
where the atoms are typically inside the solid and not accessible. Nanoparticles
have very large surface areas where catalytic chemical reactions take place, and
can be used in numerous fields such as fast chemical production, sustainable
energy, and material chemistry. Professor El-Sayed develops ultrafast methods to
make the same or better material. These methods can greatly increase the rate of
production of material and lead to new ways to make new products of practical
importance. This project provides research opportunities for graduate students.
It also includes outreach activities aimed at members of underrepresented groups
through interactions with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).

In this project, the shape, size, and composition of nanorattle catalysts with
small plasmonic nanoparticles are engineered to optimize their catalytic
performance. The optical and catalytic properties of these newly designed
plasmonic nanorattles are being studied both theoretically and experimentally.
The mechanisms involved in the catalytic reactions involving nanorattles are
probed using surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). This methods allows the
distinction between several possible effects that could lead to catalytic
enhancement of the reactions. The project also examines how the interior
particles in the nanorattles move, and compares their catalytic efficiency with
gas phase reactions. The research team also prepares semiconductor-metal hybrid
nanoparticles to study their catalytic properties and charge carrier behavior
using ultrafast spectroscopy, and examines their mechanical stabilities.