* 1608238
* Kinetics and Entanglement in Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 363,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education on time-dependent phenomena in nanodevices, such as the transfer of
heat and charge. Recent progress in information technology has greatly exceeded
even the wildest dreams of science fiction writers of the sixties and the
seventies. The cornerstone of this still unfolding revolution has been the
exhaustive theoretical understanding of semiconductor materials. Based entirely
on quantum mechanics, it has enabled technology to manufacture and pack billions
of transistors per square centimeter. The next big frontier in this quest is
building a quantum computer, which will enable calculation capacity infeasible
in current classical devices. As before, the crucial step is in imagining,
predicting, and eventually finding materials with the proper "quantum pedigree"
that will be up to the task. Most experts agree that we already have a perfect
candidate for the job, the so-called topological insulators. These novel
compounds have unique electronic properties that make them ideal for the
processing and storage of quantum information. The proposed activity will
advance the theoretical understanding of these materials and expand on the ways
they can be employed in quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will
also support graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, which will be
trained in modern theoretical and computational techniques, and will have
opportunities to visit and interact with experimentalists. The results of the
research will be published in scientific journals, and will be presented in
national and international conferences. The PI will co-organize a two-week
summer school at the University of Minnesota, and a public lecture series in
theoretical physics that is attended by more than 500 members of the Twin-Cities
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research and education on nonequilibrium dynamics and
entanglement propagation in quantum devices. Topological properties of
electronic spectra, which play increasingly prominent role in these structures,
lead to transitions between various topologically distinct phases. Disorder,
inevitably present in any realistic device, qualitatively changes electron
dynamics in the vicinity of such quantum phase transitions (QPT). The activity
will focus on: (i) investigating heat and charge transfer in the vicinity of a
topological QPT and developing concrete experimental setups that will be capable
to probe such near-critical dynamics, (ii) investigating finite-size and
dynamical scaling for various measures of quantum entanglement across a QPT,
(iii) investigating hidden topological characteristics of quasicrystals, (iv)
aiding and advancing experimental efforts in the search for neutral edge modes
of fractional quantum Hall structures and in the characterization of
superconducting nanowires, (v) advancing a theory of dissipative quantum
tunneling in molecular magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will also support
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, which will be trained in modern
theoretical and computational techniques, and will have opportunities to visit
and interact with experimentalists. The results of the research will be
published in scientific journals, and will be presented in national and
international conferences. The PI will co-organize a two-week summer school at
the University of Minnesota, and a public lecture series in theoretical physics
that is attended by more than 500 members of the Twin-Cities community.