* 1608614
* Quantifying the Polymer Physics of Mechanical Deformation in Ultra-thin Polymer Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2019
* USD 405,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Numerous technologies rely upon the properties and performance of thin polymer
films. For example, membranes used in clean water applications are comprised of
thin polymer layers through which water is pushed to separate and remove
unwanted contaminants. Although currently useful, this technology remains
energetically unfavorable due to engineering limits with regard to the
mechanical strength of polymer thin films. Beyond membranes, the efficiency and
lifetime of many other applications are also limited by the mechanical
properties of polymer thin films; however, direct knowledge of these properties
in thin films is extremely limited. Changes in polymer materials when they are
processed into films comprised of only a few molecules in thickness are well
known, but how these changes impact mechanical strength remains unclear. The
proposed project will overcome current challenges with directly measuring
mechanical properties in ultra-thin polymers, leading to new fundamental data
and knowledge that can help guide the design and synthesis of new materials for
better membranes, alternative power sources, as well as many other technologies.
The proposed research will provide a strong foundation for the education and
training of multiple graduate students and undergraduate researchers. To extend
the impact of this project to the K-12 education level, new materials science
and engineering curriculum materials will be developed to be integrated into a
workshop, called BioInspire!. This program is designed to teach lessons of
materials science and engineering and biology in the context of bioinspired
innovation, where science, engineering, and art can be used to engage a broad,
diverse group of students.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project will develop fundamental knowledge of the polymer physics
associated with the mechanical properties in ultra-thin films of polymer
glasses. Although changes in the mobility of glassy polymer chains in a surface-
dominated regime has been studied extensively, the mechanical properties in
ultrathin polymer films have only been studied to a limited extent. Here, a new
measurement device, called the Ultrathin Film Tensile tester (UFT), will be used
to measure the complete stress-strain relationship for polymer thin films under
uniaxial extension conditions. The proposed measurements will provide a complete
understanding of mechanical responses in ultra-thin polymer films by quantifying
elastic and dissipative processes through monotonic and cyclic loading histories
across a wide strain and temperature range, as well as controlled fracture
experiments in the dimensionally-constrained regime. Three materials systems,
including polystyrene (PS), polycarbonate (PC), and blends of polystyrene and
poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (PS/PPO), will be studied, allowing
molecular structure and mechanical responses to be tuned systematically. The
findings are expected to provide new insight with regards to how polymer
mobility changes near a surface can alter the constitutive response of a
polymer, how changes in entanglement density due to dimensional geometric
constraints alters fracture mechanisms, and how geometric constraints on polymer
molecules may alter the onset of dissipative or plastic deformations. The
findings from this project will have a significant impact on fundamental polymer
physics, as well as on the development of new characterization methods that can
aid the development of advanced materials for thin film applications.