* 1608007
* Innovations in Social Science Learning: The Poverty in Tucson Field Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sally Stevens, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 248,882.00

The Poverty in Tucson Field Workshop Model creates an immersive methodological
experience for undergraduates in the social sciences. It provides students with
specific data collection and analytical skills applicable to a variety of
professional STEM careers. Undergraduates will experience firsthand the
challenges of data collection and management. This field workshop is a type of
course-based research for undergraduates. The design seeks to draw on the
possible synergy between classroom learning and independent research, broadly
considered by educators to be a transformative approach within STEM education.
It does this by creating direct conceptual linkages between materials presented
by instructors and hands-on student experiences. In this approach,
undergraduates work in small groups to analyze the data they collected using a
conceptual design they created, providing personal ownership of both data as
well as the results. This is a process that is believed to enhance the overall
learning experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is
to create a more methodologically rigorous social science course and assess its
1) effectiveness among enrolled students, 2) impact on student STEM-related
learning, 3) scalability for inclusion of similar immersive courses within other
university colleges and departments, and 4) transferability to other
institutions. This type of methodological coursework is best suited for local
field sites that offer local opportunities to begin integrating semester-long
research experiences.