* 1608427
* RUI:  Neutrino Experiments at Fermilab
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Nathaniel Tagg, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2020
* USD 147,496.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. A primary area to search for answers to these and
other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it is the way
it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we
know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard
Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with practically
nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were once thought
to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were believed to have an
antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted
that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they did undergo
whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have totally changed
our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because
they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino experiments,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics Beyond the Standard
Model (BSM), and are the subject of this investigation. This research will
involve the work of undergraduate students at an RUI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports work, using the neutrino beam at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory (FNAL), on three related neutrino experiments: MINERvA, Nova and
MINOS+, all measuring neutrino oscillations: muon neutrino to electron neutrino
transitions. To correctly measure these transitions, precise knowledge of
neutrino interactions is required. This award will be used to measure (using the
MINERvA detector) these interactions across a wide energy range available at
FNAL. This will improve our knowledge of the neutrino flux, useful for future
Short Baseline (detector near the source at FNAL) and Long Baseline (detector
hundreds of kilometers away) experiments as well as the current Nova experiment.
The work on the MINOS+ experiment will help map out the shape of the energy
dependence of the neutrino oscillation probability, which could reveal new
anomalies in the neutrino sector. A number of BSM proposed phenomena, from
sterile neutrinos to extra dimensions, can cause measurable deviations in the
neutrino oscillation probability in the 4-10GeV range.&lt;br/&gt;A special
contribution of this award and an exciting broader impact of this research
program is the development and implementation of 3D visualization tools to guide
the physics analyses of the experiments and to render visible to students and
the public the nature of neutrino interactions as recorded and studied by
scientists.