* 1608279
* An Integrated Approach Combining Compositional, Interfacial Material Engineering, and Characterization to Investigate the Complex Hysteresis Instability in Perovskite Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Alex Jen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The large-scale deployment of photovoltaics requires
solutions for reliable devices fabricated on flexible substrates with affordable
and scalable processes. This project aims at addressing complex reliability
issues that affect stable electrical output and lifetime of emerging perovskite
photovoltaics. The interdisciplinary research entailed in this proposal
simultaneously addresses the scalability challenge and the technological
translation for next generation photovoltaics. The proposed research has a
potential for significant societal impact through the development of enabling
technology for sustainable energy generation and the education of students and
community members at all levels. Through graduate student mentorship and
outreach, this project enhances fundamental understanding of sustainable energy
generation, materials design, and photovoltaic device engineering to enable
undergraduates, K-12 students, and community education. By collaborating with
the Clean Energy Institute, the UW MSE department, and the university, it helps
broaden community impact and train graduate students to be highly capable
leaders in science, education, and technology translation.

Technical Description: The proposed research uses a unique, integrated approach
to design suitable materials and device interfaces to directly address
perovskite solar cell hysteresis, one of the most important challenges that may
prevent large-scale implementation of perovskite-based solar technology. To
solve the challenging and complex hysteresis problems, the proposed research (1)
investigates the origin and mechanisms behind hysteresis while simultaneously
addressing them at the perovskite bulk and interfaces, (2) modifies intrinsic
hybrid perovskite properties through fabrication of novel perovskite solid
solutions with new alloying elements like bismuth, and (3) enhances fundamental
understanding of perovskite device hysteresis as well as the material and
interface structure-property relationships governing it. The systematic approach
entails first establishing essential material and interfacial structure-property
relationships through model systems followed by implementing these design rules
to realize efficient and reliable perovskite solar cells with little to no
hysteresis. The application of low-temperature, solution processable materials
enables the facile translation to flexible substrates for fabricating large-area
and stable perovskite solar cells.