* 1608147
* CRCNS: Mechanisms and Modeling of the Adaptive Modulation of the Intrinsic Properties of Spinal Motoneurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Melissa Harrington, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2020
* USD 699,999.00

The long-term objective of this research is to uncover the cellular mechanisms
involved in activity-dependent modification to the excitability of neurons in
the spinal cord that control motor function, i.e., spinal motoneurons.
Understanding how spinal motoneuron output properties can be modified by
increased as well as decreased activity is a fundamental challenge with
implications that span from athletic training to rehabilitation and advanced
prosthetics. The project serves to generate a quantitative understanding of how
persistent activation of motoneurons modulates the neurons' intrinsic
excitability and how this effect, in turn, influences the neurons' output to
drive muscle contraction. Motoneurons have long been thought to function simply
as relays from motor commands to muscle activation. However, growing evidence
demonstrates that these neurons can undergo significant modification
(plasticity) that can change the relationship between input and output. Recent
work with motoneurons demonstrates that plasticity in intrinsic electrical
properties might be important for learning in the motor system. The goal of this
project is to determine how prolonged activation, as occurs with sustained
walking, changes the intrinsic excitability of motorneurons. Alongside
experimental studies, the project includes the development of detailed
computational models of spinal motoneuron activity before and after persistent
activation that are based on but also guide the experimental work. Delaware
State University is a Historically-Black, primarily undergraduate institution,
with an enrollment that is >75% African-American. Thus, a broader impact of this
project is the training of students who are members of under-represented groups.
Trainees are exposed to a comprehensive research environment, including
technical approaches representing state-of-the-art electrophysiological and
computational neuroscience, as well as given career guidance, training in
writing and communication, and exposure to grant proposal writing to foster the
students' professional development as scientists.

Mechanisms of synaptic plasticity have been intensively studied in the central
nervous system, but the potential for plasticity in neurons' intrinsic
properties has received little attention. The goal of this project is to
understand the plasticity of spinal motoneurons and to determine how prolonged
activation, as what occurs with sustained walking, changes their intrinsic
excitability. The project involves the application of electrophysiological,
immunohistochemical, and pharmacological methods in mouse spinal cord slices.
The overarching hypothesis is that alteration of KCNQ/Kv7.2 channel function and
changes in axonal initial segment properties are the primary mechanisms of
adaptation of spinal motoneurons to prolonged network activation, and that
activation of excitatory synaptic inputs is required for these changes. The
project includes the development of detailed computational models of spinal
motoneuron activity before and after persistent activation, exploiting a multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm approach capable of matching multiple selection
criteria simultaneously and of generating entire collections of neuronal models.
The computational models are based on experimental measurements, and the models
in turn generate experimentally testable hypotheses. Thus, experiments and
simulations are closely intertwined in this project.