* 1608577
* Geometric Problems in Conformal Analysis, Dynamics, and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Christopher Bishop, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2020
* USD 221,573.00

Conformal and holomorphic maps are fundamental to many areas of mathematics,
physics, engineering and probability. These are two special kinds of maps that
preserve angles and complex structures. For example, Brownian motion (a
mathematical model of continuous random paths) can be studied using conformal
analysis and the project will use this approach to investigate some well known
problems, e.g., to determine what types of simple sets are covered by Brownian
motion. Another focus of the project is the iteration theory of holomorphic
functions. The PI will study the size, shape and behavior of the Julia and Fatou
sets associated to entire functions (holomorphic functions defined on the whole
plane). Traditionally, most work has focused on the special case of polynomials;
the case of more general entire functions is known as "transcendental dynamics",
but has been much less studied so far. The project will also consider several
problems in analysis that can be attacked using ideas from discrete and
computational geometry. Successful completion of this work could result in
faster algorithms related to meshing, as used in graphics, medical imaging, and
a wide variety of design and manufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project divides into several broad areas:
transcendental dynamics, Brownian motion, and the interactions of analysis with
computational geometry. Continuing earlier work, the PI will study problems such
as computing the dimension of Julia sets of entire functions, investigating the
existence of wandering domains with bounded orbits, and studying the escaping
set (points that iterate to infinity). The PI will also work on related
geometric problems for random sets such as Brownian motion, considering both
well known questions (does Brownian motion cover any rectifiable arcs?) as well
as more novel ones (is Brownian motion removable for conformal maps? Does the
set of cut-points lie on a rectifiable curve?) Finally, the PI will work on
extending his earlier algorithms for optimal meshing, triangulation and
conformal mapping using ideas from analysis, geometry and topology. The most
interesting generalization would be to three dimensions, where no rigorous
complexity bounds are known, but where the most important applications lie. The
proposal also considers problems in "pure" analysis that might be solved using
strengthened versions of known results in computational geometry; one such
problem is the connectedness of the space of chord-arc curves in the BMO
topology; another is the factoring of general bi-Lipschitz maps into bi-
Lipschitz maps with small constants.