* 1608331
* Non-Heme Iron(II)-Nitroxyl Complexes: Modeling Key Intermediates in Nitric Oxide Reductases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 11/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Nicolai Lehnert from the University of Michigan to study
how the molecule nitric oxide is broken down by bacteria. Nitric oxide (NO) is a
simple but very important molecule in human physiology as it is involved in the
control of blood pressure and serves as a key immune defense agent. However,
some bacteria have evolved defenses against this molecule by using certain
enzymes which destroy it. This project is working toward understanding the
fundamental mechanism by which these enzymes are able to break down NO. The
fundamental understanding of the chemistry that these bacterial enzymes catalyze
is contributing to the effort to find new cures against drug resistant bacterial
infections. In addition, this project is training graduate and undergraduate
students in chemical synthesis, analytical characterization techniques, advanced
spectroscopic methods, and how to approach and solve scientific problem). These
are all valuable skills for students when they enter the job market. Finally,
outreach with Cass Technical High School in Detroit is integrated in to this
project by allowing underrepresented minority high school students to work in
the Lehnert laboratory over the summer and obtain research experience.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed at using model complexes
for the active site of flavodiiron nitric oxide reductases (FNORs) to map out
potential chemical pathways of how NO reduction can be accomplished by non-heme
diiron sites. In previous work, the Lehnert group prepared the first functional
model complex, which forms the basis for the current mechanistic studies. Using
spectroscopic and kinetic studies, coupled to DFT calculations, the researchers
determine the molecular mechanism by which this complex catalyzes the NOR
reaction. By preparing suitable derivatives of this species, they define the
geometric and electronic requirements for efficient NO reduction and N2O
generation by non-heme diiron active sites in general, and further explore
different mechanistic possibilities. These studies ultimately identify
chemically feasible pathways for NO reduction in FNORs and provide fingerprints
of important intermediates of this reaction. The research group performs
detailed reactivity studies on this model system in order to gain a better
understanding of how non-heme (high-spin) iron(II)-nitroxyl complexes could be
involved in NOR catalysis and, potentially, HNO biosynthesis.