* 1608554
* Collaborative Research: Nucleation of Calcium Phosphate Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stavros Thomopoulos, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2020
* USD 90,000.00

Non-technical: This collaborative awards funded by the Biomaterials program of
the Division of Materials Research to Washington University in St. Louis and
Columbia University will investigate calcium phosphate (CaP) based biomineral
formation under physiological conditions. A better understanding of real-time
CaP mineral formation on collagen is required for treating mineralization-
related bone pathologies, in enhancing bone regeneration, and in improving
tendon-to-bone healing. Thus, the findings from the project will be important in
understanding the compatibility and strength of bioactive bone and tendon-to-
bone substitutes. In addition, the project will provide key information in
remediating pathologic bone formation. The results will also be broadly
applicable in the bio-mineralization field and will be of interest to
investigators studying fundamental processes and developing regenerative
medicine applications (e.g., in vitro synthesis of artificial bone materials).
Furthermore, transformative knowledge obtained from this work will be applicable
in many biological, medical, industrial, geological, and environmental
processes. The proposed education and outreach plan will also provide
educational and research opportunities for middle school, high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, while simultaneously encouraging the
participation and educational stimulation of students from traditionally
underrepresented groups. The project team will collaborate with middle school
teachers in the St. Louis area and outreach educators at Washington University's
Institute for School Partnership (ISP). The team will develop workshops and free
educational kits on crystal formation, and provide insight into the relevance of
the experiments for bone formation. The educational kits will be available for
teachers in the Greater St. Louis area, and listed on the ISP website for better
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This collaborative project will
examine the initial nucleation and growth of calcium phosphate (CaP) biominerals
within collagen fibrils, with consideration of the multiple length scales
involved (i.e., macro-scale extrafibrillar structures and nano-scale
intrafibrillar regions). Using synchrotron-based in situ real-time small angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS), the work will, for the first time, provide quantitative
information on particle dimensions and volumes, nucleation rates, and
interfacial free energies between CaP nuclei and collagen fibrils at nucleation
sites. In situ wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) and high resolution X-ray
pair-distribution functions (PDF) will examine the kinetics of multiple CaP
crystallization pathways, involving both classical and non-classical nucleation
behaviors, depending on the sequence of mineralization at multiple nucleation
sites. Once a better understanding of nucleation kinetics and mechanisms at
different nucleation sites is achieved, the project will study the consequent
mechanical properties of the final products of collagen-CaP composites. By
developing a novel structure-function relationship model, the project can
provide a guideline for the development of better biomaterials. The technical
impacts of the project encompass both fundamental scientific discovery and
applications for mineralized biomaterials.