* 1608594
* Collaborative Research: Water Mediated Transport of Ions and Molecules in Ionomeric Paint Films: An Integrated Multi-Technique Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Silvia Centeno, Metropolitan Museum of Art
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 295,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Irreplaceable masterworks of art dating from
the 14th century through the 20th century are slowly deteriorating due to
chemical reactions among the paint components. One step believed to be important
in this complex process is the movement of ions and molecules through the paint.
In this project, the dynamics and transport of materials such as water and
solvents in paint films are examined to determine (1) the nature of the process,
and (2) what factors affect this process. Paint films are complex materials, and
they must be studied with multiple techniques to characterize the processes as
completely as possible. With the support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging program in the Division of Chemistry, the ongoing
collaboration between the University of Delaware and The Metropolitan Museum of
Art to address the deterioration of paintings with modern technologies is
expanded by the involvement of scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory and
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory to provide additional unique analyses of
materials prepared at The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the University of
Delaware and of microscopic samples removed works of art affected, to provide
answers to questions like "Why and how does this process occur?" and "What types
of actions can be taken to minimize or eliminate these processes that ultimately
destroy priceless art objects?" The project, through outreach carried out by The
Metropolitan Museum of Art and the University of Delaware, provides the public
with a tangible connection between scientific discovery and the elements of
culture and history, at the same time as it develops an understanding of complex
chemical processes that affect more than just paintings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The reaction of heavy-metal-
containing pigments with fatty acids in oil paintings, derived from the oil
paint binders, produces metal carboxylates also called soaps. These soaps may
produce disfiguring inclusions, surface crusts and/or increased transparency of
the paints, resulting in unwanted and ultimately deleterious effects. Most oil
paintings suffer from this process to some degree. From a scientific
perspective, the process consists of a series of steps: (1) production of free
fatty acids by hydrolysis of the oil; (2) migration of acids and pigment-derived
ions; (3) the reactive event; and (4) agglomeration of the products to produce
soap aggregates or migration to the paint film surface to produce crusts. Each
step is important and complex, in part due to the heterogeneity of the material.
This project focuses on the dynamics of materials in the paint films,
predominantly characterizing step 2, but the dynamics are also important as
materials like water and solvents, sometimes from restoration interventions, and
environmental effects may be involved in steps 1 and 4. Additionally, because
these materials are heterogeneous, one must simultaneously consider the effects
of properties such as pigment particle size and shape, and porosity of the paint
in understanding the nature of these process. This can only be achieved by a
multi-pronged approach to characterize samples treated in different ways. By
combining the strengths of the Metropolitan Museum, the University of Delaware
together with expertise at Brookhaven National Laboratory and Pacific Northwest
Laboratory, several sophisticated technologies are directed towards
understanding the process. The novel strategy proposed to study a complex
heterogeneous multilayered system is applicable to the characterization of
analogous problems in the field of soft matter science.