* 1608177
* A mini-workshop to define scientific strategies and next steps for optimizing the OOI-node on Hydrate Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Marta Torres, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 20,957.00

Marine gas hydrates comprise a vast offshore reservoir of natural gas. They
provide a potential significant untapped energy resource and also present
serious potential continental slope landslide hazards capable of generating
devastating tsunamis as they decompose and destabilize slope sediments as
seawater warms. This workshop on natural marine gas hydrates supports the
participation of US scientists at a 1.5-day workshop aimed at showcasing the
infrastructure and capabilities of the new NSF-funded and operational Ocean
Observatories Initiative (OOI) cabled infrastructure at Hydrate Ridge off the
coast of the northwestern US. The workshop provides a venue for discussion of
science and scientific questions that can be tackled at the Hydrate Ridge node,
one of three instrumented sites on the cabled observatory. The Hydrate Ridge
node was originally envisioned as a natural laboratory where the temporal
evolution of dynamic gas hydrate systems could be examined in detail to
determine fluxes of methane from the seafloor into the ocean and understand the
biogeochemical coupling associated with gas-hydrate formation and dissociation.
The OOI Hydrate Ridge workshop will be held March 4th and 5th, 2016 at the same
location and immediately following 4th Gordon Research Conference on Natural Gas
Hydrates in Galveston Texas. The timing and location of the workshop were
designed to be as cost effective as possible by leveraging off the travel of
Gordon Conference attendees who will stay an additional 1.5 days to attend this
workshop. Funding from NSF will be used to help subsidize the additional
conference days and support the participation of key researchers who may
otherwise not be attending the Gordon Conference, but whose input was
instrumental in generating site survey data and defining the research objectives
for the Hydrate Ridge node in OOI's original founding documents. Also to be
discussed will be the wealth of knowledge and technological advances that have
taken place since the initial guiding scientific documents. Strategies for
optimizing the scientific returns that can be made possible by this new facility
will also be discussed. Broader impacts of the workshop include potential
impacts on energy, climate, and geohazards with deep linkages into biology,
chemistry, physics, permafrost science, marine science, geotechnical
engineering, and petroleum engineering.