* 1608505
* Novel phases of electronic insulators and quantum Hall systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Senthil Todadri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2019
* USD 214,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on the physics of new kinds of quantum phenomena in
materials. The electronic properties of most solids are understood within a
quantum mechanical description of a large number of interacting electrons that
are moving in the background of charged atom cores that form the bulk of the
solid. An important modern realization is that due to quantum mechanics, the
properties of spatially distant electrons in the solid can be inextricably tied
together, a phenomenon called entanglement. Quantum mechanical entanglement
plays a role in determining macroscopic properties of the solid. A striking and
paradigmatic example occurs when the motion of electrons is restricted to two
dimensions and is subjected to a strong perpendicular magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop new concepts and methods to deal
with such electronic states and their identification in experiments. He will
also develop a deeper understanding of the interplay between symmetry and
entanglement, which are two of the central pillars of modern quantum physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, such fundamental research on electronic
materials has generated many of the concepts that underlie modern electronic
technology. The proposed research will contribute to the continuum of scientific
and technological knowledge enabling future technology that harvests quantum
entanglement in fundamental ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research,
the award supports the training of graduate students in modern concepts and
methods in condensed-matter physics. Undergraduates will be involved in the
research when possible. The PI will develop lectures to expose graduate students
to the phenomenology of correlated materials and the associated experimental
probes. He will also develop lectures to convey the excitement of condensed
matter physics to other scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the physics of novel quantum states of electronic insulators and
quantum Hall systems. Specific phases of interest are liquids of composite
fermions in quantum Hall systems, quantum spin liquids in insulating magnets,
and strongly correlated relatives of topological insulators. There has been a
remarkable convergence of these three seemingly different topics in the last two
years. The project will develop these connections further and exploit them to
further our understanding of each topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
questions that will be pursued are: i) a microscopic lowest-Landau-level theory
of the metallic particle-hole-symmetric half-filled Landau level, ii) a
theoretical description of current experiments on quantum spin liquid states,
iii) theory and realization of strong correlation effects in topological
insulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project (i) is fundamental to the theory of the
quantum Hall effect and seeks to provide a microscopic foundation to recent
developments on a long-wavelength effective theory for the metallic state in the
half-filled Landau level. Project (ii) will seek to develop the theory of
quantum spin liquids in contact with many ongoing experiments on Mott insulators
that find evidence for various kinds of quantum spin-liquid phases. Project
(iii) will study the interplay of strong correlation effects and topological
insulator phenomena, two cornerstones of modern work on quantum materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the award supports the training
of graduate students in modern concepts and methods in condensed-matter physics.
Undergraduates will be involved in the research when possible. The PI will
develop lectures to expose graduate students to the phenomenology of correlated
materials and the associated experimental probes. He will also develop lectures
to convey the excitement of condensed matter physics to other scientists.