* 1608492
* Dynamics of compressible fluids near a free surface and collisional kinetic models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/13/2015,08/31/2017
* Juhi Jang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 46,827.00

Jang&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1212142&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies
nonlinear partial differential equations arising in gas and fluid dynamics and
related applications. The first topic regards the dynamics of compressible
fluids near a moving boundary driven by gravity. The models considered in this
topic include Euler equations in Newtonian gravity theory and relativistic Euler
equations in special relativity, and two-fluid Navier-Stokes equations with
constant viscosity. The focus is on the investigation of important physical
phenomena such as gravitational collapse and Rayleigh-Taylor instability. The
second topic concerns the qualitative behavior of collisional kinetic models
such as Boltzmann equations and Fokker-Planck equations. The asymptotic behavior
of Boltzmann equations in the presence of electromagnetic fields with focus on
magnetohydrodynamic regimes is investigated when the mean free path is
sufficiently small. Also the dynamics driven by Fokker-Planck collisions are
studied on a bounded domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Compressible fluids and
gases are the common objects found everywhere in nature. The study of moving
boundary problems for compressible fluids and the asymptotic limit of kinetic
gases is very important because of their rich applications in mathematical
sciences and engineering as well as the fascinating mathematics behind them. The
investigation of the dynamics of fluids near a free surface and the dynamics of
mesoscale collisions balanced with electromagnetic fields aims to advance
knowledge in this fundamental area of mathematics. The problems addressed in
this project are also very interesting to physicists, other scientists, and
engineers. The results provide some foundational evidences to other disciplines
such as astrophysics, plasma physics, aerodynamics, and computational physics,
chemistry, and biology, and is expected to lead to scientific and technological
advances.