* 1608278
* US-German Collaboration: Computational Modeling of Cooperative Success using Neural Signals and Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Michael Spezio, Scripps College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 393,321.00

Societal progress requires humans to excel at cooperation over time. When people
cooperate successfully, everyone on the team comes together to achieve a goal
while being fair to the entire team. Successful cooperation ideally includes
achieving the good of each person on the team, as well. To sustain successful
cooperation, people need to coordinate what they see, hear, think, and do,
especially about who is in the best position at any given moment to make the
best decision or to take the best action for the team as a whole. Expertise
changes with changing circumstances, and team members need to respond quickly
and flexibly. This project will enhance understanding about how the mind and
brain work to initiate and sustain successful cooperation in a rapidly changing
world. The research will reveal aspects of the mind and brain that best support
winning strategies for cooperative success. It will combine computational models
of team coordination with measurements and models of brain networks during
successful cooperation. The outcomes of the research could help enhance
innovation in teams for technology design, assist centers of disease control to
contain sudden outbreaks, and create new methods to help robotic assistants
better respond to human direction.

The research proposal seeks to answer the following primary questions: 1) What
is a team member's mental representation of other agents with whom that person
is cooperating, especially during periods of cooperative success?; 2) How do
these representations contribute to knowledge of others' decision-making
processes and changing expertise?; and 3) What are the neural signals that
predict cognitive updating and successful cooperative action? To model the
cognitive processes during cooperation requires explicitly modeling social
reasoning capabilities, especially capacities to think about other partners's
decision process and their sophistication in understanding both the task and
communication among team members. These features cannot be observed directly and
will be estimated using computational approaches for multi-agent settings (i.e.,
interactive partially observable Markov decision processes). The underlying
neural networks will emerge via dense array EEG and analysis of functional
connectivity patterns within and across brains. Network connectivity measures
include the circular correlation coefficient and time-varying, adaptive
multivariate autogressive modeling, using independent components that covary
strongly with choice outcomes and/or cognitively modeled parameters. These
measures of between-brain connectivity are less susceptible to spurious
correlations induced by underlying task demands. A companion project is being
funded by Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF).