* 1608744
* INSPIRE: How Do Cilia-driven Flows Shape the Chemical and Mechanical Environment in Bacteria-Host Associations?
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Scott Fraser, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

This is an INSPIRE award that was co-funded by the Biosciences Directorate,
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Systems and Synthetic
Biology (SSB) program, and the Engineering Directorate, Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), Dynamics, Control and System
Diagnostics (DCSD) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beneficial and pathogenic
bacteria alike, commonly interact with host cells along mucosal epithelia. These
surfaces are often lined with dense fields of motile cilia that serve both a
biomechanical function for generating mucociliary flows, and a biochemical
function to detect and present molecular signals. The goal of this project is to
investigate a the dynamic association of healthy and diseased ciliated tissues.
The project posits that cilia-generated flows influence bacteria-host
interactions, thereby challenging the conventional view in biology that
attributes bacterial recruitment mostly to active bacterial behavior and passive
diffusion, ignoring the effect of cilia-generated flows on both motility and
mass transport. The broader impacts of this study are that this project provides
excellent educational and training opportunities at the intersection of
disciplines, while also generating new insight in microbial host colonization
that are likely to reveal avenues for impactful strategies to block pathogenic
bacteria from colonizing the host, while enhancing the colonization potential of
beneficial organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach incorporates
interdisciplinary methods, ranging from cutting-edge imaging and genetic tools
to novel microfluidic technologies, all combined with powerful mathematical and
computational framework, to investigate this fundamental problem in bacteria-
host associations, namely, the role of cilia-generated flows in shaping these
associations. The project will build a quantitative and predictive model that is
informed by experimental assays in two complementary model systems:&lt;br/&gt;1.
In vivo invertebrate model: the squid-vibrio system, an intact animal host
operating in its natural fluid environment, will be used to study how the host's
ciliated epithelium initiates contact with its native, flow-borne bacterial
community. Events in the squid-vibrio association share remarkable similarities
with host responses to human-relevant pathogens, while still being accessible to
imaging and experimental manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;2. In silico microfluidics:
properly designed microfluidic channels will be used as a tool to analyze the
response of bacterial cells to carefully controlled microenvironment. This
approach is aimed at complementing the squid-vibrio studies by providing a
platform that isolates the chemical gradients and flow shear gradients observed
in the in vivo model, thus allowing to unravel the mechanisms dictating
bacterial behavior and possibly triggering the changes in bacterial gene
expressions causing the transition from free-swimming to biofilm state.