* 1608149
* Development of MAS NMR RF Power and Spinning Speed Controllers and 1H-X Dipolar Recoupling Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Terry Gullion, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2020
* USD 434,000.00

This project, funded by the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, supports Professor Terry Gullion of West Virginia University
to develop magnetic resonance methods (analogous to those used in magnetic
resonance imaging) to determine the structures of proteins in the solid phase.
Proteins are key components in the control of biological processes.
Determination of their structures can lead to better understanding of their
biochemical functions. For example, interactions of proteins on metallic
nanoparticles offer potential therapies for targeting cancer cells. To help
communicate this science, Dr. Gullion and his group are developing and
presenting chemistry to the public, providing educational opportunities for
elementary and middle school students, and developing online tutorials for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on
the development of magic-angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS NMR)
hardware and techniques. The first goal is the development of high-stability MAS
NMR hardware necessary for long-term NMR experiments. A controller is being
designed to accurately control radio-frequency (rf) power levels as needed for
NMR experiments designed to determine molecular structures by dipolar
recoupling. A novel method to control the sample spinning speed during MAS NMR
experiments is also being developed. This enables NMR experiments that require
rf pulse trains to be applied synchronously with the sample rotation. A second
goal is to develop MAS NMR 1H-Ag, 1H-Au, 1H-2H dipolar recoupling experiments to
determine the structures of peptides chemisorbed on gold and silver
nanoparticles and to determine the relative orientation between the adsorbed
peptide and the metal surface. To help undergraduate and graduate students that
are just beginning to work in solid-state NMR, a series of educational tutorials
describing NMR hardware is being produced and posted online.