* 1608014
* Fracture density and grain size controls on the relief structure of bedrock landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Roman DiBiase, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2021
* USD 315,052.00

Quantifying the connection between rock material properties and the topography
of mountain ranges is critical for understanding how climate and tectonics
influence landscapes and for predicting natural hazards. However, incorporating
rock strength into landscape evolution models has been a challenging problem.
This is due in part to difficulties in defining appropriate metrics to describe
rock strength, and because the factors that determine rock strength vary in
importance depending on erosion process. This project aims to address this
knowledge gap by testing the hypothesis that in steep landscapes, rock strength
exerts a first order control on landscape-scale erodibility through the
influence of fracture density on bedrock hillslopes and the resulting grain size
distribution of sediment delivered to channels. By comparing topographic metrics
of hillslope and channel relief with erosion rates determined from cosmogenic
nuclide concentrations in stream sediment, this project will characterize
differences in erodibility between two landscapes in Southern California with
similar topography, rock type, and climate, but strongly contrasting tectonic
history and bedrock fracture density. This project will take advantage of new
ground-based photogrammetry techniques and analysis of high-resolution airborne
lidar data to upscale field observations and measurements to entire landscapes.
Development and testing of novel point-cloud and image-based analysis techniques
will provide training and experience for geoscience undergraduates through
classroom laboratory exercises and independent research projects. Results from
this project will provide a framework for making progress on the challenging
task of expanding site-specific correlations between relief and erosion rate to
regions with differing rock strength and climate, and inform provocative
hypotheses regarding potential feedbacks between tectonic setting and bedrock
fracturing that limit the height of mountain ranges.