* 1608241
* RAPID: Galapagos lake chemistry and plankton assemblage during the 2015-16 El Nino
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2017
* USD 74,986.00

Robust reconstructions of tropical Pacific climate are critically important for
understanding past climate change due to the unique ability of this region to
influence climate on a global scale. The El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
affects precipitation and temperature patterns across more than half of the
globe every 3-7 years. Impacts associated with ENSO include drought, flooding,
crop failure, disease, and changes in ocean productivity. Importantly, large
uncertainties exist regarding how ENSO has changed in the past and how it is
likely to change in a higher CO2 world. Improving ENSO reconstructions from the
vastly under-sampled eastern equatorial Pacific will help elucidate the response
of ENSO to large-scale changes in the climate system and thus poses tremendous
benefit to society. Freshwater and coastal saline lake sediments in the
Galápagos Islands provide invaluable long continuous reconstructions of rainfall
from the eastern equatorial Pacific, where annual rainfall is strongly
correlated to El Niño sea surface temperatures. To date, however, such
reconstructions have been hampered by large uncertainties owing to the lack of
direct measurements of the response of Galápagos lakes to El Niño
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to leverage the 2015-2016
strong El Niño event that is currently underway to improve constraints on these
and future rainfall reconstructions from the tropical Pacific. Towards this end,
a comprehensive set of meteorological and lake measurements will be taken at El
Junco Lake (San Cristobal Island) and Poza del Diablo and Poza Verde (Isabela
Island) during the onset, peak, and decay phase of the El Niño event in
collaboration with Equadorian scientists and the Charles Darwin Research
Station. Measurements will include hydrologic fluxes (precipitation,
evaporation) and their isotopic composition (d2Hrain), as well as physical,
chemical, and biological properties of the lakes (d2Hlake, temperature,
salinity, nutrients, pH, phytoplankton assemblage, depth, and d2H of plant and
algal biomarkers). These data will enable the relationship between modern
climate and the paleoclimate proxies to be explicitly evaluated through the
course of a rare strong El Niño event (the last of which occurred 18 years ago).
This dataset would be the most comprehensive characterization of the influence
of El Niño events on these lake systems to date and would greatly advance
ongoing efforts to construct quantitative paleo-ENSO records from this region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is supported by Marine Geology and Geophysics,
Earth Sciences Global Change, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.