* 1608406
* Bacteria-Triggered Antimicrobial Release from Microgel-Modified Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2021
* USD 408,494.00

Technical Abstract: This project combines emerging concepts of bacteria-
triggered release, contact bacterial killing, and differential cell interactions
to construct a new means with which to render tissue-contacting biomaterial
surfaces resistant to bacterial colonization. The primary scientific objective
is to understand the materials properties governing the triggered release of
complexation-sequestered cationic antimicrobials. This project will: (1)
identify a set of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) with varying charge, charge
distribution, and hydrophobicity that can complex within model, surface-
immobilized, anionic micro hydrogels (microgels) under four-week exposure to
physiological buffer conditions; (2) show that sequestered peptides are
protected from proteolytic degradation; (3) establish whether AMP release from
the microgels can be triggered by direct physico-chemical contact with bacteria;
(4) determine whether direct physicochemical contact with tissue cells (e.g.
macrophages) triggers AMP release; and (5) demonstrate that AMP-loaded microgel-
modified surfaces resist bacterial colonization while still enabling the
integration of tissue cells. The intellectual merit of this research work
centers on the fact that this project will provide insights into the relative
roles of electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions between small-molecule
cationic antimicrobials and synthetic anionic microgels. This basic information
will guide the future design of new microgels with enhanced charge, charge
distribution, and hydrophobicity that can broaden the bacteria-triggered release
mechanisms to an even wider range of antimicrobials. Significantly, this project
will also involve both graduate and undergraduate research students who will
work not only at Stevens but also in close collaboration with colleagues from
Zimmer Trabecular Metals and will benefit from both the basic academic and
applied industrial perspectives of this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract: Most of us know someone who has had a hip or knee
replacement. Such joint replacement has become common and can have a very
positive impact on the quality of life. Many people are unaware, however, that
joint replacements can fail, most commonly because of infection. Failure due to
infection also occurs in other implants like hernia meshes, pacemakers, and
heart valves. Infection occurs when bacteria adhere to the implant surface and
grow into colonies called biofilms, like the stuff that grows on our teeth when
we don?t brush. Importantly, antibiotics don't kill bacteria in a biofilm. So,
we have to develop implant surfaces that inhibit bacteria fro' adhering. Then,
for those bacteria that do manage to adhere, we need to kill them before they
form a biofilm. This isn't an easy problem. The problem is further complicated
by the fact that the FDA is understandably reluctant to approve implantable
biomedical devices that incorporate antibiotics into them, because, in the many
cases where infection is not a problem, the unneeded antibiotics help cultivate
resistant bacteria like MRSA. This research project, funded by the Biomaterials
Program within the National Science Foundation's Division of Materials Research,
is designed to understand the fundamental science that can enable a new
technology to prevent implant infection. The idea is to cover an implant surface
with microscope particles called microgels and load them with bacteria-killing
molecules called antimicrobial peptides. The central scientific problem is to
understand how to keep these antimicrobial peptides trapped inside the microgels
unless a bacterium happens to come along. At that point, and only at that point,
the microgels have to be designed to release the peptide and kill the bacterium.
If NSF-funded scientists can figure out how to accomplish this task, people
needing biomedical implants will have a greater probability of surgical success
with healthier outcomes.