* 1608934
* Collaborative Proposal: Elucidating Chemical Mechanisms of DNA Repair Using Transition State Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Martin Horvath, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 04/30/2020
* USD 247,091.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Sheila David at The University of California - Davis and
Dr. Martin Horvath at The University of Utah to investigate how DNA damage is
detected and repaired. DNA is the blueprint for life, and damage to this
molecule caused by cellular metabolism or by environmental hazards can lead to
mutations, cell death or changes in the blueprint over the course of evolution.
The preservation of DNA relies on the action of DNA repair enzymes. Despite
years of work that has uncovered DNA repair enzymes and the types of damage upon
which they act, mysteries remain as to how these amazing enzymes work at the
chemical level. This project uses synthetic DNA chemistry and X-ray
crystallography to trap and visualize steps, in the DNA repair process, that are
otherwise too fleeting to study. This strategy provides a detailed molecular
picture of the DNA repair process. The project applies a multi-faceted approach
to investigate several enzymes that specialize in repairing damaged DNA bases.
Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project are receiving
training in synthesis, biochemistry and X-ray crystallography. The discoveries
and results produced by this project are being incorporated into a DNA damage
and repair undergraduate laboratory class at UC Davis and at the University of
Utah. Undergraduate students in these courses will emerge with skills in
critical thinking and conceptual knowledge related to how the information of
life is encoded in DNA and maintained by DNA repair
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project delineates chemical
mechanisms of base excision repair (BER) glycosylases and illuminates how these
enzymes efficiently find rare modified DNA bases. Modified nucleotides that
mimic transition states are being prepared through synthetic chemistry.
Structural studies of several BER glycosylases bound to DNA containing these
transition state analogs are revealing the strategies used by these enzymes to
catalyze base excision. Preliminary work has revealed several surprising
features of the BER glycosylases MutY and AlkD, and prompted novel structural
and mechanistic studies on these and related BER glycosylases. This project is
revealing common themes and unique features in the chemistry underlying DNA
repair.