* 1608773
* Meeting:   58th Annual Maize Genetics Conference; Jacksonville, Florida; March 17-20, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* David Braun, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lyons
* 01/31/2017
* USD 48,065.00

The 58th Annual Maize Genetics Conference will be held March 17-20, 2016, at the
Hyatt Regency hotel in Jacksonville, Florida. The meeting offers members of the
scientific community the opportunity to present and discuss their most recent
research relevant to maize genetics and plant biology. This conference grant
will broaden the scope of the meeting by funding participants from under-
represented groups to attend. These participants will also receive professional
development training through presenting their research and interacting with
invited speakers and scientist-mentors during the conference. The experience of
attending a Maize Genetics Conference, the exposure to cutting-edge research,
the scientific interactions, and the contacts established are vital catalysts
for the careers of aspiring students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide
range of topics investigating the structure and function of genes, pathways, and
traits are included in the conference, spanning the spectrum of maize genetics
from basic studies of gene action to quantitative trait dissection to more
applied topics relevant to crop improvement. The 58th Annual meeting will
feature talks by four invited plenary speakers: Karen Koch (University of
Florida), Mark Stitt (Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm,
Germany), Chris Schoen (Technische Universitat Munchen, Freising, Germany), and
Jonathan Lynch (Pennsylvania State University). There will also be a plenary
session to award the 3rd Barbara McClintock Prize for Plant Genetics and Genome
Studies to recognize one of the most outstanding plant geneticists of the
present era. The program will include approximately 35 18-minute talks by
speakers selected from submitted abstracts, and two poster sessions. The Maize
Genetics Conference provides outstanding opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists to meet and interact with an international gathering of
scientists in the field, to discuss their research while presenting talks or
posters, and to establish scientific networks that will be valuable as they
embark on their careers. Funding from NSF will be used to broaden participation
at the meeting through outreach and recruiting efforts that seek to support
Conference attendance by students, postdocs and young faculty from under-
represented groups with an interest in exploring research possibilities in maize
genetics. Partnering these awardees with experienced maize researchers at
similar career stages will facilitate their productive participation in the
Conference. In addition, students who are minorities or first time attendees
will be supported by defraying the cost of food and lodging at the Conference.
The Maize Genetics Conference is unique compared to other meetings in its
efforts to support attendance of all graduate student attendees.