* 1608095
* Collaborative Research: Carrier transport in organometal halide perovskite devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Oana Jurchescu, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 237,000.00

Abstract Title: Charge transport in hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskites
Non-technical: Hybrid organic-inorganic trihalide perovskites have emerged as
one of the most promising contenders for large scale photovoltaic energy
generation. These materials exhibit a remarkable set of properties, coupled with
low production cost, which led to an avalanche of research on this topic and a
commendable growth. Unlike most mature technologies, however, the innovation
witnessed in the field outstripped our understanding of basic these materials
properties. In addition, the hybrid perovskites contain lead, which represent an
environmental hazard, precluding their incorporation in future applications.
This project is a collaborative effort between a research group at Wake Forest
University with expertise in device fabrication and electrical characterization
and a group at University of Utah with knowledge on materials growth, optical
and magnetic field effect measurements. The research will focus on the
investigation of the electronic processes that limit the operation and stability
of hybrid perovskite-based devices; designing and implementing device structures
that promote improved performance; and developing lead-free hybrid perovskites.
Driven by the anticipated high impact of hybrid perovskite electronics on the US
economy and society, this interdisciplinary research program will integrate
education by implementing a strong teaching and mentoring component that
complements all stages of the research efforts. Technical: The research will
focus on novel hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HTP) single crystals and
thin-film growth, structural, optical and electrical characterization, device
design, fabrication, and characterization with the following objectives: (i)
develop Pb-free hybrid perovskites; (ii) understand the mechanism of charge
transport in hybrid perovskite materials; (iii) elucidate the coexistence
between the electronic and ionic transport and their contribution to HTP device
hysteresis, performance, reliability and stability. The project is structured
into three phases. The first phase focuses on the study of charge transport in
HTPs using time of flight, space-charge-limited current and FET measurements at
various temperatures. In the second phase we will focus on the analysis of bulk
and surface defect states by performing Poole-Frenkel and density of states
analysis. In the third phase the PIs will disentangle the ionic and electronic
contributions to the conductivity in HTP devices using Seebeck effect in the
dark and under illumination, and impedance spectroscopy. The PIs and their
research groups will continue and expand their efforts dedicated to enhancing
the growth of the new field of perovskite electronics by organizing conferences,
participating in activities at local science museums, and offering research
opportunities to students from local community colleges and high schools.