* 1608018
* Constructions in Higher-Dimensional Contact Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Roger Casals Gutierrez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2018
* USD 153,624.00

This research project in pure mathematics focuses on abstract geometric
structures in higher dimensions, known as contact and symplectic topology. The
field intertwines rigid geometric problems, such as studying periodic orbits or
counting curves passing through a given point, with flexible cut-and-paste
constructions. Part of the research conducted in this proposal is the
development of a combinatorial description of these structures in terms of a
diagrammatic calculus, and its applications to these rigid geometric problems.
This provides an accessible source of new examples and computations, and
establishes the ground for strictly higher-dimensional constructions. Due to its
combinatorial nature, this line of research is naturally conducive to
participation from undergraduate students and young researchers. Another part of
this project uses techniques that combine known elements from algebraic geometry
and geometric topology with new ideas from contact and symplectic topology, and
the outcome of the proposed research contributes to each of these central fields
of mathematical research.

The first part of this project is the development of a Legendrian calculus in
the front projection, including higher-dimensional Reidemeister moves,
Legendrian handle-slides and criteria for the existence of loose charts. By
further establishing a relation with bi-Lefschetz fibrations, this tool will
provide effective combinatorial criteria for (sub)flexibility of Weinstein
structures and the computation of algebraic invariants such as the Legendrian
contact differential graded algebra and the wrapped Fukaya category. This
combines ideas from affine algebraic geometry and higher-dimensional contact
surgery theory. The second part of this research project focuses on the
detection of tightness and over-twistedness of higher-dimensional models,
including bordered Legendrian open books and small neighborhoods of over-twisted
models. The project will use pseudoholomorphic techniques adapted to each
problem in combination with new ideas coming from the study of Legendrian
submanifolds, including the study of Legendrian cobordisms and their relation to
Weinstein cobordisms. In both these projects the study of compatible open books
in special position have a role, and a general existence theorem will be studied
with asymptotically holomorphic techniques. In addition, the project will
include the study of a flexible class of Engel structures, completely determined
by formal homotopy class, and related h-principles.