* 1608043
* Creating Practical Active Learning Stations to Transform and Improve Existing Learning Environments for Computer Science Students
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Patrick Seeling, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2020
* USD 267,571.00

Active Learning and Active Learning Classrooms have proven themselves as a
valuable means to better engage STEM students, enhance their learning experience
and increase their performance with respect to learning outcomes. One difficulty
in providing more student access to Active Learning Classrooms is the associated
cost of constructing or retrofitting existing classrooms is expensive and cost
prohibitive for many institutions. Newer, more economical tools and approaches
are needed to increase access and the evaluation of this new technology will add
to a growing body of knowledge as to how Active Learning Technology and pedagogy
work together to enhance student collaboration in the classroom and increase
student performance and satisfaction in introductory Computer Science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, deploy and evaluate an
economical means of adapting existing classrooms to facilitate Active Learning
for Computer Science students. Lightweight, commodity hardware running flexible,
open-source software will be used to create a network of self-contained
practical, active learning stations (PALS). These stations will then be deployed
in an existing classroom to transform it into an Active Learning Classroom. The
effectiveness of the PALS system will be evaluated through qualitative and
quantitative data collected on student learning outcomes for CS1 and CS2 and
perceived learning experience.