* 1608728
* Dampening autoimmunity with encapsulated autoantigens in polyphenolic capsules
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Eugenia Kharlampieva, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 419,955.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Alabama at Birmingham is to develop
biologically-active biomaterials for potential treatment of an autoimmune
disease, such as Type 1 diabetes (T1D). Restoring immune tolerance, i.e., the
inability of the immune system to respond to specific autoantigens such as
insulin is a major challenge in T1D. To address this challenge, this project
will develop novel immunoprotective polymeric nano- and micro-particles with
encased insulin to dampen aberrant Type 1 diabetes autoimmune responses. This
research will impact the design and application of a new type of polymer
material with autoimmune modulating activity and will provide a fundamental
understanding of the physical and chemical properties of these materials at
biological interfaces. The design of this material will open new prospects in
various bio-related areas such as bioengineering and tissue engineering and
autoimmune therapies. The educational objective of this project is to develop a
discovery-driven multidisciplinary biomaterials/polymer sciences program at
University of Alabama at Birmingham in promoting diversity from the high school
through graduate-level. These students, including underrepresented minorities,
will be trained in modern aspects of biopolymer sciences including state-of-the-
art synthetic and analytical methods, and they will take part in intensive
multidisciplinary collaborations between the Departments of Chemistry and
Microbiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal of this proposal is to
develop a new type of immunomodulatory particulate material with encased
autoantigens (insulin) for dampening autoimmune responses in Type 1 diabetes
(T1D), and to gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanism of immune
modulating activity. These hollow particles will be designed through hydrogen-
bonded assemblies of polyphenolic tannic acid (TA) with neutral polymers to
produce micro- and nano-capsules for delivery of insulin to immune cells and
restore their immune tolerance. The objectives of the proposed study are as
follows: 1) synthesis TA-based microcapsules with novel temperature-sensitive
diblock copolymers, and explore their immune cell uptake properties; 2) explore
the loading of insulin into capsules with tunable thermal, antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory properties; 3) investigate immunomodulation of antigen-presenting
cells with TA-based capsules with dampening autoimmune responses in an
autoantigen-specific manner; and 4) study the interaction of these materials
with antigen-presenting cells in vitro. Correlations between material
physical/chemical properties and function of immune cells is pivotal for
transformative knowledge in developing immunomodulatory materials for treating a
broad spectrum of autoimmune diseases. Access to state-of-the-art techniques
with unique capabilities of in situ nano-scaled measurements, advanced imaging,
and immunology facilities will ensure the successful completion of the project.
Recruitment and/or mentoring of students at different levels - High school,
undergraduate, and graduate including underrepresented minorities - and training
them in modern aspects of biopolymer sciences including state-of-the-art
synthetic and analytical methods are parts of this award.