* 1608958
* An Interferometric CMOS DC-Terahertz Lab on a Chip Biosensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ali Niknejad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Title: An Interferometric CMOS DC-Terahertz Lab on a Chip
Biosensor&lt;br/&gt;Brief description of project Goals:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Building a single-cell sensor platform for labelless identification
of cells and their components (protein, DNA, molecules) with extremely rapidly
alternating electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Importance: Identification of
cells, and by extension their components, is essential for a wide range of
healthcare and scientific applications. There is key need for real-time
measurements, for example during cancer surgery where leaving unidentified
cancer cells behind leads to increased cancer recurrence. Unfortunately, current
techniques cannot identify biological molecules without the use of secondary
molecules with a signaling tag attached, necessitating multiple steps often in a
laboratory setting. Therefore there is a need for rapid identification of cells
and molecules to guide real-time clinical decision making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Solution: To enable direct, and near instantaneous,
identification of molecules and single cells, this proposal measures their
innate response to extremely high frequency electrical fields to identify a
unique frequency signature. In particular, this project aims to extend the
ability to measure these characteristic vibrations into the Terahertz range,
with electric fields alternating within a picosecond. At these speeds, the
vibrations of molecules are measured, potentially identifying biological
molecules without the use of secondary labels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing
the Field: The overarching goal of this research is to establish the frequency
characteristics for a wide range of biomolecules and cancer cell lines using a
single-cell high frequency measurement platform. If unique spectral signatures
of cancer cells are found, the possibility of rapid labelless identification can
be realized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to Society: Of key importance in
cancer therapy is the need to identify and treat all disease. Instantaneous
identification of tumor cells, made possible by measuring the innate electrical
properties of the molecules themselves, enables instantaneous assessment of
tissue to guide resection of all tumor cells.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
measurements on single cells at this frequency have never been done before.
Through publications, this information will be disseminated to the community,
potentially enabling new biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education
and Diversity: The educational goals of this research include the training of
graduate student researchers in the art and science of terahertz signal
generation, detection, and processing, and the development of a new
undergraduate curriculum targeting freshman electrical engineering students and
outreach to underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research proposal
is to enable labelless investigation of biological systems by obtaining wide
frequency spectrum information on the molecular and cellular level through
development of a sensor platform operating from DC to the THz regime. This
capability, coupled with microfluidics that enable single cell interrogation,
has an immense advantage in the characterization, identification, and, possibly
diagnosis of disease, potentially solving a variety of problems faster, less
expensively, or perhaps even in a point of care settings. This research will
advance the state-of-the-art by 10X in frequency and allows for inexpensive and
rapid Terahertz cell and biomolecule characterization. Combining Giga and
Terahertz sensing allows a broad range of information to be gathered on
individual cells and biomolecules. Moving to higher frequencies, from 100 GHz to
1 THz, opens up the possibility to sense molecular rotational resonance
signatures, identifying key molecular components of cells.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The work is divided into three interrelated thrusts. In the first
thrust, the focus is on the development of the DC-THz sensor array. Our group
has identified powerful architectures that are amenable to integration in CMOS,
built around performing interferometry between on-chip voltage-controlled
oscillators (VCOs), which are easily integrated in CMOS technology into a very
small area. The architecture has high sensitivity and immunity from phase noise.
In the second thrust, we will be co-designing the microfluidic package and
sensor interface so that we can reliably and repeatedly flow materials such as
biomolecules or cells into the sensor to perform measurements (1 THz for
biomolecules, 0.5 THz for cells). In the third thrust, we will begin an
extensive study of the spectral signature of biomolecules and cells from
microwave bands up to the terahertz regime.