* 1608009
* CDS&E: Cyclic Tetrapeptide Probes For Protein Binding
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kevin Burgess, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Kevin Burgess of Texas A & M University to discover
small molecules that affect how some proteins bind to each other. Protein-
protein interactions are important to many biological processes in cells. Thus
having small molecules that can either aid or or hinder protein-protein
interactions could lead to potential new drugs to help treat various diseases.
The project is creating new small molecules and studying their effect on
protein-protein interactions. It also combines chemical synthesis, computer-
aided molecular design and data-mining training for graduate and undergraduate
students to help them tackle problems in contemporary life science.

Cyclic peptides are known to mimic key regions involved in protein-protein
interactions, i.e. to be Protein-Protein Interface (PPI) mimics. While cyclic
pentapeptides are easy to make they tend to equilibrate between conformers.
Conversely cyclic tetrapeptides from natural amino acids are difficult to make
but are more conformationally stable. Thus, easily synthesized cyclic peptides
from genetically encoded amino acids linked by main-chain amides can have ring
sizes of 9, 12, 15, etc. i.e. 3n atoms, (n = # amino acids) which misses ring
sizes between 12 and 15 that combine conformational rigidity with ease of
synthesis. This work is showing that contrary to some earlier reports, cyclic
Tetrapeptides from natural amino acids are conformationally rigid and are more
synthetically accessible than previously thought. It is also showing that
replacement of a genetically encoded residue with some rigid unnatural amino
acids can be used to give cyclic tetrapeptides that rest at a useful crossroads
between ease of synthesis and conformational rigidity.