* 1608457
* Supramolecularly Templated Living REP-ROP Polymerizations and Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Rigoberto Advincula, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Celtic art, Boy Scout knots, Mobius strip rings, and M.C. Escher's art have
fascinated the viewer and challenged their ability to trace the origin of
connectivity. For some time now, mathematicians have described the topology of
rings and cyclic overlapping structures with their programmable qualities into
the so-called Knot Theory. In polymer science, understanding how long polymer
chains become tangled and how to get those tangled chains to dissolve in a
solution can result in new materials with interesting physical properties and
chemical properties that can extend the applications of plastics, coatings,
rubber, and composites. There are many opportunities for training and mentoring
future scientists in this interdisciplinary and practical field. This research
helps preparing a workforce that solves complex problems and produces valuable
products. This project focuses on the design and synthesis of new catenated
polymer and block copolymer compositions via monomer ring opening (RO) and
macroinitiator ring expansion polymerizations (REP) or REP-ROP Polymerizations.
By utilizing the Knot Theory, it may be possible to obtain various knotted
macromolecules, which have controlled entanglements as well as block copolymer
composition with high yields and high molecular weight. The approaches towards
the synthesis of catenated macromolecules involve: 1) phenanthroline-based
macroinitiator templates; 2) homopolymers and block copolymers derived from atom
transfer radical polymerization methods and ring closures with atom transfer
radical coupling; 3) ring expansion strategies with polycaprolactones; and 4)
polymer reactions that modify the side groups and control the composition and
interaction parameters of the chains. Characterization methods include nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, MALDI mass sppectrometry, atomic force
microscopy, size-exclusion chromatography, and rheometry, which verify the
polymer's chemical structure, topology, and phase separation in solution and
solid state. Collaborations with polymer physicists, theorists, and rheologists
are pursued to harness the properties of the catenated polymers as materials and
compatibilizers for practical applications.