* 1609393
* Signal Processing for Passive RF Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Hongbin Li, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

This project considers passive radio frequency (RF) sensing that employs
wireless communication signals as illuminators of opportunities (IOs) to detect,
locate, and track objects of interest. Such capabilities are useful for a wide
range of applications, e.g., indoor localization, health monitoring, vehicle
tracking, and many more. Originally considered as a supplementary technology to
active sensing (e.g., radar), passive RF sensing has emerged as a promising
alternative that far exceeds the scope of standard radar operations. Passive RF
sensing has many advantages over its active counterpart: no dedicated
transmitter and RF pollution free; covert operation; order of magnitude cheaper
to build, deploy and operate; and the ability to simultaneously access several
IOs to obtain multiple views and spatial diversity of the surveillance area.
Recent interest in passive RF sensing is further driven by spectrum scarcity and
a growing pressure from the wireless sector to release government-held spectrum,
including spectrum allocated to active sensing, in order to boost the economy.
Given the ubiquity of wireless infrastructure, it is expected that passive RF
sensing will be integrated in people's daily life. For example, wireless service
providers can offer wireless devices with built-in passive RF sensing functions
and make them broadly available to any user. Thus, the associated economical and
societal impact of the proposed research is
substantial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the advantages, there are fundamental
technical issues that need to be investigated for passive RF sensing.
Specifically, unlike active sensing which has a well-established theory for
optimum signal processing based on the matched filter (MF), existing passive
sensing techniques were introduced largely by imitating the MF, without
adequately considering the differences between the two systems. The MF requires
knowledge of the transmitted waveform that is unavailable in a passive system
due to the non-cooperative nature of the IO. The standard strategy is to replace
it with a reference signal, which is a noisy copy of the IO waveform obtained
via an antenna steered toward the IO, and cross-correlates (CC) the reference
signal with the received signal. The CC detector is not an optimal method. In
fact, it is very sensitive to the noise contained in the reference and further
deteriorated by the direct-path interference, i.e., the direct transmission from
the IO to the passive receiver. To address these issues, this project aims to
develop novel signal processing techniques for passive RF sensing by taking into
account impairments such as noisy reference, DPI, and multi-path clutter, which
are inherent in passive systems. In addition, the project will develop
techniques for passive RF sensing involving sensors placed on moving platforms
(e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles) to obtain close-up looks of the scene, which is
of interest for disaster relief, rural search, and many other applications. A
major technical challenge there is to cope with excessive clutter Doppler spread
induced by platform motion. Finally, this project also has a significant
educational component aimed to provide integrated research experience and
training for undergraduate and graduate students.