* 1609553
* Thermodynamics of Metal-Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Dean Wilcox, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,292.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Dean Wilcox from Dartmouth College as he seeks to obtain
new insights into the binding of metal ions to proteins. Metals are often used
in Nature due to the unique reactivity they provide when they are bound to a
protein (e.g., metalloenzymes). Proteins play key roles in the uptake,
transport, use and excretion of biologically essential metals (e.g., zinc,
copper, iron), as well as toxic ones (e.g., mercury, lead, cadmium), by living
organisms. Dr. Wilcox's studies are providing fundamental insights into how
proteins interact with metal ions in the cell. Additionally, students working on
this project are gaining important knowledge and valuable skills for their
careers in science and education, thereby enhancing the scientific workforce.

This research quantifies the thermodynamics of metal ions binding to proteins in
order to provide a better understanding of metal contributions to protein
stability and protein modulation of metal redox properties. Fundamental new
insights about metal-protein interactions are being obtained from studies that
correlate metal-binding thermodynamics to the thermodynamics of metal
stabilization of the resulting metalloprotein. The Wilcox group quantifies
solvent contributions to metal-binding thermodynamics, and determine metal
contributions (bonding, electrostatics) to metalloproteins binding to DNA. A
method that determines the metalloprotein reduction thermodynamics from
calorimetric measurements of metal binding is being applied to selected
metalloproteins and enzymes. These methods provide insight into protein
modulation of the metal reduction potential, as well as proton transfer
accompanying reduction. Several variants of azurin with higher and lower
reduction potentials, polysaccharide monooxygenase, which has a unique Cu(I)
coordination, and tyramine-monooxygenase, which has two mechanistically-distinct
copper ions are being studied. Finally, this method is being extended to studies
of the copper enzyme superoxide dismutase to quantify the thermodynamics and
accompanying proton transfer reactions.