* 1609587
* Developing deformation maps for designing nanoporous metals with enhanced ductility and strength
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Niaz Abdolrahim, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,673.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoporous (NP) metals are three-
dimensional networks of inter-connected pores and ligaments. Their open-cell
structure and high surface area per unit volume give them unique electrical,
mechanical, and catalytic properties. These properties make NP metals excellent
candidates for a variety of high-tech applications including catalysts for fuel
cells, gas filtration, biosensors, and actuators. The performance of NP
structure in all these applications is connected to its mechanical properties
and deformation behavior during operation. For example, NP Au shows limited
macroscopic ductility due to lack of strain hardening. The brittle fracture of
NP Au can harm its interconnected structure and cause loss of functionality in
many applications especially under cyclic loading. This project will use
computational simulation methods to investigate the deformation behavior of
nanoporous gold structure and determine the microstructure conditions under
which NP Au exhibits ductile behavior and high strength for use in structural
and functional applications. These results will be compared with available
experimental investigations of the mechanical behavior of NP Au. The project
will contribute to the education of students in the area and the PI will
encourage students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop mathematical models and deformation maps that enable design
of Nanoporous gold (NP Au) with improved mechanical properties. The research
team will test the hypothesis that varying the morphological configuration of NP
Au can enhance its ductility and strength. In pursuit of this goal, atomic-level
simulations will be performed to understand the underlying mechanisms that
control plastic deformation in NP Au. The role of structural and morphological
parameters including surface and interface effects, ligament and pore sizes,
orientation and loading direction, effect of triple junctions, density of pores
and ligaments, surface ledges, and voids will be determined. The PI and her team
will integrate their findings into deformation maps and mathematical models that
relate the deformation mechanisms to structural parameters and predict the
morphologies that result in to enhanced ductility and strength. These
predictions will be compared with available experimental investigations of the
mechanical behavior of NP Au. The project will contribute to the education of
students in the area and the PI will encourage students from underrepresented
groups to pursue careers in STEM areas.