* 1609142
* Advancing Understanding of Semiconducting Oxide Nano-Heterostructure Gas Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sheikh Akbar, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 732,975.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project has direct technological benefits to
society by enabling the accelerated development of selective, low-power portable
gas sensors. This work is purposely structured to disrupt the cycle of trial-
and-error materials discovery in gas sensors by developing a fundamental
understanding of the sensing mechanisms to enable bottom-up design and
engineering of nanomaterials toward specific applications. The knowledge gained
from this research provides crucial contributions to the field seeking to: (1)
enhance rapid detection of leaks of toxic or flammable gases that could
otherwise cause massive environmental damage; (2) enable real-time automated
monitoring of food freshness to reduce food waste and aid sustainability, and
(3) facilitate deployment of portable sensors capable of rapid screening for
biomarkers in exhaled breath that correlate with a range of health conditions
and cancers, aiding early detection efforts in populations lacking easy access
to advanced health care technology. The two graduate students funded by this
project are being developed into future leaders in a U.S. sensor community that
is increasingly yielding leadership to international efforts in Japan, South
Korea, China, and several groups in Europe. Specifically, they will become
experts in nanomaterial electrical measurements and state-of-the-art electronic
properties characterization via electron microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: A recent surge in nanomaterials research has
developed many novel methods for synthesizing semiconducting oxides into
nanostructures, especially with combinations of materials into a single
structure, termed a nano-heterostructure. However, the focus on new synthesis
methods has led to a largely trial-and-error approach toward materials discovery
for gas sensor applications with little fundamental understanding of the
underlying mechanisms. The primary focus of this research is to develop and
publish a comprehensive and unifying model for interactions of gases with nano-
heterostructures that will provide a framework which enables the rest of the
field to more effectively design new structures and ultimately accelerate their
implementation into devices. This project seeks fundamental knowledge from
proven sensor materials engineered into nano-heterostructures by (1) using
state-of-the-art high-resolution electron microscopy techniques to evaluate the
electronic structure and properties of these materials on an individual
nanoparticle basis; (2) utilizing electrical measurements on single nanowires
and clusters of nanowires to separate contributions of interfaces from the bulk
and mapping the effects of each oxide constituent as a function of environmental
conditions; and (3) building a model of the electronic interactions at the gas-
oxide and oxide-oxide interfaces truly representative of nanomaterials and not
based on bulk ideal properties. Additionally, an open-access on-line database is
being constructed of resistive-type gas sensor published results to aid
researchers in the field in identifying trends in materials properties and
disseminating important results, as well as helping industries to identify the
most promising technologies for a specific application.