* 1609566
* Quality of Life Technology Research Experience for Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Pearlman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 599,931.00

The overarching theme of this Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in
Engineering and Computer Science Site at the University of Pittsburgh, entitled,
"Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Research Experience for Teachers," is related
to the development of products and processes that transform lives in a growing
segment of the population-people with reduced functional capabilities due to
aging or disability. QoLT is a natural fit for this site because the Pittsburgh
region is presently a world leader in research and development related to the
aging and disability communities; therefore a high density of rewarding research
opportunities are available for RET participants. All of these opportunities are
grounded within a common QoLT research focus, through collaborations between
University of Pittsburgh's Department of Rehabilitation Science and Technology
(RST) Human Engineering Research Laboratories (HERL) and Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU) Human Computer Interaction (HCII) and Robotics Institutes (RI).
The research and development projects will build upon recent advances in QoLT
that enable people with disabilities to live more independently in their homes
and maximize their community participation. This site builds on previously
successful RET programs at the University of Pittsburgh with the core objective
of improving the STEM capacity of the nation's students by using product
innovation techniques to provide applied outlets for teachers and their
students. The RET research focus is of social significance and will contribute
towards the development of technologies that will increase persons with
disabilities' independence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years, 30 STEM high
school teachers, from high need urban high schools in Pittsburgh comprised of
minority and low socio-economic status students, will take part in a 14-week
research experience, including a product innovation course in the fall and a
4-week curriculum development experience over the summer. This RET Site retains
a QoLT engineering research theme and a focus on math through product
development economics, while adding a focus on design and peer assessment
pedagogy. The site will continue to integrate military veterans with
disabilities transitioning to college into project teams, allowing for cross-
mentorship and a personal connection to the research. The site's approach
involves a seamless transition between the research experience and teaching via
a common product innovation focus, drawing upon institutional strengths in the
research and innovation of HERL and curriculum reform expertise from the
Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC). This RET will become a vehicle
to develop and strengthen teachers' skills in design based learning (DBL)
through unique peer assessment approaches that can reduce burden and increase
students' learning outcomes. The unique approach of incorporating flipped
classroom modules for the innovation course and an online high school student
design competition promotes scalability through potential adoption of the
program's methods throughout the full RET network and other interested teachers
throughout Pittsburgh and the nation.