* 1609918
* Surface Acoustic Spectroscopy Offers Novel, Broadband, and Spatially-Resolved Insight into Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 509,867.00

Non-technical Description: When an earthquake hits it shakes the buildings:
energy is transferred from the ground to the buildings and - if the buildings
are not designed appropriately - they cannot get rid of that energy and become
damaged or collapsed. This research project uses a similar approach to study a
particular class of novel semiconducting materials called transition metal
dichalcogenides. Usually, these materials are only a single atomic layer thick
and they hold tremendous opportunity for next generation electronic devices,
because they can serve in a transistor at a thinness unattainable by silicon
while at the same time allowing for optical communication. This method uses
sound waves within surfaces - waves much akin to those that shake the ground
during earthquakes - to rock the semiconductor thin layers and to study how the
charge carriers in them dissipate the energy. The approach provides unique
knowledge about the dynamic properties of charge carriers and how free they are
to move around so that they can sustain fast electronic applications. The great
advantage of this technique is that it does not require fabrication of
electrical contacts or attaching wires to the material under investigation.
Because the material is so thin, the metal of the wires can have a huge impact
on the results of measurements using more conventional techniques. This research
explores novel strategies for the integration of these materials into electronic
devices. The University of California at Riverside is a Hispanic serving
institution with every third student being Hispanic and every other student
being the first in the family to attend college. This research project is
conducted by a Hispanic graduate student and offers undergraduate research
opportunity to UC Riverside's diverse student
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research is focused on
studying the transport properties of two-dimensional (2D) transition metal
dichalcogenides by applying surface acoustic wave spectroscopy. The method is
contactless and provides insight into the transport properties modulations in
absence of any perturbation caused by electrical contacts needed for alternative
methods. The approach utilizes surface acoustic waves generated and recorded by
means of interdigital transducers that are spaced millimeters away from the
films under investigation. Optical excitation is used to modify the transport
properties of the films at diffraction-limited spatial resolution rivaling that
of current photoluminescence and Raman maps. This allows new insight into the
spatial variation of transport properties in transition metal dichalcogenide
films. The research team explores the impact of grain boundaries, lateral and
vertical interfaces, and other material perturbations on the local conductivity.
The project is interdisciplinary, combining the preparative techniques available
at the University of California, Riverside, with the expertise of an
international collaborator from University of Augsburg, Germany. The research is
expected to enhance the understanding of carrier transport in transition metal
dichalcogenide films with defects, heterojunctions or other local variations.
The acquired knowledge is a foundation for design of novel devices that
incorporate heterojunctions of such films as functional elements.