* 1609137
* Programmable Catalysts Designed to Replicate Flexible Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Severin Schneebeli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 414,268.00

Nature employs catalytic processes to replicate biopolymers (e.g., DNA) from
templates. Such processes are vital for sustaining life. Meanwhile, man-made
polymers are widely used in everyday life. Learning how to amplify man-made
polymers efficiently has important impacts on future advances in many fields,
such as medicine, electronics, and renewable energy. With the support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Prof. Severin Schneebeli at the University of Vermont is investigating
how to replicate well-defined, man-made polymers efficiently. His research group
aims to develop synthetic approaches to preparing functional polymers from
templates in a sustainable manner. Students at all academic levels participating
in this fundamental research gain valuable, multi-disciplinary insight and
experience in chemical synthesis, computer modeling, and materials science.
Furthermore, Professor Schneebeli organizes educational outreach events at the
ECHO lake aquarium and science center in Burlington, VT, to engage the public in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reach the aforementioned goals, this research
aims to develop catalysts - large molecular strips built with chirality-assisted
synthesis - which facilitate the accurate replication of man-made polymers. As
steric protection groups, these catalysts are designed to embrace the polymer
strands during the duplication processes to reduce common replication mistakes.
The synthetic approach focuses on key physical interactions commanding the
accuracy of replication for different catalyst/monomer pairs. Ultimately, this
research is devised to discover general design rules for the creation of shape-
defined, complex macromolecular structures, which can readily be amplified
exponentially. Professor Schneebeli unites art, engineering, and chemistry to
engage the public in science and its potential outcomes by organizing
educational outreach events at the ECHO lake aquarium and science center in
Burlington, VT. With interactive, 3D-printed, LEGO-like models, these outreach
activities educate the public about the genetic code of life and illustrate how
man-made approaches towards sustainable, replication-based materials synthesis
relate to nature?s methods of creating materials.