* 1609840
* Harnessing the Promise of Negative Ion Electron Capture Dissociation (niECD) for Acidic Biomolecule Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kristina Hakansson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program supports work
by Professor Kristina HÃ¥kansson and her group at the University of Michigan to
explore new approaches to characterizing biomolecules using tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) - a powerful and sophisticated analytical tool.
Specifically, the team has developed "negative ion electron capture dissociation
(niECD)," a new approach to probing the structure of molecules. Their research
aims to improve understanding of the fundamental mechanism of niECD, and to
expand its applications to new classes of molecules that are difficult to
characterize with conventional MS/MS approaches, with important implications for
drug discovery and enhanced understanding of the molecular basis of living
organisms. The work is providing training of graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment as well as participation in a K-12 Summer Program
"Girls in Science and Engineering" offered by the University of Michigan's Women
in Science and Engineering Program. The latter activities are aimed at boosting
interest in the scientific method at a young age through the discovery that the
contents of a box can be elucidated without opening it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to explore the compatibility of niECD
with a wider range of analytes that are difficult to characterize with
conventional MS/MS approaches. Goals include investigation of a proposed
zwitterion mechanism for the counter-intuitive niECD process, which results in
charge-increased rather than the typical charge-decreased species in other ion-
electron reactions, as well as further optimization of niECD for compatibility
with liquid chromatography. Continued development of niECD will allow access to
novel means for detailed structural characterization of important low-level
acidic biomacromolecules such as phospho- and sulfopeptides, intact acidic
proteins, cross-linked proteins, and RNA-small molecule complexes. Educational
activities are aimed at boosting interest in the scientific method at a young
age among htose underrepresented in science and engineering. The broader impact
of the research includes introduction of novel technology for biomolecular
structural characterization with important implications for drug discovery and
an enhanced understanding of the molecular basis of living organisms.