* 1609866
* Ion Hydration and Nanocalorimetry in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2023
* USD 966,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging (CMI) Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Evan Williams at the University of
California, Berkeley, and his group are developing methods to investigate the
interactions of ions with water in small droplets. State-of-the-art techniques
developed in the Williams lab enable new measurements of the strength of ion-
water interactions, how ions affect the structure of surrounding water
molecules, how ions interact with other ions, and how water stabilizes ion
charge. These measurements provide new insights into important problems in
chemistry where ions play a central role, such as ion-protein structural effects
that are important in biochemistry, ion solvation that plays a central role in
aerosol chemistry important in the atmosphere, electrochemistry that plays an
important role in batteries and fuel cells, and desalination that will likely
play an increasingly important role for providing a reliable source of fresh
water. They provide benchmarks that can help theoreticians improve computational
methods aimed at a deeper understanding of various processes at the molecular
level. Students working in the laboratory learn about instrumentation,
computational methods, and measurement science - training which prepares them
for success in a wide variety of technical careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolated nanodrops provide an ideal, well-controlled
environment in which to study ion-water interactions. These nanodrops are size-
selected, and thermochemical information is obtained using a method developed in
the lab called nanocalorimetry. The accuracy of this nanocalorimetry method is
being improved using UV laser light at various wavelengths for calibration. The
improved method is used to probe ion-electron recombination reactions, thereby
obtaining electrochemical half-cell potentials previously immeasurable using
conventional methods, and to establish an absolute electrochemical scale. The
concept of an absolute electrochemical scale has been hotly debated, but no
definitive method for establishing such a scale currently exists. The research
also seeks to extend the wavelength range of infrared photodissociation
spectroscopy in order to provide complementary information about how water
molecules directly interact with ions and ion-pairs inside the nanodrops. These
methods are being used to improve understanding of the role of ion-water
interactions for ions in the "Hofmeister" series, which orders ions based on
their propensity to either stabilize or destabilize the native structures of
proteins.