* 1609784
* Responsive Hybrid Oleosin Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Daniel Hammer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical A goal of materials research is to make responsive, biocompatible
materials that can respond uniquely to environmental conditions and also be
targeted to specific sites in the body. The development of carriers that can
specifically target sites of disease would increase the efficacy of treatments
and reduce toxic side effects of drugs delivered systemically. Nano-materials,
such as spherical micelles and vesicles, can be used to carry large payloads of
drugs and imaging agents. For all of the promise of targeted drug delivery,
there are relatively nanomaterials that afford robust, targeted delivery while
being responsive to environmental conditions. To meet this significant need, the
PI's goal is to make a class of nanocarriers, made from a naturally occurring
plant protein called oleosin, that can target specific sites, be turned on for
drug delivery only in specific locations, and have reduced immunogenicity. The
PI will introduce responsive domains into the protein using recombinant
biotechnology, and demonstrate how carriers made of the protein can bind to
sites of inflammation using a flow chamber lined with endothelial cells, the
cells which line blood vessels. This work will also impact the lives of students
who are trained in the PI's laboratory. The graduate students who work on this
project will be trained in the most current techniques in materials science, and
be prepared for careers in scientific research. In addition, the PI will
continue to run a highly successful summer program to introduce and encourage
talented high school students to pursue careers in science and engineering.

Technical

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Pennsylvania is to engineer an amphiphilic plant protein, oleosin,
to make targeted, responsive nanocarriers for drug delivery and imaging. Because
oleosin is made recombinantly, we can embed designer functionality within these
vesicles using the tools of molecular biology. The resulting investigation will
lead to a new class of responsive, bio-inspired materials with enormous
flexibility for targeted delivery. The PI hypothesize that large stretches of
oleosin can be replaced with domains from other proteins, preserving the
amphilicity and self-assembly of the molecules, but allowing the design of new
materials. One strategy will be to embed protease cleavable domains into
materials that allow for environmental proteases to trigger the binding of nano-
materials, or the release of drugs they are carrying after binding. A second
strategy will be to incorporate domains from human intrinsically disordered
proteins into oleosin, which will allow us to make humanized oleosins. The PI
will study how the length, number and type of IDP affects the assembly of the
nanocarrier and reduces its immunogenicity. The PI will demonstrate how these
materials can be used to deliver drugs specifically to inflammatory sites using
activated endothelial cells in a flow chamber, targeting the endothelial surface
molecule E-selectin. In the process, graduate students will be educate in
cutting edge methods for making and testing the activity of recombinant
proteins, and introduce high school students to research at the university level
and encourage them to pursue careers in science and engineering.