* 1609267
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Diffusion along Metal-Ceramic Interfaces: a combined theoretical and experimental study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Srolovitz, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 558,437.00

Part I: Non Technical Abstract

This project focuses on understanding the mechanisms by which atomic diffusion
occurs along metal/ceramic interfaces. Diffusion along metal/ceramic interfaces
plays a key role in a number of technological processes in a variety of
industrial sectors, including microelectronics (e.g., interconnect interfaces),
tooling (e.g., Co-WC interfaces), and automotive (Pt,Pd-alumina catalyst
interfaces) sectors. This type of interface diffusion largely determines the
rates of electromigration in metal interconnects and stress relaxation in thin
films, and the dispersion stability of metal catalysts. The design of better
components and more stable catalysts is impeded because of both the lack of
reliable data and the understanding of the basic science. Providing both the
fundamental, mechanistic science and reliable diffusion data are the main goals
of this project.

Part II: Technical Abstract

The main objective of the proposed Project is to understand the microscopic,
atomistic mechanisms of metal diffusion along the metal-ceramic interfaces
employing precise experimental measurements and first-principle computational
techniques. These studies will be performed in parallel on the same set of
interfaces. This synergistic study will establish the mechanisms for metal
diffusion along metal/ceramic interfaces, these diffusivities establish the
hierarchy of fast diffusion paths in crystalline solids. This is a focused
program of parallel and correlated computational and experimental studies of the
self- and hetero-diffusion of metal atoms along several different metal-ceramic
interfaces. The reliability of the computational methods will be verified by
comparing simulated atomic structures and energies with the experimentally
determined ones for the same set of interfaces. This work identifies which
mechanisms dominate transport kinetics in a wide range of multiphase system
applications. The experiments will be performed by dewetting a metal film on a
ceramic substrate to form metal particles that are then coated with the
diffusants. The interface diffusion will be monitored using analytical HRTEM.
The simulations will address point defect and interface energetics and transport
using first principles techniques coupled with molecular dynamics simulations.