* 1609204
* Introduction and Assessment of i-Newton for the Engaged Learning of Engineering Dynamics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Noel Perkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,992.00

A sound understanding of Newton's laws is essential for students pursuing
multiple engineering degrees. While many engineering students have little
difficulty reciting Newton's laws, few master the ability to apply these laws to
real engineered systems. This failure likely traces to over exposure to highly
idealized textbook examples and under exposure to actual engineered systems that
display motion. This project aims to change that by introducing a novel learning
technology, referred to as interactive-Newton or i-Newton, to promote the
engaged learning of Newtonian mechanics for engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The i-Newton technology delivers an inexpensive and highly
portable device (an inertial measurement unit) for measuring and analyzing
motion, essentially a "dynamics laboratory at your fingertips." The rich motion
data harvested from i-Newton allows detailed exploration and engaged leaning of
dynamics and without the expense of a brick and mortar laboratory. This project
will generate knowledge of how i-Newton (1) deepens the conceptual understanding
of Newtonian mechanics, (2) builds student self-efficacy, and (3) increases
student intention to persist in engineering. Extending beyond these goals, the
research team aims to institutionalize i-Newton in the engineering curricula at
the University of Michigan and to lay the foundation for the large-scale
adoption at other institutions through a commercialization pathway. Given that
Newtonian mechanics is taught to the more than 37,000 engineering undergraduates
per year in the U.S., the potential reach of this project is massive.