* 1609654
* Catalytic methods for site-specific modification of natural proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Zachary Ball, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Zachary Ball from Rice University to investigate
chemical reactions for protein modification. Proteins are incredibly large and
complex molecules and selective alteration of proteins remains a daunting
challenge. Nonetheless, chemically-modified proteins represent tantalizing
opportunities. Applications of modified proteins include biomaterials for
coatings or green energy and biological probes to understand, perturb, and
inhibit biological pathways. Efforts under this award focus on developing new
metal-mediated methods for protein modification. These novel methods allow the
preparation of new sites with novel structures, reactivity, and biological
properties. The research project is providing undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows with training in synthetic organic and
inorganic chemistry. In addition, these research participants are receiving
training in techniques and modern analytical methods of protein chemistry. An
integrated outreach program is introducing modern protein chemistry and
analytical methods to local high school teachers and their students.

In order to develop sequence-selective protein modification catalysts, this
project employs rhodium(II) conjugates that enable modification of proteins,
whether purified or in lysate, on the basis of molecular recognition. Catalytic
modification provides a covalent readout for the presence and location of ligand
binding, and thus allows identification of ligand-binding sites of "hit"
compounds. The reactivity can also be harnessed to quantify inhibitors of weak,
transient interactions that are difficult to study with existing methods. In a
new direction, Chan-Lam coupling of boronate reagents allows copper-catalyzed
modification of peptides and proteins, with unique sequence specificity.
Unnatural chemical modification of metalloenzyme active sites has emerged as a
powerful tool in metalloenzyme design. Boronate coupling promises to provide
exciting new tools to build hybrid metalloproteins with new function and
reactivity.