* 1609014
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Mallorie Taylor-Teeples, Taylor-Teeples          Mallorie       M
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Mallorie Taylor-Teeples is "The Role of Protein
Degradation in Plant Growth Patterning" The host institution for the fellowship
is the University of Washington and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jennifer
Nemhauser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing crop yield is essential to meet the
rising demand for food, feed and fuel. One major area for improvement is the
manipulation of plant architecture. The patterning of flowers along the shoot
(phyllotaxy) determines the positioning of grain or fruit along a stem. A key
player in the process of phyllotaxy is the plant hormone auxin. Recent research
in the Nemhauser Lab has found that phyllotactic patterning in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana can be altered by changing one protein in the auxin
response pathway. This project aims to test whether these findings can be
applied to multiple plant species. If successful, this work will pilot a
pipeline for rapid engineering of desirable agronomic traits into diverse crops
with limited genomic infrastructure. Research findings will be disseminated
through publications and presentations at scientific conferences. Public
outreach will include workshops with high school and middle school students to
facilitate understanding of basic biological concepts surrounding plant
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution has given rise to a staggering diversity
of body plans. Effective methods for altering the patterning of organ emergence
around the shoot are of agronomic interest, as phyllotactic patterning affects
light harvesting capacity and determines the density of grain or fruit along a
stem. Through the novel application of plant synthetic biology tools, the
Nemhauser Lab has found that phyllotactic patterning can be altered by re-
programming degradation rates of IAA28, an auxin repressor protein. Auxin-
mediated degradation of repressive Aux/IAA substrate proteins via the
E3-ubiquitin ligase pathway induces auxin-mediated transcriptional responses.
BARREN INFLORESCENCE 4, a putative ortholog of IAA28 in Zea mays, also plays a
role in phyllotaxy, suggesting that that the diversity in natural phyllotactic
patterns across plant species can be explained in part by variation in auxin
repressors. This project focuses on the readily tune-able parameter of auxin-
induced degradation rate as a potential mechanism to precision engineer new body
plans. These studies will be performed in parallel in three plants: Arabidopsis
thaliana, Zea mays and Brassica rapa.