* 1609198
* Existence and Regularity for Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Christine Breiner, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 127,195.00

This project concerns optimal objects for their respective energy functionals,
and as such existence and structural results are of interest in engineering,
physics, and chemistry. The most classically studied of these are minimal
surfaces, which locally minimize area subject to a fixed boundary. Of particular
interest in this project are so-called constant mean curvature (CMC) and minimal
surfaces as well as harmonic maps. CMC surfaces are also critical for the area
functional, but with constraint now given by enclosed volume. Delaunay
determined a family of CMC examples in 1841, but it was another 150 years before
any new examples were known, at which time Kapouleas produced infinitely many
new examples via gluing techniques. The variational solutions studied in this
project have characterizations in many areas of mathematics and the proposed
questions and desired results are of broad interest in mathematics and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue her study of classical
questions in geometric analysis related to the existence, regularity, and
compactness of solutions to variational problems. The project will use and
refine the gluing techniques pioneered by Kapouleas to produce new examples of
minimal and CMC surfaces. The understanding of singularity development for a
sequence of complete, properly embedded minimal disks, developed by Colding-
Minicozzi, was of critical importance for the resolution of the uniqueness of
the helicoid. In contrast to the picture developed when the disks are complete
and proper, the structure of the singular set for sequences of embedded minimal
disks with boundary in a ball can be pathological. These pathological examples
are helpful in the resolution of uniqueness and regularity results. Gluing
techniques will be used to produce even wilder singularities in settings where
problems are intractable via former techniques. For CMC gluing, the project aims
to extend the generalized gluing techniques developed in Euclidean space to more
general manifolds. In the setting of harmonic maps, the aim of the project is to
establish the existence of conformal harmonic maps into metric spaces with upper
curvature bounds. This work generalizes a classical result of Sacks and
Uhlenbeck on the existence of minimal 2-spheres. Existence of the established
maps could help answer the unresolved portions of Thurston's Hyperbolization
Conjecture.