* 1609023
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Matthew Nielsen, Nielsen                 Matthew        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Matthew Nielsen is
"Evolution of seasonal color plasticity in response to climate change in orange
sulphur butterflies." The host institution for this fellowship is the University
of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Joel
Kingsolver.

The goal of this research is to investigate how climate change affects adaptive
phenotypic plasticity, the ability of an organism to change its traits to better
fit its environment. Adaptive plasticity relies on the ability of an organism to
use cues to predict the future environment. Climate change can disrupt this
relationship so that formerly functional cues no longer reliably predict the
environment an organism will experience. The Fellow is investigating this in the
orange sulphur butterfly (Colias eurytheme), which as a caterpillar uses
seasonal changes in photoperiod to determine whether to produce a warm or cool
season form as an adult. Because climate change alters temperatures, but not
photoperiod, it has likely disrupted the ability for this butterfly (as well as
other organisms) to predict the environment it will experience; however,
evolutionary change could 'correct' this mismatch by altering the photoperiods
when the two morphs are produced. The Fellow is examining this evolutionary
process by examining changes in the time of year when each form is found across
the last 60 years using specimens from natural history collections across
different parts of the US, including the Smithsonian, the California Academy of
Sciences, the Field Museum, the Milwaukee Public Museum, the McGuire Collection
at University of Florida-Gainesville, and Yale's Peabody Museum. The Fellow's
research promotes understanding of how phenotypic plasticity evolves when the
relationship between a cue and the environment it predicts changes. Further, it
provides an important insight into the limitations of thermoregulatory
plasticity in responding to climate change and whether evolution can overcome
those limitations.

The Fellow is receiving advanced training in a variety of topics, including
hands-on work with collections, spatially explicit statistics, and biophysical
modeling. This project is allowing the Fellow to establish lasting
collaborations with other biologists using collections. The Fellow is training
undergraduates in topics such as experimental design, collection use, and data
analysis, and involving the broader public through a citizen science component
using online tools to help collect observations and survey the contemporary
timing of the orange sulphur?s seasonal morphs. To further connect to the
public, the Fellow is sharing his research resultsat multiple local science
festivals, focusing on how it fits into the broader picture of climate change.