* 1609195
* High Accuracy, Broadband Simulation of Complex Structures with Quantum Effects, Parallel Fast Algorithm, and Integral Equation Domain Decomposition
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Weng Chew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Even though classical electromagnetic theory has been around for over 150 years,
its enduring legacy has not diminished. In fact, it finds its way into so many
modern day technologies that it is indispensable in the modern world such as in
wireless communications, computer technologies, bio-medical engineering, and big
data transfer. Two concepts in electromagnetics have emerged in recent past.
First is the use of computers and mathematical methods that have appeared in the
20th century to solve highly complex electromagnetics, giving rise to the field
of computational electromagnetics (CEM). Second is the study of quantum effects
and quantum theory (that also appeared in the 20th century) in electromagnetic
systems giving rise to fields like quantum optics that can potentially impact
information, communications, and computation technologies such as quantum
information, communication, encryption, and computation. This project will
combine the use of computational electromagnetics knowledge to understand
quantum systems that interact with electromagnetic fields. This will engender
the development of future quantum technologies that open new gateways to
previously untapped possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop computational tools to meet the demands of emerging technologies in nano
chip, nano optics, and quantum optics. The modeling of electromagnetic and
quantum effects in nanostructures has become increasingly important due to the
miniaturization of transistors, optical structures, and quantum information
systems. But the exorbitant complexity and computational cost of modeling such
problems have precluded their precise solution so far. The objective of this
proposal is to develop fast computational algorithms that can capture circuit
physics, wave physics and quantum effects in order to effectively simulate
circuit-quantum electrodynamics (C-QED) systems. This will entail the
development of multi-scale, multi-physics solvers while incorporating quantum
effects through the use of the dyadic Green?s function. The resulting codes will
be validated against experimental results. If successful, this research will
open up a new frontier on how C-QED systems can be analyzed using fast, stable
and accurate computational algorithms. This in turn would enable new discoveries
in C-QED that could impact quantum computing and quantum information processing.
Extensive educational outreach activities are planned including the involvement
of K-12 and undergraduate students, and the development of visualization tools
and video lectures to disseminate results to the public.