* 1609058
* SusChEM: Fungal Proteins as Agents for Organization and Delivery of Electroactive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Paul Russo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: This SusChEM award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Georgia Institute of Technology is to investigate how
natural materials combine structural stability with elegant function, and how
that ability may be harnessed for the production of superior semiconducting
polymer assemblies for flexible/stretchable electronics. These polymers, which
transport charge or harvest photons to produce charge, depend upon organization
into ideally defect-free macromolecular structures. The vision presented in this
proposal is to exploit the ability of some fungal proteins to encapsulate and
induce the self-assembly of semiconducting polymers into organized architectures
that are expected to have exceptional electronic characteristics. These features
will provide access to low-cost, high performance, flexible, stretchable
electronics, which could transform technology as we know it today. This SusChEM
project provides opportunities to integrate research and education in
technologies that will impact society. Robust, flexible and stretchable
electronic systems may enable affordable sensors for applications in monitoring
the environment and personal health, flexible and conformal displays and many
more. The students participating in this research will be cross-trained in
multiple areas to expand their knowledge and experience for professional growth
and career opportunities. Further, based upon Georgia Tech's Invention Studio,
the investigators plan to adopt the model of student-led training to Materials
Science &amp; Engineering through creation of a new Materials Innovation Studio
to champion problem-solving and creative applications of material sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This proposal will investigate how
the structural stability and elegant functional properties of natural
biomaterials could be harnessed for the production of superior and value added
optoelectronic, and other high performance materials. These molecular or
supramolecular entities depend upon organization and alignment of them into
ideally defect-free, tightly stacked assemblies on a macromolecular scale. Using
a class of amphiphilic fungal proteins known as hydrophobins, this proposal will
exploit their ability to encapsulate and induce self-assembly of polymers into
organized architectures with enhanced stacking and therefore unprecedented
performance. These features are expected to provide access to low-cost, high
performance, flexible, stretchable materials for many applications. Hydrophobins
are powerful natural surfactants, known to form aqueous dispersions and even
encapsulate gases, organic solvents, and polymer solutions. Using these fungal
proteins, this project will study factors that control the maximum capsule
loading, and explore the impact of crystal structure on electronic
characteristics and design appropriate protocols to prepare high performance,
flexible and stretchable optoelectronic materials for fabrication of devices and
circuits. Students participating in this study will benefit from this
multidisciplinary and collaborative environment to expand their knowledge and
experience. The investigators plan a strong and long-running commitment to
broadened participation of students in science and engineering, and in serving
the community. Additionally, these researchers plan to expand Georgia Tech's
Invention Studio with its student-led training to Materials Science &amp;
Engineering areas, and to take a leading role in problem-solving and creative
applications of material sciences and engineering.