* 1609060
* Vacancy Engineering for Enhanced Strength and Toughness of Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Md Haque, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 325,000.00

1. Nontechnical Abstract

Strength (ability to bear mechanical load) and toughness (ability to resist
fracture) are desired in civil and transportation infrastructure, manufacturing
and processing, and bio-medical implants to make them stronger, safer, and
lighter and energy efficient. Unfortunately, strength and toughness in metals
are mutually exclusive - a fundamental challenge that remains to be resolved
because the mechanism that controls strength in metals is inversely coupled with
toughness. This research project aims to introduce a new type of mechanism,
where atomic scale vacancies interact with existing defects to induce decoupling
of strength and toughness. Such vacancy-defect interaction is not well
understood because in conventional metals, vacancies do not play dominant roles.
In addition, these mechanisms are strongly influenced by the internal structure
and existing defect distribution in the metal as well as temperature. The
experiments will be performed inside high-resolution microscopes, so the role of
different deformation mechanisms can be seen in real time as strength and
toughness are controlled and measured. The scientific outcome of this research
will be new knowledge in atomic scale vacancy - defect interactions, which will
be demonstrated through technological innovation in metals that are both strong
and tough. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in crosscutting
disciplines of metallurgy, mechanics, nanofabrication and microscopy to solve
this highly coupled research problem. Academic outreach activities will be
performed to attract the next generation workforce towards materials science &
engineering.

2. Technical Abstract

Strength of metals originates from their capability of suppressing dislocation
motion or plastic deformation. Toughness, on the other hand, requires large
amount of plastic work before fracture. Because of such conflict, they are
mutually exclusive. The current paradigm is to optimize, or in other words,
compromise between strength and toughness. Contrarily, this research aims to
maximize strength and toughness through synergistic multi-scale defect
interactions (0D: vacancy, 1D: dislocations and 2D: grain/twin boundaries).
Here, dislocation confinement in nano-crystalline metals is exploited to achieve
high strength. At the same time, point defects (vacancies) are generated at
ambient conditions, which facilitate diffusion-based plasticity without
unlocking the dislocations. The net result is the unique co-existence of
suppressed dislocation activities and pronounced diffusional plasticity without
any change in grain size. This research is based on the hypothesis that it is
possible to have both dislocation-based strength and diffusion-based
deformability in the same grain at the same time and at ambient temperature. A
unique material processing technique with temperature-current-stress synergy is
proposed to generate the required vacancy concentration. This leads to a
transformative concept; a three-way interaction among three dimensions of
defects to maximize both strength and toughness. The nanoscale grain boundaries
will lead to very high strength by impeding dislocation motion. The lack of
ductility arising from small grains is removed by vacancies through diffusional
plasticity in the grain boundaries. Finally, scalability of the proposed concept
in meso and macroscopic manufacturing processing will be studied for feasibility
in real life applications.