* 1609752
* Multiphase Chemistry in Soil and its Impact on Reactive Nitrogen Recycling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jonathan Raff, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, Professor Jonathan
Raff of Indiana University is investigating how reactive nitrogen oxide (NOy)
gases interact with soil surfaces. NOy is generated during fuel combustion and
is an important precursor to the radicals that both control the lifetime of
pollutants and generate harmful byproducts (e.g., ozone and particulate matter).
Removal of NOy through adsorption to soil surfaces is a process that remains
largely unexplored despite the fact that soil is a substrate with high
reactivity and high surface area. Soil comprises vast areas of the Earth's
surface. Additional activities include providing graduate students (including
those from groups that are underrepresented in the science) with opportunities
to perform cutting-edge and pertinent research in the environmental chemical
sciences. Dr. Raff is developing an outreach program that provides local middle
and high school students and their teachers with access to portable pollutant
monitors for field trips and in-class experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the research is to study how fast NOy adsorbs onto soil and the chemical
processes that "recycle" nitrogen species back into the atmosphere. The
multiphase chemistry of several NOy species on a variety of soil-related
substrates are studied under environmentally relevant conditions using soil
chemistry, physical chemistry, and biochemistry techniques. Results from the
activities ultimately contribute to an improved understanding of the fate of
reactive nitrogen in soil and the protection of human health against poor air
quality. As air quality standards for ground-level ozone become more strict,
background levels of NOy that are influenced by soil emissions and multiphase
chemistry of NOy on ground surfaces become more important. The kinetics studies
allow modelers to more accurately parameterize soil NOy emissions in the
chemical transport models. Such simulations are used to predict the formation
and movement of pollutants and inform pollution control policy.