* 1609404
* Collaborative Research: A Holistic Approach to Wind Energy Integration:  From the Atmospheric Boundary Layer to the Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Sven Schmitz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2020
* USD 125,000.00

With the current trends towards higher levels of electric power produced using
wind resources, the uncertainties and fluctuations of wind power output are
increasingly challenging power grid operations and especially the so-called
generation dispatch operations. Generation dispatch refers to scheduling
traditional power plant output based on predicted demand, but this becomes
difficult when wind energy becomes a major source of electric power. This is due
to the unpredictability of wind as a resource. To seamlessly integrate wind
energy to the power grid, it is imperative to improve the modeling of wind power
output at the scale of wind farms, from seconds up to a day ahead. The
quantitative characterization of wind fluctuations from the atmosphere and those
induced by turbine-turbine interactions is a central component towards
accurately predicting wind power output. Even with such predictions available to
grid operators, the benefits associated with enhanced power system operations
have neither been fully understood nor exploited. This problem is a fundamental
issue of sustainable energy infrastructure related to the integration of
fluctuating wind power into the power grid. This research aims to develop
fundamental knowledge and guidelines to close the gap between atmospheric flow
and wind farm electric power output, and to integrate this linkage to
efficiently and reliably operate power grids. The holistic approach has the
potential to allow the electric power grid to embrace higher levels of wind
energy penetration. It will ultimately aid in decreasing the cost of wind power
and help it become an attractive and viable option for the nation's renewable
energy portfolio. The project will also fund the educational development of both
graduate and undergraduate students, and significant efforts will be made to
disseminate the results to the general public, the wind energy engineering
community, and to the K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project aims to develop a holistic framework to close the gap between
atmospheric turbulence and wind farm electric power output to increase the
efficiency of power grid operations. To achieve this goal, an interdisciplinary
team will synergize their analytical, experimental, and numerical expertise to
address the foundational problems of improving wind power prediction and power
grid operations. High-performance computing will be used to characterize and
quantify the variations of the turbulence dynamics occurring over the diurnal
cycle (i.e., 24 hour day/night cycle) and their ability to modulate power
fluctuations at the wind-farm level. Furthermore, a generic approach to wind-
farm power output parametrization will be developed to account for temporal
power output variability over a range of time scales (from seconds to hours),
along its variance and spectral structure. The state-of-the-art wind power
predictions will be integrated to design advanced control and operational tools
for power grids. The ultimate goal is to achieve higher levels of wind energy
that can be integrated to the electric power systems, and to contribute towards
a future sustainable energy infrastructure. The potentially transformative
aspects of the research include the development of a general parametrization of
wind farm power output, and robust and economic frequency control designs. The
work will integrate the physical processes involved in wind energy systems, the
power grid and the associated interface between the two, including i)
uncertainties in wind power modeling associated with the atmospheric stability
state and diurnal cycle; ii) short-term and hourly-ahead forecasting of
electrical power output fluctuations at the wind farm scale; and iii) enhancing
power grid operations using the wind output prediction. The facilities at UIUC
and PSU as well as the diverse expertise of the PIs provide an ideal environment
for conducting this research.