* 1609898
* Collaborative Research: Phase-Change Materials for Strong Optical Modulation and Nonvolatile Optical Memory
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Shriram Ramanathan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 264,693.00

Non-technical Description: The ability to manipulate properties of light beams
has changed our understanding of the physical universe. Light beams are being
explored to process information, probe the nature of solids and understand how
the brain responds to and interacts with external stimuli. New materials that
interact with light in unusual ways often form the cornerstone for enhancing the
effective coupling of light to matter. The project investigates the potential of
new material systems in emerging devices that manipulate light. The research
goal is to explore optical and electronic properties of thin film materials that
have a controllable phase change near room temperature that can be
systematically induced by changing the electronic structure for potential
applications in optical memories. The project is collaborative between materials
scientists and photonics "study of light" engineers to bring multi-disciplinary
skills together to work on cutting-edge topics in nanophotonics incorporating
new thin film materials. The project trains graduate and undergraduate students
to carry out research at the intersection between materials science,
nanophotonics, and optoelectronics. The project engages diverse students in
interdisciplinary research that encompasses materials growth, device design,
computer modeling, cleanroom nanofabrication, and optical/electronic
characterization of materials/devices.

Technical Description: This project investigates the potential of electron-doped
perovskites as novel phase-changing materials for future light modulation
devices needed for optical memory, brain-inspired photonic devices with multiple
states. The research goals of this collaborative project are to elucidate the
fundamental mechanisms and reliability of non-volatility of the electron
incorporation process and to understand the limits on the speed of phase change
studied by optical routes. The research team uses a combination of thin film
materials synthesis, electron diffraction, carrier transport measurements,
optical microscopy and spectroscopy to study the nanostructure and optical
properties of selected perovskite oxides. The research team uses "metasurfaces",
which are two-dimensional arrays of optical antennas, to maximize the
interaction between intensely confined light and thin films of phase-change
materials. The project involves diverse graduate and undergraduate students to
work on frontier topics in nanophotonics. Collaborations between materials
scientists and photonics researchers enhances the research experience and
broaden the technical horizons of the participating students.