* 1609954
* Advanced Terahertz Imaging Systems based on Plasmonic Antenna Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mona Jarrahi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 324,998.00

Terahertz waves are very attractive for medical imaging applications since they
do not pose an ionization hazard for human tissue, due to their very low energy
compared to shorter wavelength waves often used in medical imaging systems.
Moreover, terahertz waves experience less scattering from biological tissue
compared to optical waves due to their longer wavelengths making it possible to
see deeper into different biological tissue types. Additionally, several
absorption lines of water lie in the terahertz frequency spectrum, making
terahertz waves very powerful means for distinguishing between tissues with
different hydration levels that is often useful for diagnostics purposes. The
combination of these attractive attributes of terahertz waves has created a
great deal of interest in terahertz imaging systems and has been utilized for
various medical imaging and diagnostics applications. In spite of a significant
advancement in terahertz imaging systems over recent years, existing terahertz
imaging systems have constraints in their size, image acquisition time, image
resolution, and detectable depth, which has limited the scope of their potential
use for various medical imaging and diagnostics applications. The research
component of this program will address some of the physical limitations of
existing terahertz imaging systems by developing a high-performance pulsed
terahertz imaging system with potential application in in-vivo imaging and
diagnostics applications. Additionally, this program will integrate research
with education and outreach activities by developing new courses, recruitment
and involvement of undergraduate students, and organizing high-school seminars.

The objective of this research is to develop a new generation of non-contact
terahertz imaging systems that offer significantly larger detectable depths and
faster image acquisition rates compared to existing terahertz imaging
technologies. For this purpose, a novel pulsed terahertz imaging system based on
a two-dimensional array of large area plasmonic photoconductive terahertz
sources and detectors compatible with a commercial endoscope will be implemented
and experimentally demonstrated. The use of large area plasmonic photoconductive
sources and detectors will enhance the output power of terahertz sources,
detection sensitivity of terahertz detectors, and signal-to-noise ratio, thus
enabling significantly larger detectable depths for the imaging system. The
proposed work presents a new perspective on the potential use of terahertz
technology for various medical diagnostics applications that are not currently
possible due to the shallow detectable depth and bulky nature of existing
terahertz imaging systems. The proposed theoretical investigation will provide a
detailed understanding of the fundamental physical limitations of plasmonic
terahertz source/detector operations, while the experimental effort will develop
appropriate device fabrication and packaging processes compatible with endoscopy
systems.