* 1609781
* Thermochemistry of Nanoceramics: Understanding and Controlling Densification and Grain Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Ricardo Castro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 413,400.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ceramic materials can exhibit unique physical and
chemical properties when their feature size approaches nanometer dimensions.
These properties have inspired a variety of applications in several fields and
opened the development of solutions in response to current U.S. challenges such
as the increasing demand for energy and national security. However, design and
fabrication of optimal and durable ceramics at the nanoscale still face
significant difficulties, and more understanding at the fundamental level of
these processes is required. Within this project, Prof. Castro focuses on the
larger volume fraction of interfaces present in nanoscaled ceramics to improve
processing control by targeting modifications on their intrinsic thermodynamic
properties. This approach challenges old paradigms in the field that infer
thermodynamics is irrelevant on processing optimization, and offers
opportunities for unprecedented breakthroughs. Prof. Castro works on the science
behind products, i.e. the consolidation of powders. The goals are to enable
faster, less expensive, and more controlled processing, and more durable
materials. This research investigates a technologically-important material
(magnesium aluminate). The project also has important education components that
focus on the promotion of engineering in middle and high-schools; and training
of undergraduate and graduate students in research and development. The K-12
program involves demonstrations of interesting processing and properties at
school events to expose students to basic materials' concepts. The undergraduate
program involves competitions and hands-on research opportunities in
contemporary technologies, while the graduate students are directly involved in
cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project uses
highly-sensitive calorimetric techniques to measure interface energies of
nanoscaled ceramics with the goal of improving the control of sintering and
grain growth by monitoring and manipulating driving forces. The aim is to
quantify the effects of dopants on the interface energies and correlate them
with processing parameters and kinetics. The effect of dopants in processing is
typically considered exclusively on a kinetic basis, but with the advent of
high-resolution calorimetry available at University of California-Davis, Prof.
Castro?s group is capable of quantifying the effect of composition change on the
energetics of the system, opening a new avenue for processing control on a
thermodynamic basis. Within this project, differential scanning calorimetry,
oxide melt drop-solution calorimetry and water adsorption microcalorimetry are
used to thermodynamically characterize magnesium aluminate properties ? a
material of strategic interest for armor, laser, and refractory applications.
The data is then correlated with sintering and grain growth behavior. A better
understanding of the role of interface energetics and dopants in processing
fosters improvement of composition design in industries, enabling more energy
and cost efficient products, with more stable grain sizes (a key element on the
control of ceramics? properties). From an education perspective, students
participating in the project are being mentored, are working with strategic
materials and processes, and are receiving training for their future careers as
materials? professionals.