* 1609935
* Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Transition-Metal Compounds with Large Spin-Orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Valery Kiryukhin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 397,615.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Compounds containing elements with large atomic
numbers (such as iridium and osmium) exhibit a strong interaction between their
magnetic and structural properties called spin-orbit coupling. It gives rise to
exotic and technologically relevant properties, potentially useful for making
superconductors, novel magnetic materials for low-power electronics, and
permanent magnets. Herein, studies of two important classes of such compounds,
the so-called transition-metal dichalcogenides and hexagonal chain oxide
magnets, using x-ray and neutron probes are proposed. The obtained atomic-level
crystallographic and magnetic structures of these compounds, as well as their
dynamical properties, are expected to reveal the specifics of the action of the
spin-orbit coupling in these materials. The resulting insights might help in the
design of future high-performance permanent magnets, as well as novel nanoscale
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Interaction of electronic degrees of freedom with crystal
lattice gives rise to a plethora of interesting effects in transition-metal
compounds, such as multiferroicity, and colossal magnetoresistance. Spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) is an important magnetostructural coupling mechanism. In systems
with electrons in 3d and 4d shells, SOC is usually weak. In 5d materials,
however, it can qualitatively change the basic materials properties, leading to
novel physical effects and new device concepts. Herein, x-ray and neutron
scattering studies of the lattice and magnetic structures, as well as their
dynamical properties, are proposed for two classes of 5d compounds. (1) Layered
transition-metal dichalcogenides. The proposed studies include investigations of
global and local lattice symmetry, long-range and local dimer orderings, and
their role in destruction/promotion of exotic superconductivity, magnetic order,
and spin-polarized electronic bands. (2) Quasi-one-dimensional hexagonal magnets
exhibiting colossal magnetic coercivity, and unusual magnetic anisotropies.
Studies of field-induced transitions, microscopic magnetic interactions, and
magnetic domains are proposed. The goals include understanding the unusual
magnetism in these compounds, its relationship to the physics of 5d electrons,
and whether this physics could give an insight into functioning of permanent
magnets.