* 1609829
* Far from Equilibrium and Quantum Phenomena in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Emil Yuzbashyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in non-equilibrium physics. Thanks to major advances in
technology, new states of matter can be accessed experimentally by driving a
system of many interacting particles far from their unperturbed equilibrium
state. For example, researchers are now able to stir up electrons in a
superconducting metal with an intense ultrashort pulse of electromagnetic
radiation while fully maintaining the overall superconductivity of the material.
The conventional tools of statistical physics do not apply in such non-
equilibrium conditions. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop reliable
theories of these phenomena, and to predict and describe new states of far-from-
equilibrium quantum matter that can potentially be harnessed in novel quantum
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of the research plan will at
the same time foster training and education of graduate students and postdocs.
Integral parts of this project are the proposed graduate course on non-
equilibrium many-body physics, and the development of interactive methods for
teaching non-science majors, which will be implemented in collaboration with the
PI's colleagues in science pedagogy at Rutgers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in non-equilibrium physics. The past decade has witnessed
unprecedented experimental access to coherent dynamics of many-body interacting
systems. Far-from-equilibrium superconductivity and superfluidity is an
important separate subfield that has been growing rapidly since the PI's early
influential work. Nevertheless, a universal description and understanding of the
origin of non-equilibrium phases commonly seen in different superfluids is still
lacking. This project aims specifically at developing both. The PI also plans to
explore non-equilibrium topological superfluids that are expected to have much
richer topological properties than in equilibrium, as well as non-equilibrium
phases and instabilities in the dynamics of multicomponent superfluids. A
further goal of this project is to analyze how the dynamics change as we
gradually go from quantum to classical mechanics using the central spin model as
an example, and to study the driven-dissipative dynamics of ensembles of two-
level atoms that are strongly coupled through a cavity mode. The last research
component of this project addresses mesoscopic and nanoscale properties of
quantum integrable systems. Random Matrix Theory (RMT) enjoyed a great deal of
success as a description of many such universal properties in non-integrable
complex systems. The PI plans to develop a counterpart of RMT for quantum
integrable systems starting from basic principles. In a separate study, the PI
will apply this newly created integrable matrix theory to the problem of quantum
irreversibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of the research plan
will at the same time foster training and education of graduate students and
postdocs. Integral parts of this project are the proposed graduate course on
non-equilibrium many-body physics, and the development of interactive methods
for teaching non-science majors, which will be implemented in collaboration with
the PI's colleagues in science pedagogy at Rutgers.