* 1609406
* Hierarchical Assembly of Peptide Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jean Chmielewski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2019
* USD 460,000.00

Under the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jean Chmielewski of Purdue
University conducts research building unique structures on a very small (nano-
to micro-) scale using ball and stick atomic and molecular building blocks.
Professor Chmielewski studies how the size and shape of the structures they make
can be controlled by changing the building blocks at a molecular level. These
nano- and micro-structures may have many uses, such as delivering drugs to
different parts of the body or helping to grow new organs. Professor Chmielewski
trains many chemistry students who work on this project. She is working to
improve the diversity of the chemistry graduate student population at Purdue
University. In this way a new generation of diverse scientists will be available
to tackle the technological challenges of the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hierarchical assembly of nanoscale building
blocks into micron-scaled functional materials is a powerful strategy for the
design of devices for technological applications. The Chmielewski research group
has previously used collagen peptide triple helices as building blocks for
higher order assembly promoted by metal-ligand interactions. In this way her
group generated a range of unique nano- to micro-structures, including fibers,
disks, florettes, cages and 3-dimensional matrices, which are potentially useful
for biopolymer delivery, imaging agents, cell culture and tissue growth. Herein
Prof. Chmielewski investigates coiled coil peptides (dimer to tetramer) and
disulfide-linked helical bundle peptides (pentamer to hexamer) as alternate
building blocks for metal ion-promoted higher order assembly into nano- and
microscale materials. Modulating the oligomerization state of the peptide allows
the control of the number of assembly signals displayed on the building block
and provides the opportunity to design pores within the building block. The
overall goals of this research are to have fully optimized conditions to
generate distinct peptide nano- and micro-structures on demand and to develop a
clear understanding of the mechanistic underpinnings of the assembly process.