* 1609494
* Complex Functional Materials Accessed through Precision Scaffold Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Nicole Sampson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 07/31/2020
* USD 565,138.00

This research project enables the synthesis of next generation functional
polymers (plastics) with precise sequences of building blocks. The precise
sequence of the synthesis allows preparation of the polymers in bulk quantities
and these quantities enable the researchers to determine the effects of the
synthetic sequences on the physical properties of the new polymers. These
synthetic methods are readily adoptable by the polymer community because the
materials are prepared in one-step from simple starting materials that are
commercially available. This project trains graduate students to pursue
interfacial research projects that solve problems at the chemistry-materials-
chemical engineering interface. The research impact is transferred to the
broader community through formal training in general public communication under
the auspices of the Alda Center for Communicating Science at Stony Brook
University. Using techniques to improve audience engagement and for distilling
their message, researchers engage local high school students and college
students in understanding the activities of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on developing
alternating ring-opening metathesis polymerization syntheses that provide
materials with monomer-level control of sequence. With the successes in
ruthenium catalyst development provide both functional group tolerant and
rapidly propagating catalysts, the next goal is to develop monomers that
generate materials with previously inaccessible types of nanoscale morphologies.
The Sampson laboratory's recent discovery of the
bicyclo[4.2.0]oct-1(8)-ene-8-carboxamide-/cyclohexene system allows the
preparation of very long, alternating polymers with high monomer economy. An
aggressive determination of the scope of the alternating polymer reaction is
planned. This project identifies polymer microstructures that can and cannot be
achieved. The chemistry research provides a unique opportunity to explore and
discover novel nanoscale structures formed as a consequence of precise
macromolecular sequence control.