* 1609120
* CDS&amp;E: Appraisal of Subgrid Scale Closures in Reacting Turbulence via DNS Big Data
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* William Layton, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 362,735.00

Design and manufacture of advanced combustion systems for both industrial and
government applications is aided by direct numerical simulation (DNS) of
turbulent combustion data. Such "big data" sets are so large that the data has
to be either aggressively filtered at the source or discarded after a short
period of time. The project employs a range of strategies and computational
tools for utilizing DNS data to appraise the performance of large eddy
simulation (LES) predictions in turbulent combustion. The study will pave the
way for LES to become the primary means of predictions for future design and
manufacturing of combustion systems, while building a data sharing
infrastructure, and providing educational and outreach programs to students at
all levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is built around a
coordinated 5-element strategy for handling turbulent combustion direct
numerical simulation (DNS) data sets of the order of tens to hundreds of
terabytes in size. The elements include: (1) Appraisal of current LES strategies
using DNS data in various flame regimes; (2) Assessment of confidence intervals
of SGS closures in LES; (3) Development of a computational framework for
efficient computation of filtered DNS data; (4) Development of infrastructure
for broad sharing of DNS data and annotations which can be employed to appraise
future SGS closures and LES predictions; and (5) Suggestion for future DNS to be
conducted of flames in other (missing) regimes. The DNS big data will be
collected from multiple sources and will pertain to both non-premixed and
premixed (fully or partially) flames. The LES will be conducted with the aid of
subgrid scale (SGS) closures that are applicable for each of the flame
configurations considered in DNS. An attempt will be made to cover all of the
regimes of turbulent combustion as identified in the literature and contribute
further insight as to which LES prediction would work better in the different
regimes. Appraisal of the SGS closures via DNS data will be invaluable for
assessing the level of trust and confidence that can be placed on the closure.
By integrating expertise from a team of engineers, computer scientists, and
mathematicians, the study has the potential to make a significant impact in
state-of-the-art high-fidelity predictions of turbulent combustion. Success of
this research will have a significant impact in combustion, both in the gas-
turbine industry and in government (DoD, DOE, NASA). The potential for LES to
become the primary predictive tool for future design and manufacturing of
combustion systems will be aided by the enhanced infrastructure, which will
facilitate incorporation of future SGS closures. The study will also provide
research opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, K-12
outreach, and recruitment of students from minority and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the Computational Data-
Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) Program.