* 1609470
* A Multi-Physics-Based Approach to Active Microwave Thermography
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Lesley Sneed, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 385,233.00

Active Microwave Thermography (AMT) is based on the integration of microwave and
thermographic nondestructive testing (NDT), which utilizes a microwave heat
excitation for subsequent thermal measurements. AMT has strong potential for
controlled, rapid, and effective inspection of targeted (surface or volumetric)
regions of rehabilitated concrete infrastructure. By combining the benefits of
multiple NDT techniques, unique features of multiple methods can be brought
together to achieve new results that one method alone cannot achieve. A
significant advantage to the integration of these techniques lies in the ability
to capitalize on microwave signal properties to achieve focused and localized
heating. The outcomes of this research will result in a new NDT method with
broad-reaching applications for inspection of aging infrastructure, which has
direct benefits to society through cost-savings and general safety of the
public. In addition, this research establishes an approach for simulation and
experimental aspects that will serve as a solid developmental platform for
expansion of AMT to other fields such as medical, aerospace, and security.
Research opportunities within this project will be offered to underrepresented
(minority/female high school through graduate) students. Further, this work will
have a significant impact on the content of several undergraduate and graduate
courses taught in the electrical and computer engineering department, the civil,
architectural, and environmental engineering department, and the chemistry
department at Missouri University of Science and Technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to develop the general science behind a
unique nondestructive testing (NDT) method for controlled, rapid, and effective
inspection of targeted (volumetric) regions of a structure through the
integration of microwave NDT and thermography, referred to as Active Microwave
Thermography (AMT). A significant advantage to merging these techniques lies in
the ability to capitalize on the strengths of microwave NDT and thermography
while improving their limitations. A key benefit to utilizing microwave energy
as a heat source is the potential for controlled and targeted heating, thereby
improving the efficacy of thermography. The tasks proposed in this project will
be conducted through multi-physics based microwave and thermal simulations and
will be subsequently verified with measurements. A materials characterization
effort will be conducted to characterize the materials used in rehabilitated
concrete structures from an electromagnetics point-of-view. This information
will be invaluable for other applications where such materials are utilized.
Moreover, as part of the material characterization effort, this work capitalizes
on microwave-induced heating to determine information about electric dipole
moments. This study will also provide information necessary to build predictive
models for how a material will physically respond to microwave heating and
eventually predetermine thermal signatures for healthy and defective samples.
Further, these tasks will address critical issues including the effectiveness
and optimization of microwave heating and the detection sensitivity of AMT to
flaws/defects. Moreover, current literature states that modulated lock-in
methods are not possible for AMT due to the interaction between the microwave
energy and thermal camera hardware. However, AMT systems can be designed to
reduce the electromagnetic interference with the thermal camera, thereby
alleviating this limitation and opening the door for a more successful
utilization of this technique. Additionally, this study will explore the
potential for advanced signal processing techniques that utilize microwave-
specific attributes such as polarization control and patterned heating that will
lead to improved defect detection and characterization capabilities. Overall,
the project outcomes will not only result in a new inspection method for the
transportation and infrastructure industries, but also a development platform
for applications of AMT in other important industries such as medical,
aerospace, and security.