* 1609647
* Towards high power output electrostatic energy converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* John Tichy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

The field of wireless sensors for various applications including applications
related to the Internet of Things is rapidly growing. Powering wireless devices
with replaceable batteries will become unsustainable due to their finite
lifespan and high maintenance costs. Thus, there is a great need for micro-scale
power generators, which are inconspicuous and inexpensive while generating
sufficient power to match the requirements of wireless sensors. Silicon-based
electrostatic power generators employ variable capacitors to harvest mechanical
vibration energy. They have significant advantages over other mechanical
vibration harvesting technologies because of their compatibility with processes
for fabrication of integrated circuits (IC), which minimize costs and also allow
for on-chip integration with wireless sensors and control circuitry. Currently,
the level of power output of state-of-the art harvesters is still an order of
magnitude lower than that required by most advanced ultra-low power wireless
systems. In this work, new concepts will be investigated to create silicon-based
electrostatic harvesters with increased power output. As part of the project, a
consistent effort will be made to attract students from underrepresented
minorities in the research. The research results will also be communicated to a
broad audience including high school students, through summer programs and other
outreach efforts at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to investigate new methods for silicon-based
electrostatic vibration energy harvesters in order to increase their power
output. Such devices typically employ variable capacitors with interdigitated
electrodes, where a set of electrodes moves in response to vibration. The energy
converted depends on the level of capacitance variation during motion. The
proposed work explores two transformative approaches to increase the capacitance
variation, and consequently the power level, by investigating: i) a dual-level
stopper, in conjunction with highly dense packed electrodes in gap-closing
interdigitated in-plane harvesters and ii) out-of-plane interdigitated
harvesters. The first approach employs two different stopping mechanisms, a
nanostopper and a soft-stopper, that work together to boost the maximum
capacitance and produce frequency up-conversion, increasing the number of energy
conversion cycles per unit time for a gap closing in-plane harvester. The
nanostopper is defined by an insulating film with nanometer thickness deposited
on the electrode sidewalls, which sets the absolute minimum gap. The thin film
stopper will provide a separation gap that is smaller by at least an order of
magnitude, as compared to stoppers defined via lithography and etching. This in
turn results in an order of magnitude increase in capacitance variation and
consequently in power output. The role of the soft-stoppers is to trigger
frequency up-conversion, increasing the harvesting frequency, along with
increasing device bandwidth and prolonging the lifespan of the nanostopper by
minimizing impact forces. The second proposed approach employs a structure not
previously explored for vibration energy harvesting with silicon-based devices.
This structure oscillates out-of-plane and has high conversion potential due to
the ability to undergo extreme capacitance changes. To validate these
approaches, theoretical models will be developed to predict performance as a
function of input parameters. Design optimization will be carried out for both
types of devices, followed by fabrication and testing.