* 1609848
* Molecular Insights into the Oxidation of Atmospheric Mercury
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Chuji Wang, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2021
* USD 545,789.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Theodore Dibble
at the State University of New York (SUNY) College of Environmental Science and
Forestry and Dr. Chuji Wang of Mississippi State University are investigating
how atoms of mercury react in the atmosphere to form molecules that are readily
transferred into ecosystems. Atmospheric reactions of mercury are not well
known. Questions of where and when mercury enters ecosystems and how it is
transported around the globe are of special interest. Mercury is toxic to people
and wildlife. Mercury in the atmosphere is not present in harmful
concentrations, but once mercury enters ecosystems it is concentrated in animal
tissues to levels that are dangerous when eaten by other animals or humans. Dr.
Dibble works with high school teachers to develop modules to teach kinetics
based on mercury-containing chemistry. The broader impacts of this work include
the first experimental determination of the products of atmospheric reactions of
mercury-containing molecules, and the incorporation of the results of this
research into atmospheric models of mercury chemistry and
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on mercury oxidation by
atomic bromine (Br). Cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) is used to monitor the
fate of the HgBr radical in reactions with atmospheric trace gases. CRDS
experiments and computational chemistry are used to determine, for the first
time, the rate constants for reactions of HgBr radicals with ozone, volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), and atmospherically abundant radicals (Y. radicals,
where Y. = NO, NO2, HOO, ClO, BrO, and IO). Rate constants are determined as a
function of temperature and pressure to span the full range of atmospheric
conditions. Synergistic interactions between scientists doing field studies,
modeling, and laboratory work accelerate progress towards understanding global
mercury cycling.