* 1609043
* SusCHEM: Supramolecular Assembly and Catalysis Applications of Organoborane Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Frieder Jaekle of the Department
of Chemistry at Rutgers University-Newark is studying a new class of polymers
that contain the element, boron. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and
are found in many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including food
packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. In this research project, Professor Jaekle is
developing methods to synthesize polymers that contain specific boron-containing
groups and then to utilize these polymers as catalysts for chemical reactions.
Major features of these catalysts are that they are stable and easily recycled
for further use. Professor Jaekle is training a diverse group of undergraduate
and graduate students in a highly interdisciplinary research environment. The
students are using and maintaining instrumentation for polymer research and
education at Rutgers University-Newark. Professor Jaekle and his group are also
involved in K-12 outreach activities and the stimulation of international
scientific exchange through the organization of international symposia.

Organoboranes are well-known for their Lewis acidic properties. When combined
with hindered Lewis bases so-called "frustrated Lewis pairs" are generated that
can be exploited in small molecule activation and in various catalytic
processes. There are few examples of recyclable versions of these high-value
catalysts, though. Professor Jaekle is studying how to attach functional
organoboranes to both soluble polymers and polymer resins with easily accessible
functional groups. Two target structures are being pursued: (1) highly electron-
deficient triarylboranes that in concert with Lewis bases are capable of
activating small molecules such as dihydrogen or silanes: These polymers will be
tested as catalysts in the hydrogenation and hydrosilylation of imines,
aldehydes and ketones. (2) electron-deficient borinic acids and corresponding
polymers that are expected to display unusual self-assembly characteristics
through hydrogen bonding and Lewis acid-base interactions: These polymers will
be tested as catalysts in amidation reactions. Outreach activities involving
K-12 students are being planned, including the participation of high school
students from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds in research through
the ACS Project SEED and the organization of Polymer and Materials Chemistry
Outreach Programs that involve local schools with predominantly minority
students.