* 1609379
* Nanoporous polymer particles and gels containing functionalized semi-rigid copolymer structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Richard Turner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 181,943.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental and exploratory
research of this project is directed toward the discovery of new specifically
designed polymeric materials that can serve as enabling materials for
innovations in specific gas and metal ion sorbent technologies. Such materials
could be employed as tools for applications involving gas emissions and water
pollution. This project will focus on creation and study of high-surface-area
polymer particles. These would contain high loadings of specifically chosen
chemical groups delivered by specially designed polymer units and could be
readily prepared by industrially practiced polymerization processes. These
polymeric materials could provide practical candidates for acid gas and heavy
metal ion capture (e.g., carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, heavy-metal ions).
Some of these polymers could also lead to practical high-surface-area polymer
particles for enhancing reversible storage of hydrogen. Results from this
project will be reported at major scientific conferences and published in high-
impact journals. Students trained with intense interactions across discipline
boundaries are an important output of this research. The tight coupling of
disciplinary and interdisciplinary training in the scientific development of new
functional polymeric materials will prepare students to enter the scientific
workforce well-prepared to make important contributions for advancing the
technological growth of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this project focuses on
preparing and studying novel semi-rigid, sterically crowded and precisely
functionalized nanoporous hypercrosslinked polymeric materials. Precise
insertion of semi-rigid segments from alternating copolymers into
hypercrosslinked polymer particles delivers new chemical backbone units to
modify properties of network systems. Precise control of placement of functional
groups from strictly alternating sequences will enable unique solid state
constructs that are expected to provide excellent control over physical
properties of the resulting networks. For hypercrosslinked systems, these semi-
rigid units slow pore collapse during the hypercrosslinking step. Computational
collaboration will help guide the development of the fundamentals for designing
higher surface area functional particles. These new hypercrosslinked polymeric
materials will possess high surface areas with high concentrations of functional
groups designed for specific interactions with gas sorbates, metal ions, or
other reactive molecules. Comparison of semi-rigid chain stiffening sequences to
less sterically crowded functional copolymer sequences will assist in
elucidating the role of chain stiffness on fundamental structure property
relationships. Recent discoveries with semi-rigid structures containing
carboxylic acid functional group will be expanded to hypercrosslinked polymeric
materials with primary and secondary amine groups and phenolic groups precisely
enchained in the polymer backbone. It is anticipated that these new functional
nanoporous particles will be effective solid sorbents for carbon dioxide and
other acidic gases. Hypercrosslinked nanoporous polymer particles containing
aromatic amines will be targeted also and their potential for hydrogen storage
studied.