* 1609860
* Energy storage devices based on Lithium-air flow systems for electric grid applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Petru Andrei, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2020
* USD 297,299.00

Renewable sources of electric power such as wind and solar power produce output
that is constantly fluctuating in time, sometimes by more than one order of
magnitude within a few minutes or hours. At penetrations larger than 20%, these
fluctuations require high capacity energy storage devices that are
environmentally friendly, reliable, and do not compromise the security of the
national electricity grid. To address this issue, the current project introduces
fundamental advances in the theoretical understanding, modeling, simulation,
experimental characterization and development of Lithium-air flow systems for
grid applications. The proposed systems are tailored to large-scale grid
applications by being cost effective and having a high energy density and long
cycle life in comparison with current electrical energy storage systems used in
grid applications. The proposed systems will also represent an attractive
technology for building low-cost batteries for electric vehicles, by having a
design that allows fast fueling by simply changing the electrolyte with pure
water and replacing the anode electrode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to develop innovative Li-air systems that can be scaled up and used
in grid applications. The energy and power ratings of the proposed systems are
independently adjustable, making the proposed batteries attractive for building
high-capacity and low-cost energy storage devices. The research component
focuses on understanding the fundamental science and developing the technology
for metal-air electrochemical systems for large and scalable energy storage
applications. The novelty of the approach lies its strong emphasis on: (1) The
combined theoretical-experimental investigation of the material properties and
processes in Li-air flow batteries with cathodes made of layers of buckypaper
with variable porosity and catalyst deposition; (2) An innovative design for Li-
air flow batteries with energy densities over 250 Wh/kg, and minimum cost. The
electrochemical reaction unit of the cell (which consists of the metal anode,
separator and the porous cathode) is separated from the oxygen exchange and
electrolyte storage units, allowing for easy transportation, installation, and
scalability of the system; and (3) Computational optimization of the porosity
and catalyst distributions, and experimental development of a prototype cell.
The education component focuses on the development of a Virtual Battery
Laboratory - a simulation package for metal-air batteries that incorporates the
theoretical models into a user-friendly battery and circuit simulator. A new
Graduate Certificate Program in Renewable Energy and Energy Storage Systems,
primarily addressing people from the industry will be developed, and a 2-week
module on the electrochemical modeling and simulation of lithium and other
metal-based batteries will be incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate
curricula at Florida A&amp;M University and Florida State University.