* 1609547
* Collaborative Research: Detecting First Light and Reionization of the Universe using Advanced Radio Instrumentation
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Colin Lonsdale, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 148,868.00

In the Big Bang model, the universe started in a very hot state in which the
material was ionized. This is now seen as the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)
radiation. As the universe expanded, it cooled. At later stages, the first stars
formed. These caused the neutral material to be ionized again, in the Epoch of
Reionization (EoR). At later times, the limit is set by the ionization caused by
the first stars. After the first stars, the first galaxies formed. This is a
theoretical scenario, so measurements are needed to provide important details
needed. The goal of this project is the first measurement of neutral hydrogen
from the EoR. Such a measurement is extremely difficult because of instrumental
effects. In addition, this project includes the mentoring of undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students. The hands-on training provides a unique
introduction to ultra-precise measurements, so this will be an unequaled
experience involving instrumentation and data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the measurement of the
hyperfine transition of neutral hydrogen. The history of the universe is traced
by redshifts, so higher redshifts correspond to earlier times. The CMB arose at
a redshift of about 1000. At redshifts of about 30, the most abundant
constituent is neutral atomic hydrogen. The highest measured redshift for a
galaxy is about 8. Presumably, at redshifts higher than 8, this material was
reionized by stars, during the Epoch of Recombination (EoR). Thus the EoR should
be bounded by redshifts 8 and 30. At earlier times the limit to the EoR is set
by the recombination of ions caused by the CMB. The EoR allows a look back to a
time before the first stars and galaxies formed. Depending on the local physical
conditions, the spectral line can be either in absorption against the CMB or in
emission. Though a measurement of this line, the state of the universe during
the EoR can be determined in more detail. This complements the extensive,
ongoing studies of the CMB. The proposers will lower the instrumental effects
caused by the large linewidth and the high intensity of foreground radiation.
They will accomplish this by constructing an improved receiver with a more
uniform response over the range of redshifts studied. In addition they will
investigate a dipole design that has a more uniform response. These advances are
at the forefront of electronics design, and so require a large number of
laboratory tests, each of which is very time-consuming. In addition, the
proposers are improving their data reductions to further reduce the effect of
systematic errors. The detection of the EoR spectrum will serve to expand our
knowledge of the evolution of the universe in a very significant, perhaps
transformational, fashion. This will provide an important link between the early
stages of the universe, before stars formed, and the present stage. The training
of students in the techniques of ultra-precise measurements is unique. The
interaction with commercial firms may have wide-ranging implications for the
design of much improved test equipment.