* 1609074
* Trap Array Chips Enabling Rapid, Automated, and Portable Antibiotic Resistance Screening
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Don DeVoe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 376,782.00

Proposal Title: Trap Array Chips Enabling Rapid, Automated, and Portable
Antibiotic Resistance Screening&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Brief description of
project Goals: &lt;br/&gt;A miniature system enabling rapid, multiplexed, and
portable point-of-care identification of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in under
15 minutes will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid growth of antibiotic resistance is
recognized as one of the most serious threats to public health in the U.S. and
worldwide, with increasing numbers of drug-resistant bacteria leading to poor
clinical outcomes and higher death rates, while consuming greater health-care
resources. The ability to rapidly identify multiple bacteria and evaluate their
antibiotic susceptibility at or near the point of care would greatly enhance the
ability of clinicians to optimize treatment through the prescription of
appropriate drugs based on the specific infections, or through the isolation of
high risk patients to prevent further transmission. In this project we will
develop a new technology using disposable lab-on-a-chip devices capable of
segregating a patient sample into over 1000 individual reaction chambers where
different microbial gene fragments associated with antibiotic resistance may be
rapidly analyzed, allowing highly effective screening of multiple potential
targets in under 15 min. The resulting technology is envisioned as a simple and
inexpensive diagnostic platform for use at the point of care. The underlying
lab-on-a-chip technologies developed in this work will also serve to advance
other diagnostic platforms requiring simple operation and minimal equipment for
use in clinical settings lacking central laboratory resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic
resistance represents a major and growing threat to public health, with drug-
resistant pathogens significantly increasing rates of morbidity and mortality
for infected patients. A major challenge associated with the increase in
antimicrobial drug resistance is the lack of rapid assays for identifying
causative pathogens and their drug resistance profiles during the earliest
stages of treatment. In this project we will develop a low-cost and disposable
thermoplastic microfluidic platform employing a novel trap array technology
expected to open the door to routine clinical application of polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) for antibiotic resistance screening at the point of care. The
trap array platform will support over 1000 simultaneous PCR reactions using
primers for multiple antibiotic-resistance gene targets, without the need for
external pumping, valving, substrate preparation, or reagent introduction. The
resulting platform will specifically be applied to the development of a rapid
multiplexed assay for multi-drug resistant carbapenemase-producing bacteria,
which currently presents a significant challenge across multiple clinical
environments. To achieve these goals, the effort will result in the development
of new technologies enabling (1) single-step discretization of a continuous
sample volume into an array of individual sample traps to enable highly parallel
analysis, (2) integration of all required PCR reagents, including defined primer
sets for multiplexed analysis, directly into the array of sample traps during
chip manufacture, and (3) rapid PCR and high resolution melt analysis (HRMA) of
the resulting amplicons in a disposable thermoplastic chip requiring only a
single manual pipetting step for operation, vastly simplifying assay
implementation for use in near-patient settings without access to a central
biochemical laboratory.