* 1609543
* Development of Molecular Simulation Techniques for Probing Solvent Effects in Polymer Films during Solvent Vapor Annealing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Arthi Jayaraman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 307,257.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research to simulate a method to fabricate films made of polymers - long chain
like molecular assemblies with repeating molecular units. Polymers are used
universally in every-day materials, such as automobile parts, plastic cups, and
food packaging, and in high technological applications, such as microelectronics
and solar cells. The properties of polymer-based materials can be optimized for
a given application by tuning the arrangement of constituent molecular units.
This motivates materials scientists in industry and research labs to find
processing techniques that will enable precise control over the molecular
arrangement within the polymer materials. One such processing technique is
solvent vapor annealing, where the polymer film is exposed to a solvent vapor so
that the solvent molecules mix in with the polymer film which alters the
polymer-polymer interactions and leads to a particular resulting arrangement.
This method has allowed materials scientists to obtain polymer arrangements that
have not been possible to achieve before, thus paving a pathway for creating
next generation of materials. Despite the proven value of this technique,
optimized universal protocols have not been established due to a lack of
fundamental knowledge about this technique. In this project, the PI will develop
models and computer simulation approaches to gain fundamental understanding,
advance predictive modeling, and make solvent vapor annealing a universal,
practical, and reliable method facilitating the engineering of polymers for
various technologically relevant applications, such as fuel cells,
photovoltaics, and nanomembranes. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will also dedicate
significant effort to undergraduate education, specifically through training and
mentoring of undergraduate students in her research lab as well as in the
classroom through her Introduction to Polymer Science and Engineering course. In
her role as organizer of many national conferences in the area of polymers she
plans to invite leading women computational soft materials scientists from
around the country, facilitating the dissemination of polymer science research,
as well as serving to inspire future generation of women scientists and
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Solvent vapor
annealing is an increasingly utilized polymer processing method where the
presence of solvent within the polymer film enhances the mobility of the
polymers, alters the effective polymer-polymer and polymer-surface interactions,
and drives morphological changes. Through solvent vapor annealing and eventual
instantaneous solvent evaporation, some technologically useful morphologies that
are not seen at equilibrium can be trapped. Despite the proven value of this
processing technique, especially in block copolymer films, standardized or
universal protocols have not been established due to a lack of fundamental
knowledge regarding the complex interplay between solvents, substrate, and
polymer(s) during solvent annealing and solvent evaporation. &lt;br/&gt;This
lack of knowledge is due in part to a) the limitations in experimental
techniques for probing these solvent-polymer interactions and solvent mediated
polymer-polymer interactions in situ, and because b) in most computational
studies of polymers the solvent is treated implicitly or when treated explicitly
the solvent and polymer dynamics during solvent vapor annealing are not
captured. &lt;br/&gt;To address this lack of fundamental knowing the overarching
goal of this project is to develop new computational approaches to simulate
solvent vapor annealing in polymer films. The computational research will
uncover the thermodynamics and kinetics underlying solvent-induced morphology
changes within polymer thin films and provide universal guidelines on the use of
solvent vapor annealing to achieve target morphologies in homopolymer blends and
conjugated polymer based films. Through comparison with data from experiments
these computational techniques will be validated and provide guidance on the
selection of solvent chemistries and solvent vapor annealing conditions for
achieving desired target solvent-induced effects in the polymer film. Such a
fundamental understanding will be valuable for solvent vapor deposition to
become a universal, practical, and reliable method facilitating the design of
polymer and other soft materials films used in various technologically relevant
applications, such as lithography, fuel cells, photovoltaics, and nanomembranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational tools developed in this project will be
made available for others studying systems beyond homopolymer blends and
conjugated polymers, such as polymer nanocomposites and block copolymers. The PI
is also committed to achieving excellence in education and outreach efforts. She
will dedicate significant effort to undergraduate education, specifically via
training and mentoring of undergraduate students during their contributions
towards the proposed work. The results and tools pertinent to the proposed work
will also be included in an Introduction to Polymer Science and Engineering
course that she teaches in the fall to undergraduates and graduate students from
chemical engineering and materials science. The PI will continue her extensive
past efforts to recruit and retain female students and mentor them to leadership
roles in industry, universities, and national laboratories. Through her role as
organizer of various national conference, the PI aims to invite leading women
computational soft materials scientists from around the country, facilitating
the dissemination of outstanding work, as well as serving to inspire future
generations of women scientists and leaders.