* 1609157
* OP: Spatial and spectral control of quantum dot single photon emitters for scalable photonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Matthew Doty, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Project title: Engineering materials for the scalable production of new
electronic devices that use controlled emission and absorption of single
photons&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:
Modern photonic and electronic devices operate via the generation and
transmission of many thousands of photons or electrons, respectively. Although
scientists have known for many years that devices that operate with single
photons or single electrons could enable revolutionary new functionality, it is
extremely difficult to engineer reliable devices that operate at this level. For
example, previous efforts to build a material that contains many independent but
identical single photon emitters have failed because the emitters are formed at
random locations and are not identical. The supported researchers will engineer
a new material that overcomes this limit. First, the emitters will be forced to
grow at specified locations by pre-patterning the surface on which the emitters
grow. Second, each site will contain a pair of emitters whose interaction can be
controlled to tune the emission to the value desired for device operation. This
work will include sustained engagement with the students, parents, and teachers
of an elementary school with an extremely high percentage of economically-
disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Optoelectronic devices
that operate at the quantum limit of single photons, charges, and spins have
long been viewed as a promising platform for quantum device technologies. These
quantum technologies promise many advances, including fundamentally secure modes
of information transmission and exquisite sensors with very low detection
thresholds. The ideal device would leverage wafer-scale semiconductor processing
methods to create on-chip photonic devices that emit, route, manipulate, and
absorb single photons. The fundamental component of such a device would have to
be a single optically-active nanostructure with quantized energy states.
However, efforts to create chip-scalable platforms for single-photon
technologies have been hampered by the challenge of creating optically-active
nanostructures with both spatial control of their position and spectral control
over their emission energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to be taken in
this project overcomes these challenges by leveraging two recent advances in
molecular beam epitaxial growth. First, pre-patterned substrates will be used to
spatially control the nucleation of "template" quantum dots (QDs) whose optical
quality is unimportant. A series of these "template" QDs will be used to
transfer the spatial pattern to a growth surface well-separated from the pre-
patterned surface in order to obtain high optical quality from the QDs that are
used for photon emission and absorption. Second, the optically-active structure
will be a complex of two QDs stacked along the growth axis such that applied
electric fields can be used to tune the optical absorption and emission
wavelengths. Prior work on these coupled QD pairs by the PI shows that they can
tune optical emission wavelengths over a range at least one order of magnitude
larger than that available from single QDs. The team will embed the QD pairs
within a p-i-n diode structure that enables the local application of electric
fields to individual QD pairs. The individual wavelength tunability of each QD
pair provides the mechanism for deterministic spectral overlap with target
photonic device wavelengths.