* 1609776
* First-principles studies of relativistic spin interactions and torques
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kirill Belashchenko, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 258,646.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education aimed
at better understanding the mechanisms by which relativistic magnetic effects
manifest themselves in the properties of magnetic materials and nanostructures.
The ability to understand these mechanisms is critical for further progress and
continued innovation in information technology. The focus of this project is on
the fundamental physics relevant for emerging electronic device technologies
that exploit electron spin in addition to, or instead of its electric charge.
Part of this research will involve investigations of the properties of specific
magnetic materials that are promising for use in such devices. The project will
also study the effects arising at interfaces between different materials, which
enable the operation of current and future devices. Overall, it will advance the
broader goal of designing materials and nanoscale devices with desired
properties through computer simulations based on fundamental principles of
quantum mechanics.

The project will achieve broader impacts by advancing the fundamental theory of
magnetism, facilitating the design of novel magnetoelectronic devices, and
through the development of new computational tools, which will be made available
to the broader computational materials research community. The research will
involve graduate students, who will be educated in modern electronic structure,
magnetism and transport theory, and will gain experience in the use and
development of state-of-the-art electronic-structure and transport codes.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education aimed
at better understanding relativistic magnetic interactions in magnetic materials
and nanostructures, and their effects on transport properties. This research is
based on density-functional electronic structure theory, and includes the
development of computational tools for the description of relativistic magnetic
interactions and spin torques based on linear-response and nonequilibrium
Green's function techniques. The project will focus on elucidating the
mechanisms of magnetocrystalline anisotropy in metallic antiferromagnets,
electronic structure of magnetic materials of current interest, such as
magnetically doped topological insulators and half-metallic ferromagnets, and
spin-orbit torques in non-centrosymmetric metals and ferromagnet/heavy-metal
bilayers. The central feature of this research is realistic, material-specific
treatment of disorder and temperature-dependent spin fluctuations.

The project will achieve broader impacts by advancing the fundamental theory of
magnetism, facilitating the design of novel magnetoelectronic devices, and
through the development of new computational tools, which will be made available
to the broader computational materials research community. The research will
involve graduate students, who will be educated in modern electronic structure,
magnetism and transport theory, and will gain experience in the use and
development of state-of-the-art electronic-structure and transport codes.