* 1609524
* ENgaging Educators in Renewable EnerGY (ENERGY)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Valentin Soloiu, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 10/31/2020
* USD 524,706.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, entitled Engaging Educators in Renewable EnerGY (ENERGY) at Georgia
Southern University (GSU) aims to develop a diverse, competitive, and nationally
engaged teacher workforce through activities and projects performed alongside
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as faculty and industry advisors.
The focus is on high-need rural areas in southeastern Georgia, in partner
counties, that collectively are home to high populations of underrepresented
minorities, economically disadvantaged and special needs students. Target
participants include those who are from historically underrepresented groups in
the STEM disciplines and those who teach in schools characterized by a high
level of poverty and/or a high percentage of minority learners. ENERGY was
specifically chosen as the research theme because it is a current national topic
of direct interest to students and teachers, and it can be easily embedded in
the high school STEM curriculum. In addition, there are regional industries
involved in hands-on, cutting edge engineering research projects in energy-
related fields. The research topics for the RET participants in ENERGY include:
renewable and alternative energy (solar, wind, biofuels, thermoelectric),
development of sensors and controls for energy applications, biologically-
inspired wind turbines and solar collectors. As part of their engineering and
scientific research projects, the teachers will be linked with real-world
applications through collaborations with university and industry partners and
will build upon long-term collaborative relationships between the participating
school districts and the College of Engineering and Information Technology
(CEIT) at GSU. This research experience will give participants the ability to
immerse themselves into various engineering disciplines, expand their knowledge
of engineering through research in renewable energy while giving them concrete
hands-on examples and pedagogical methods of incorporating engineering into STEM
curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period the ENERGY RET Site
will directly impact 30 STEM high school teachers, pre-service education majors,
and community college faculty and approximately 4000 students. The goal of the
ENERGY RET is to educate, engage, and inspire teachers to bring renewable energy
to their classrooms through summer-term interdisciplinary STEM research
experiences in the field of engineering and computer science. The educational
objectives of this program are to: increase basic understanding of
interdisciplinary concepts through hands-on learning, introduce STEM problem-
solving skills and the ability to apply them in lectures and laboratories, and
to increase interest in conducting STEM research. The program will develop the
participants' ability to collaborate and communicate effectively at both the
interpersonal and presentation level all while part of a diverse team. RET
participants, through fundamental energy-related research and transformational
activities that are tied to industry, will leverage curricular approaches that
allow them to transition this knowledge into highly inspirational STEM
experiences for their students. The ENERGY participants, working with College of
Education faculty, will develop activities and instructional practices that
model and transfer their experience for integration of energy concepts into
their classrooms during the academic year.