* 1609183
* Multi-Scale Predictive Control of Coupled Energy Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Victor Zavala Tejeda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2020
* USD 378,614.00

Infrastructure networks (electrical, natural gas, water, transportation) have
evolved into massive and highly sophisticated engineering systems. The U.S.
electrical transmission network comprises 30,000 transmission lines that span
450,000 miles and that are connected to 55,000 substations. The gas transmission
network consists of 210 pipelines that span 305,000 miles and comprise 1,400
compressor stations and over 11,000 delivery gates. Each substation and delivery
gate is connected to a vast distribution (utility) network that takes resources
to buildings, homes, and industrial facilities. Water and transportation
networks have similar arrangements and complexity. Infrastructure networks
present drastically different time scales and layouts that make them notoriously
difficult to synchronize. For instance, electricity flows throughout the power
grid nearly instantaneously while natural gas flows in pipelines at 30-50 miles
per hour. The difficulty in achieving synchronization became evident during the
so-called Polar Vortex of 2014 in which record low temperatures experienced in
the Midwest region of the U.S. triggered cascading shortages of natural gas and
electricity that affected the entire country. This project seeks to develop new
control architectures that can effectively synchronize infrastructure networks
by managing space and time scales in a systematic manner. The control
architectures will enable more effective mitigation of extreme weather and man-
made events as well as a more efficient distribution of resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will pursue the project goals by
developing a new transformative control paradigm -referred to by the
investigators as multi-scale model predictive control (msMPC). The msMPC
formulation will enable the systematic design of hierarchical control
architectures capable of handling heterogenous energy networks covering vast and
disparate spatial and temporal scales. The key idea behind msMPC is to create a
control hierarchy in which a top level coordinating controller computes control
actions using highly coarse but tractable space-time representations of the
entire system. The coarse control actions are then communicated and
progressively refined at the lower levels. At the lowest level is a set of
decentralized control agents each operating on a portion of the time-space
domain. Each agent rejects local and high-frequency disturbances, while
remaining coordinated with other agents through capturing global information
obtained from the coarser levels. In other words, msMPC is a paradigm that seeks
to bridge the gap between fully centralized and fully decentralized control. The
project also aims at developing a stability theory for msMPC hierarchies and
performing studies to identify more effective infrastructure arrangements (e.g.,
hub-based as opposed to resource-based). The interdisciplinary nature of the
work will provide a unique training environment for graduate students that
combines control and economic theory, systems modeling, optimization algorithms,
and high-performance computing.