* 1609549
* OP Collaborative Research: Taking lithium-niobate to the nanoscale: shaping revolutionary material onto photonic microchips for developing next-generation light sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract title: OP Collaborative Research: Taking lithium-niobate to the
nanoscale: shaping revolutionary material onto photonic microchips for
developing next-generation light sources&lt;br/&gt;Abstract (general): Lithium-
niobate is a revolutionary material that has played a major role in transforming
optical telecommunications. It has enabled electronic data (0s and 1s) to be
directly written onto light pulses that travel the globe and essentially form
the backbone of the internet. It is also used to change the color of light
emitted by lasers, of importance for high-speed computing and sensing, as well
as to enable realization of novel quantum sources of light that may enable next-
generation ultra-secure optical communications. However, currently the
performance of lithium-niobate based optical devices is limited by their bulky
size. This project aims to miniaturize these to the nanoscale by patterning
lithium-niobate onto a photonic microchip, thereby enhancing their efficiency
many-fold. This will enable the design of novel light sources with greatly
improved properties compared to current technology and also significantly reduce
the optical power requirements. The proposed research program is a natural
template for informing students, teachers, and the public of how scientists and
engineers explore the unique behavior of materials at the nanoscale, and make
use of these properties in the creation of new devices. The team will leverage
the "magic" of optics and lasers to engage a wide audience and inform the public
of their ongoing research. The program has strong theoretical and experimental
components and addresses both fundamental and engineering aspects of light-
generation in nanoscale optical devices and systems. Therefore, it represents a
unique research and educational opportunity for students at all levels. The
devices and systems that will be developed will be of great interest to both the
scientific community and commercial industry.&lt;br/&gt;Abstract (technical):
Lithium-niobate, with its large second-order susceptibility, relatively large
refractive index and wide transmission window extending from ultra-violet to
mid-infrared, is one of the most important optoelectronic materials, widely used
for electro-optic modulation and classical &amp; quantum optical frequency
conversion. However, due to difficulties associated with fabrication, most of
these components are discrete and cannot be easily integrated onto a photonic
microchip. Fortunately, recent advances in lithium-niobate thin-film fabrication
techniques, via crystal ion slicing, are promising and enable chip-scale
integration of nanophotonic devices. The proposed program builds on these
results and seeks to develop an integrated nonlinear nanophotonics platform that
combines the unique material properties of periodically-poled lithium-niobate
with the superior light confinement and dispersion engineering in wavelength-
scale optical waveguides and cavities. The new platform will be developed based
on thin x-cut lithium-niobate device layers (~500-nm thick) bonded on top of a
SiO2 substrate that provides optical isolation. The team will develop new
techniques for surface poling of thin x-cut lithium-niobate films, thus allowing
for efficient phase matching. State of the art nanofabrication techniques will
be used to realize optical waveguides and cavities directly in the periodically-
poled device layer. The devices will operate over a wide wavelength range
(visible to mid-infrared) and enable strong photon interactions resulting in
40-fold more efficient nonlinear processes than those found in conventional
counterparts. The program is expected to result in a wide variety of integrated
devices and systems with applications in quantum frequency conversion,
entangled-photon pair generation, supercontinuum generation, and frequency comb
generation. The proposed program is transformative since it introduces lithium-
niobate into the family of materials suitable for integrated, on-chip photonics.
It will result in the development of a wide range of novel &amp; more efficient
nonlinear optical devices &amp; systems, and make an impact on disciplines as
diverse as quantum information science &amp; technology, remote sensing,
astronomy and optoelectronics.