* 1609720
* Monomers and Dimers of Cytochrome c in Apoptotic Peroxidase Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bruce Bowler, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,999.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program within the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Bruce E. BowlerÂ from the University of Montana to
investigate how changes in the three-dimensional structure of a protein known as
cytochrome c changes its function from a protein that moves electron around to
one that speeds up the reaction of membrane lipids (fats) with hydrogen
peroxide. This latter, so-called, peroxidase activity provides an early signal
in important biochemical pathways. This project will also provide training for
undergraduate student and graduate students in a broad array of structural,
biochemical and biophysical methods. As part of this project, Dr. Bowler and his
students are developing hands-on curricular materials, effective in low resource
environments, to enhance STEM education at tribal schools in collaboration with
the spectrUM science center in Missoula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypotheses
for the research to be carried out derive from a novel X-ray diffraction
structure of yeast iso-1-cytochrome c bound to the detergent CYMAL-6. In the
presence of CYMAL-6, iso-1-cytochrome c crystallizes as a domain-swapped dimer
with CYMAL-6 bound in a pocket placing its hydrocarbon chain next to the heme
iron. Dr. Bowler's lab is testing the hypothesis that this dimeric structure is
important for peroxidase activity by measuring the peroxidase activity of
monomeric versus dimeric cytochrome c, determining the ability of cardiolipin
nanodiscs to catalyze the formation of dimer, and also testing the ability of
lipid analogs to stabilize the dimer. Crystallization and structural studies
with different lipid analogs also is being attempted to more fully define the
lipid binding pocket of the dimer. The work is being carried out with three
evolutionally diverse forms of cytochrome c, those of yeast, spider monkey and
human. The effects of mutations to two surface loops near the lipid binding
pocket, on the accessibility of the binding pocket and the peroxidase activity
of cytochrome c also is being investigated to determine how evolution from yeast
to humans has optimized cytochrome c for peroxidase activity. Finally the
dimeric structure of cytochrome c indicates that a broad group of lysine
residues control the electrostatic binding of cytochrome c to cardiolipin.
Binding studies on cytochrome c variants with these lysines eliminated is being
conducted to determine the extent of the electrostatic docking site on the
surface of cytochrome c.