* 1609125
* Nanoscale Organic Hybrid Materials (NOHMs)
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Lynden Archer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 580,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on basic
science and technological applications of organic-inorganic hybrid materials
created by attaching short polymer chains (corona) to hard, inorganic
nanostructures. Termed Nanoscale Organic Hybrid Materials (NOHMs), they are the
first example of an organic-inorganic hybrid material in which each nanoscale
building block is itself a hybrid. This design provides opportunities for
scientific exploration and for engineering new materials with unusual
combinations of properties that take advantage of the large library of available
nanostructures and polymers for manipulating physical properties and function.
Research in this study considers a particular family of NOHMs in which the
corona is comprised of lithium-ion conducting polymers. This focus is motivated
by the potential such materials hold for creating battery electrolytes with
high, liquid-like ionic conductivity, tunable mechanical properties, and non-
flammability under normal operating conditions for batteries. The work is
important because it will enable batteries to safely utilize energetic metals as
their anodes and to offer substantial increases in the amount of energy stored.
Aspects of this promise have already been realized with the creation of a
technology start-up company, NOHMs Technologies, which currently employs 14
persons. It is expected that further technological development may occur over
the four-year performance period of this NSF award as fundamental understanding
of the materials grow and as this understanding leads to new non-flammable
electrolyte designs that can be used as drop-in replacements for currently used
flammable battery electrolytes. The flexible design of NOHMs in multiple, easy-
to-appreciate applications of broad-based societal interest (including
batteries, 3D printing, and advanced lubricants) also provides important
opportunities for introducing younger students (K-12) to nanotechnology. The
project will engage these students and their teachers through demonstrations
based on batteries. These demonstrations will be designed to teach students to
think about batteries as chemical reactors that produce electrical energy as the
principal product, and about the relationship between applications-oriented
properties and the basic chemical and physical processes that must be understood
and controlled to achieve them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on structure, component
dynamics, and ion transport in Nanoscale Organic Hybrid Materials (NOHMs)
created by densely tethering short polymer chains to inorganic nanostructures. A
consequence of the design of NOHMs is that grafted polymer (corona) segments
experience an entropic attractive force created by the constraint that segments
must homogeneously fill the space between nanoparticle cores. This entropic
force is currently believed to be responsible for at least three effects: (i)
strong correlations of the cores, (ii) physical constraints analogous to cross-
links on the corona, and (iii) suppressed density fluctuations on large length-
scales, which causes the materials to exhibit low-wave vector structure distinct
from conventional hard-sphere suspensions, but analogous to incompressible
molecular fluids. On continuum length-scales the materials behave as soft glassy
complex fluids in which each suspended particle carries around a share of the
suspending medium at all times. In contrast, on nanometer length scales, they
are granular. By isolating and studying contributions to NOHMs physical
properties from surface crowding of corona chains, geometric confinement of
corona chains between neighboring particles, entropy-mediated temporary cross-
links between corona, and slow translation and reorientation dynamics of
correlated cores, the proposed study will determine how interactions between
corona polymer chains influence structure, rheology, and ion transport
properties of the materials. The work will also explore phase stability,
dynamics and ion transport in NOHMs, NOHMs/NOHMs blends, and NOHMs polymer
blends. The proposed study aims to construct a physical model framework for
understanding NOHMs transport behaviors and rheology.