* 1609598
* IUSE: Fostering Undergraduate Students' Disciplinary Learning and Water Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Nicholas Brozovic, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,018.00

This project will support undergraduate students to develop robust understanding
of core hydrological concepts, as well as the social, cultural, economic, and
political dimensions of water-related issues. This project will design and study
a new, interdisciplinary undergraduate course, Water in Society, designed for
first year students (STEM majors and non-majors). Project work will be
transdisciplinary, drawing from the fields of STEM education, hydrological
sciences, and social and decision sciences, and will contribute to theory and
research on undergraduate teaching and learning about human-environmental
systems, STEM-informed decision-making, and science literacy. The project will
impact the future STEM workforce, as well as cultivate water literacy in future
voters and consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize a pre-
specified, iterative instructional design process to inform the development and
ongoing refinement of a course grounded in tenets of effective post-secondary
STEM instruction and contemporary learning theory. Consistent with the project's
focus on early-stage, exploratory research in an instructional design context,
the project will explore associations between student outcomes, malleable
factors, and mediating or moderating variables to clarify underlying theory
about how students engage in STEM-informed decision-making about socio-
hydrological issues. The project is a direct response to calls for discipline-
based educational research on undergraduate students' science learning. Project
deliverables will include a research-based, interdisciplinary water science
course and empirical research findings from study of course implementation
throughout the project period.