* 1609811
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Novel Nanostructured Metal Oxides for Efficient Solar Energy Conversion - Theory, Synthesis, and Interfacial Carrier Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Muhammad Huda, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,775.00

Non-technical Description: Metal oxide materials could offer earth-abundant,
non-toxic alternatives to existing light-absorber materials in thin-film solar
cells. However, efficiency of solar cells based on existing metal oxides is
typically low due to poor material properties. In this project, researchers at
the Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and the University of Texas at
Arlington (UTA) are working on increasing the efficiency of metal oxides by
theoretically predicting and experimentally synthesizing metal oxide materials
with new compositions and enhanced properties. In addition, efficiency is
enhanced by structuring these materials on the nanoscale level. These efforts
are guided by terahertz spectroscopy measurements, which are used to understand
relationships between the material composition, nanoscale structure and
efficiency. The expected outcome of this SusChEM project is essential new
knowledge for the development of sustainable thin-film solar cells composed of
metal oxides capable of solar energy conversion with practical efficiencies. The
project involves training and participation of graduate and undergraduate
researchers. In addition, the WPI researchers are developing and delivering
workshops and teaching modules on photovoltaics and nanotechnology for middle
school girls and high school teachers from local districts serving large
populations of low-income, minority and underrepresented students. The UTA
researchers are serving African-American and Hispanic high-school students
through interactive computer labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
The objective of this SusChEM research is to significantly improve solar energy
conversion efficiencies in multi-metal oxides, which could offer earth-abundant,
non-toxic alternatives to existing thin-film materials such as CIGS and CdTe.
Metal oxides typically suffer from large band gaps or poor charge mobilities, or
both, which has thus far restricted their solar-electricity efficiency. This
project tackles these issues via three synergistic approaches: i) theoretically
predicting and synthesizing new alloys of multi-metal oxides with improved band
gaps and higher charge mobilities for solar energy conversion, ii) coating thin
layers of these new oxides onto nanowire-array current-collectors to enhance
their efficiency and iii) using terahertz spectroscopy to study the bulk carrier
dynamics and interfacial charge transfer in these nanostructured oxides and
further improve efficiency. This multi-pronged approach is the first to i)
investigate new multi-metal oxide alloys that hold much promise for band
engineering via alloying while still achieving relatively high mobility, ii)
simultaneously apply 'extremely-thin-absorber' nanostructuring and interfacial
engineering strategies to improve the charge collection efficiency of multi-
metal oxide absorbers and iii) study the ultrafast carrier dynamics in thin
metal oxide absorbers on a nanostructured current-collector, focusing on both
bulk carrier dynamics and charge extraction at the absorber/current-collector
interface.