* 1609897
* Dissecting Cephalopod Camouflage: Extraction and Analysis of Optical Protein Nanostructures in Squid Loligo pealeii
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Stephen Hale, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2016
* USD 389,999.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division
of Materials Research and the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems is to explore the fundamental mechanisms behind adaptive coloration in
cephalopods. Cephalopods are marine organisms that include squid, octopus, and
cuttlefish. They can undergo rapid and adaptive changes in their skin color for
sensing, communication, defense, and reproduction purposes enabling them to
blend in or stand out in their local environment. The goal is to determine how
these animals are capable of such interactive features and identify which
proteins and pigments aid in this function. With this fundamental knowledge, PIs
aim to design new materials inspired by cephalopods that may undergo similar
color-changing responses. An integrative outreach component is a key feature of
this award, where the PIs will build educational materials and experiences to
prepare students for STEM careers in materials science and engineering. To this
end, the PIs will develop a week-long workshop to train up to 10 high school
teachers (mix of non-honors, honors, and AP teachers) on how to design, build,
and test optical devices and materials inspired by systems in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Cephalopods can actively
tune their dermal coloration with the support of neurally-controlled, muscle-
actuated pigment organs known as chromatophores. It is known that chromatophores
contribute to changes in cephalopod coloration through the active expansion and
retraction of pigmented granules confined within a cytoelastic sac; however, the
composition of the granules and their role in modulating bulk coloration remain
largely unknown. The primary objective of this proposal is to identify how the
nanostructure and composition of these granules localized within the
chromatophore organs impact broad area coloration during adaptive camouflage.
The PIs will use a customized extraction protocol to isolate, purify, and
identify the proteins and small molecules present in the chromatophores,
investigate their interactions and develop a synthetic strategy to recapitulate
their ability to absorb and scatter all wavelengths of visible light. Outreach
components and teacher workshops will be designed to leverage the knowledge,
tools, and connections from this research into educational materials and
experiences to prepare high school students for STEM careers and college degrees
where they can explore how biology is used to inspire engineered materials.