* 1609977
* Integrated Molecular Approach to Study Mechanical Behavior of Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Shi-Qing Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2019
* USD 478,497.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As plastic materials displace in
increasing amount many of the well-established traditional materials the study
of mechanical performance of polymeric glasses has become more important.
Improving mechanical properties of this important class of materials requires a
deeper molecular-level understanding of what factors and processes affect the
ultimate strength. This project aims to establish the polymer physics on a
molecular level that can be applied to provide predictive design principles on
how to make stronger bulk polymeric glasses. Specifically, theoretically
motivated experiments and computer simulations will be carried out to elucidate
the unique mechanical characteristics due to chain connectivity and address the
questions of why polymer glasses can be ductile and how they can be made even
more resistant to brittle failure. The success of the research program will
allow applications to be further broadened to increase the economical values of
this class of modern engineering materials. Since new models and concepts are
expected to emerge from the research activities, the work should offer
substantial advances to the general knowledge of polymer physics concerning
plastics in the glassy state and enhance the curriculum of graduate education in
polymer science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates various experiments with
pertinent molecular-dynamics simulations to develop a conceptual framework for
molecular mechanics of polymeric glasses and to search for physical principles
concerning the origin of stress, the nature of stress relaxation, yielding, as
well as brittle-to-ductile transition during large deformation. The research has
four objectives: A) characterize brittle-ductile transition (BDT) in compression
using both experiment and molecular-dynamics (MD) simulation; B) elucidate the
origin of stress with both experiment and MD simulation including intrachain
contributions; C) depict how the chain network is able or unable to drive a
polymer glass into a plastic state through activation and mobilization of
vitreous segments, where experiment and simulation will explore the effect of
diluting the chain network by incorporating a low molecular-weight component to
make mixtures of different compositions; D) examine how deformation at different
rates and temperatures enhances molecular mobility -- can deformation always
lead to enhanced segmental mobility as implied by the Eyring idea of activation?
(e.g., does stress always emerge to lower the activation barrier as depicted in
the Eyring formula for the molecular mobility?) Unlike most constitutive
modeling studies in continuum mechanics, this project takes a phenomenological
and molecular approach to determine the prerequisites for the application of the
Eyring idea (for a single particle) to such a complex many-body system as
polymer glasses. Explicitly, the research will examine the causality for
yielding and ductility in polymer glasses in terms of the displacement and
deformation of the chain network as causes for segmental activation and eventual
macroscopic yielding.