* 1609799
* Single Molecule Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Studies of Dynamic Disorder in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Daniel Dougherty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 252,753.00

Nontechnical Description: A major challenge in the use of organic electronic
materials in important applications like flat panel displays and solar cells is
that these materials often lack good ordering of their molecules. Such molecular
disorder often results in compromised performance of many organics-based
devices. This project addresses the impact of disorder that arises from very
fast motion of the molecules in thin films of organic materials. The research
team uses a powerful microscope capable of observing and analyzing the rapid
motion of single molecules. By carrying out these experiments on a range of
important organic electronic materials, the project provides device engineers
with information about how to choose appropriate molecules to minimize negative
effects of molecular motion on device performance. The project supports training
of graduate students in many aspects of organic electronics and scientific
leadership within the infrastructure of the interdisciplinary Organic and Carbon
Electronics Lab. This infrastructure includes a materials fabrication facility
operated primarily by undergraduate students. It also includes educational
initiatives such as the development of instructional software for understanding
the principles of organic materials. Finally, the project also supports crystal
growth competitions for grade and middle school students.

Technical Description: In the past decade, dynamic disorder has come to the
forefront of understanding of the fundamental limitations of performance in
organic electronics materials. Fluctuations in position and geometry - mediated
by phonons and intramolecular vibrations - can modulate electronic transfer
integrals that control charge transport in these materials. This project applies
tunneling current fluctuation spectroscopy in a variable temperature scanning
tunneling microscope to observe dynamic disorder processes in real time with
single molecule spatial resolution. By tuning sample temperature, the time scale
of molecular fluctuations is controlled and eventually frozen out at low
temperatures. By simultaneously adding local tunneling spectroscopy
measurements, orbital specific dynamic effects are isolated. The project focuses
on the newest classes of small molecule organic electronic materials such as
side-arm functionalized pentacenes and anthradithiophenes. In addition, it uses
laser illumination of organic single crystals to allow routine variable
temperature scanning tunneling microscopy studies of these important materials
class benchmarks.