* 1609389
* Stokes Vector Modulation for Terabit-Class Data Center Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Xin Jiang, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2022
* USD 307,156.00

Data centers have become the nerve centers of the modern information-driven
economy, relying on large networks of fiber-optic links operating at data rates
up to 10 gigabits per second. Going forward, these fiber-optic links must scale
to higher speeds at an acceptable cost in both dollars and in watts, but today's
solutions, using on-off keyed signaling and power-sensing receivers, will not
meet cost and dissipation targets as rates exceed 40 gigabits per second.
Neither will fiber-optic transceivers developed for telecommunication networks,
as these require complex receivers, expensive lasers in both transmitter and
receiver, and power-hungry digital signal processing. To close the performance
gap, this research program will investigate fiber-optic links in which the
polarization of the transmitted light is switched to carry the data.
Polarization shift keying and Stokes vector modulation (which switches both the
polarization and amplitude) can transmit multiple bits of data per transmitted
symbol, greatly accelerating the link's data rate while maintaining tolerance to
fiber loss and other signal impairments. Research tasks will include theoretical
study of noise impacts, optimization of advanced transmitter and receiver
designs, simulation of polarization-modulated communication links, and
experimental study in a lab testbed that incorporates dynamic optical
networking. The timely and practical focus of this project will offer graduate
and undergraduate students excellent opportunities to develop into productive
practitioners in communications, fiber optics, and data center design. Beyond
its direct impact on the student researchers, the program will offer additional
educational benefits to the broader community by presenting lab tours and
demonstrations to college and high-school students who might otherwise lack an
opportunity to experience modern fiber-optic technology. Finally, by advancing
the state of the art in data center technology, the project will contribute to
economic growth as well as helping to keep the U.S. innovation pipeline well-
filled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical objective of this research
program is to advance the understanding of multi-dimensional modulation
techniques based on polarization-shift keying and Stokes vector modulation, as
applied to fiber-optic transceivers for terabit-class data center networks
(i.e., photonic networks in which each wavelength channel carries about 1
terabit per second of data). Such research is critically needed because no
existing technique has been found that offers both the data throughput and the
cost needed to support Big Data applications in the 2020-2030 timeframe. Scaling
of massive data centers to meet future demands will require a radical shift in
optical data link technology. Current development based on pulse amplitude
modulation will not be able to reach the 1 terabit per second level, because it
is based on a one-dimensional symbol space. Coherent lightwave systems developed
for long-distance telecommunications offer multi-dimensional symbol spaces, but
they are too costly and power-hungry, and their slow setup times will inhibit
the rapid dynamic networking needed for data center networks. Polarization-based
modulation formats can provide 2-D, 3-D, or even 4 D symbol spaces using direct
(i.e. non-coherent) detection, once critical challenges are overcome. This
program will study fundamental issues of symbol constellations and noise mapping
into Stokes space, as well as low-complexity digital signal processing and
multiple-input, multiple-output techniques to enhance both receivers and
transmitters. Alternative Stokes vector receiver designs will be compared
theoretically and experimentally for both unimpaired link budgets and impairment
tolerance. In support of dynamic topologies, performance under rapid optical
switching/routing will be directly tested. At all stages, the work will be
socialized through publications, presentations, and bilateral collaborations,
while preparing students to enter the industrial and academic communities.