* 1609340
* Problems in Mean Curvature Flow and Minimal Surface Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jacob Bernstein, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,528.00

This research project studies two important geometric objects: minimal surfaces
and mean curvature flows. A minimal surface mathematically models the shape of a
soap film; the energy of such a film is proportional to its surface area, and so
stable configurations are those with least area, that is, minimal surfaces. The
theory of minimal surfaces directly connects to problems arising in physics,
chemistry, biology, and materials science. More broadly, minimal surfaces are an
important model for many geometric variational problems -- that is, problems
where one seeks to find and study the properties of geometric objects that are
optimal in some sense. In addition to being a fundamental principle in the
physical sciences, variational problems arise in diverse areas of pure and
applied mathematics. In contrast to minimal surfaces, which are static, the mean
curvature flow is a dynamic process. Roughly speaking, mean curvature flow
continuously deforms a surface in a manner that decreases area as quickly as
possible. It was first studied as a model of certain phenomena in materials
science and has also found applications in computer graphics and image
recognition. Furthermore, it is closely related to the Ricci flow that was
employed in the solution of the Poincaré conjecture. As such, the mean curvature
flow has promising potential applications to topology, several of which are
explored by this project.

This project will use the mean curvature flow to investigate hypersurfaces in
n-dimensional Euclidean space of low entropy, that is, hypersurfaces for which a
natural measure of geometric complexity, the entropy, is small. It also studies
properties of minimal surfaces in Euclidean three-space using a variety of
techniques. The first goal is to better understand properties, especially
topological ones, of hypersurfaces of low entropy. This requires the
investigation of the structure of non-compact self-similar (both shrinking and
expanding) solutions to the mean curvature flow. The overarching objective is to
see if hypersurfaces of low entropy in Euclidean four-space must smoothly bound
a closed ball. This question is closely related to the smooth four-dimensional
Schoenflies conjecture, an important open problem in low-dimensional topology.
The project also studies several problems connected to the theory of minimal
surfaces. Chief among these is the question raised by Calabi, refined by Yau,
and partially answered by Colding-Minicozzi, asking whether a complete, embedded
minimal surface is properly embedded. In addition, the project explores the
relationship between ideas in projective differential geometry and minimal
surface theory. This includes studying an analog of the Korteweg-de Vries
equation and investigating free-boundary minimal surfaces in the ball.