* 1609202
* Collaborative Research:  Resource Allocation for Time-Critical Communications in Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lei Ying, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Time-critical instantiations of wireless networks such as vehicular networks,
robotic systems, real-time surveillance, and networked control require stringent
deadline requirements on packet transmissions. These emerging networks demand
reliable and predictable transmissions over an unreliable, time-varying wireless
medium to support applications such as warning messages, voice calls and video
streaming. Despite remarkable progress in the design of wireless networks with
maximum throughput and low delays over the last two decades, communications with
hard deadlines in wireless networks remains a challenging open problem. Most
existing works on delay performance in wireless networks focus on reducing
average delays rather than guaranteeing hard deadlines. The goal of this project
is to develop fundamental theories and distributed algorithms for transmitting
packets with hard deadlines in wireless networks for time-critical applications.
Technical advances in this project will contribute to the improvement of
wireless systems for time-critical communications, including the so-called
internet of things, cyber-physical systems, emergency response wireless
networks, and sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;The problem of supporting
communications with hard deadlines in ad hoc wireless networks is very
challenging because the capacity region of the network is arrival-dependent, and
packet deadlines induce special types of spatial and temporal correlation. This
project focuses on a comprehensive resource allocation solution for time-
critical communications in wireless networks by utilizing the following four
novel techniques: (1) a virtual link approach to achieve spatial-temporal
resource allocation to guarantee end-to-end hard deadlines, (2) a deadline-aware
random access algorithm, (3) a virtual frame approach to deal with the infinite
temporal correlation among packets, and (4) deadline-aware PHY/MAC resource
allocation. By exploiting these transformative technical approaches, the project
will (1) design distributed algorithms for mission-critical wireless networks,
(2) design resource allocation algorithms for supporting hard end-to-end
deadlines for physical layer models beyond the collision model and (3) design
joint routing/scheduling algorithms for multihop traffic flows with end-to-end
deadline constraints. Education is a core component of this project. During the
course of this project, research and education will be integrated by including
new theories and algorithms developed in this project into graduate-level
courses. Every effort will be made to involve undergraduates and students from
under-represented students in this project. &lt;br/&gt;