* 1609946
* Investigation and design of dendritic peptide bolaamphiphile vectors for siRNA delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the basic
physiochemical properties of a new bolaamphiphile (bola) vector system for siRNA
delivery and to design new pH-responsive bolas for improved siRNA delivery
efficiency. Despite the tremendous potential of RNAi for therapeutics, the lack
of safe and effective delivery vehicles hampers the clinical promise of siRNA.
Recently the PI's lab has demonstrated a new design of bolaamphiphiles as
promising synthetic vectors for siRNA delivery. The bolas show high efficiency
and low cytotoxicity for intracellular siRNA delivery, and fluorocarbon bolas
also show excellent serum stability. Despite the excellent performances for
bolas, many fundamental questions remain unanswered. This project details PI's
plans to address several key questions for this new delivery system. The first
major aim of the study is to combine both experimental and computational studies
to understand the fundamental properties of bola/siRNA complexes, such as the
structure and morphology of the complexes, binding affinity and stability of the
complexes, as well as how do they interact with serum and membranes. The
fundamental insight gained in the first aim will enable to design more effective
bola vectors for siRNA delivery. In the second aim PI proposes a specific design
of acid-labile bolas for improving the efficiency for siRNA transfection. The
proposed multi-disciplinary research activity will provide students excellent
training in many areas including organic/polymer synthesis, biomaterials,
nanomaterials, and biology. This will provide great opportunities to train
graduate and undergraduate students, especially for minority and women students
currently working on this project. The PI is also strongly committed to various
K-12 outreach programs that are aimed to excite the younger generation with
science and to enhance general public understanding and appreciation of chemical
sciences and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical:&lt;br/&gt;RNA interference (RNAi) technology has demonstrated
tremendous utility both for fundamental biological research and for disease
treatments. The high potency and specificity of gene silencing induced by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) makes this technology particularly promising for
treatment of various diseases including cancer, viral infections, obesity and
diabetes. One major roadblock preventing it from realization of clinical
applications for siRNA technology is the lack of efficient methods to deliver
siRNA into cells. This study explores a novel molecular delivery system for safe
and efficienct siRNA delivery. The goal of this project is to understand the
basic chemi-physical properties of a new molecular delivery system for siRNA
delivery and to design new stimuli-responsive delivery molecules for improved
siRNA delivery efficiency. Ultimately, the knowledge gained from this study will
facilitate the development of safe and efficient siRNA delivery vectors that can
have tremendous impact on biotechnological and pharmaceutical industries. In
addition, the proposed multi-disciplinary research activity will provide
excellent training for graduate and undergraduate students, especially for
minority and women students currently working on this project.