* 1609560
* RUI:   Disorder in Strongly-Correlated Electrons on a Lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Ehsan Khatami, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2019
* USD 171,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in the physics of
disorder and its effect on how electrons organize in real materials. Theoretical
study and understanding of fundamental properties of solids that exhibit
unexpected and often technologically useful properties at low temperatures
commonly rely on the assumption that atoms form perfectly periodic lattices.
However, disorder (crystal defects or impurities) that exists in real materials
cannot always be ignored when studying electronic properties. Together with all
the other important players in the system (crystal lattice geometry, interaction
between electrons, etc.), their presence can drive the system as a whole to
phases that do not appear if one considers disorder alone, or only electronic
interactions. The accurate description of such an inclusive system using current
numerical techniques can be a daunting task. In this project, the PI will
implement a novel idea for efficiently taking random disorder into account in
certain numerical simulations of interacting electrons. The PI will use the
method to study the collective rearrangements of electrons and the different
transformations they can undergo. The results will help interpret experimental
observations, and will ultimately help understand the mechanism behind the
creation of exotic phases, such as insulating and superconducting phases, with
possible applications in the technology and energy sectors.

The activities will provide several undergraduate students from the diverse
population of San Jose State University with hands-on research experience in the
field of computational condensed matter physics, and with opportunities to
improve their scientific communication skills through writing papers and
presenting their findings at national scientific meetings. The award also
supports the PI in his efforts to integrate research and undergraduate education
through the incorporation of computational methods into physics courses.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in the physics of
disorder and its effect on electronic phase transitions. The interplay of
disorder, caused by impurities or crystal defects in real materials, and
electronic correlations in condensed matter physics is only poorly understood.
Important questions about the effect of disorder on the appearance and nature of
phase transitions, as well as on the fate of the Anderson localization upon
introduction of electronic interactions in different dimensions, remain largely
unsettled. This is especially true for fermionic systems and the corresponding
quantum lattice models that emulate disorder effects through random-site or bond
energies. Recent experiments with ultracold Fermi gasses on optical lattices
have begun to shed light on some of these questions. However, much like in
experimental simulations with clean lattices, these experiments rely on
approximation-free and highly precise numerical simulations for thermometry and
characterization.

In this project the PI will implement a new idea for the treatment of continuous
random disorder in the numerical linked-cluster expansion, an emerging and
powerful method that yields exact finite-temperature results for strongly
correlated electronic systems in the thermodynamic limit. Using this method, the
PI will study the thermodynamic properties, including various magnetic and/or
superconducting correlations of Heisenberg and Hubbard models in two and three
dimensions. The results will improve our understanding of the exotic phenomena
that can arise in the presence of both disorder and electronic correlations, and
will help interpret results of future experiments with disordered optical
lattices. The data obtained, especially in the strong-coupling regimes, can also
be used to benchmark other numerical methods for disordered fermionic systems.

The activities will provide several undergraduate students from the diverse
population of San Jose State University with hands-on research experience in the
field of computational condensed matter physics, and with opportunities to
improve their scientific communication skills through writing papers and
presenting their findings at national scientific meetings. The award also
supports the PI in his efforts to integrate research and undergraduate education
through the incorporation of computational methods into physics courses.