* 1609449
* Collaborative Research: Fabrication and Optimization of Continuous Stationary Phase Gradients for Liquid Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Sarah Rutan, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,035.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation. The goal of a chemical
separation is to separate a complex mixture into its individual components by
taking advantage of differences in the degree of interaction a species exhibits
between a stationary phase and a mobile phase. In this project, Professors
Maryanne Collinson and Sarah Rutan at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) are
exploring an alternate approach in the field of chemical separations. Instead of
manipulating the composition of the mobile phase during the course of a
separation, the stationary phase composition is instead changed. Gradual changes
in stationary phases have many advantages including the ability to improve
selectivity, separation times, and the ability to detect species in the mixture.
The synergy between the collaborating research groups enhances the training of a
diverse body of undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art
materials synthesis, chromatography, and the predictive power provided by
simulations. In addition, by developing a peer-coaching relationship with new
faculty, undergraduate instruction in analytical chemistry at VCU is being
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the following three
specific aims: (1) design, construction, and characterization of liquid
chromatography columns with a continuous gradient in chemical functionality
along their length, (2) development and implementation of tools to predict the
chromatographic responses for various sets of analytes on a continuous gradient
stationary phase, and (3) coupling simulations with experiments to determine
what gradient lengths and compositions are needed to obtain optimum separations,
thus avoiding the trial and error approach usually used in method development.
For proof-of-principle, silica monolithic columns and columns packed with
superficially porous particles are strategically modified to incorporate a
continuous gradient in C8, C18, amine, and/or phenyl groups using silane
chemistry and controlled rate infusion (CRI), a method recently developed in the
Collinson group. The integration of the Collinson group's expertise in sol-gel
chemistry and surface chemical gradients with the Rutan group's expertise in
modeling of separations and liquid chromatography is leading to the development
of new methodologies for problems of societal relevance, ranging from biomarker
discovery to detection of low levels of environmental contaminants.