* 1609279
* EPCN: Strong Diagnoses from Weak Signals: Leveraging Network Effects for Epidemic Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Constantine Caramanis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Interconnection is at the core of the functionality of our modern
infrastructure, spreading ideas, technology and information. Future critical
infrastructure, from self-driving cars to everything cloud computing promises to
enable, exploit and depend on this interconnection and spreading capability. But
as recent history shows, from denial of service attacks to state-driven
cyberwarfare they will also suffer from it if vulnerabilities allow. The
potential for broad destructive impact of malware is clear, particularly as the
importance of mobile devices is on the rise. As more of our critical
infrastructure becomes linked to devices end-users (consumers) control, and not
merely a computer backbone whose hardware and software are centrally managed and
controlled, the importance of maintaining the cyber-health of our devices will
become increasingly critical, and much more difficult. The central theme of this
proposal is its motto, if it spreads, it cannot hide. The motivation is to build
a theory and accompanying algorithms that do not depend on the specifics of the
network or devices, or on the specifics of what is spreading. If our defenses
depend on detecting specific characteristics, by definition they miss any threat
that does not share those. Rather, the high level idea is that if something
spreads through a network, the spread itself will leave a signature independent
of the design of the malware, or of the devices it is infecting. Moreover, the
proposal is built on the idea that this can be done, even if locally it leaves
no trace -- that is, even if looking at a single device over time, its behavior
is statistically indistinguishable from normal behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes to do this by developing a new paradigm
for network inverse problems: use plentiful but extremely weak or noisy signals
as network forensics tools, to uncover hidden structure, properties, and
phenomena spreading on the network. This requires using and developing new tools
from high dimensional statistics and concentration, Markov chain coupling, graph
dynamics and graph theory, to obtain a statistical theory that delineates the
landscape of when global phenomena are statistically detectable, from local
signals indistinguishable from noise. An equal part of the proposed work is then
to develop efficient, scalable algorithms to do the detection. Building on this,
the proposal tackles two fundamental challenges: developing efficient
parallelizable and distributed algorithms with information requirements that do
not scale in the size of the network, and second, using a notion of aggregate
network feedback extracted through noisy signals, to enable network learning.