* 1609151
* SusChEM: New Ni Macrocyclic Catalysts for Solar Driven Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Tong Ren, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tong Ren of the Department of
Chemistry at Purdue University is studying new complexes of the element, nickel,
that can be used to catalyze reactions of carbon dioxide using sunlight.
Professor Ren is synthesizing cyclic organic molecules that will bind to the
nickel atom and remain stable during the course of the reaction. These product
molecules are then being incorporated into solar cells. Professor Ren is
providing a high level of level of interdisciplinary education and training for
undergraduate and graduate students in chemical science, with an emphasis on
broadening the participation of groups that are underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. He and his students are also designing K-12 level laboratory
teaching modules that teach elements of sustainable science and technology.

Professor Ren is synthesizing macrocycle complexes of nickel with the aim of
discovering ones that are among the best catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction.
Nickel and cobalt macrocyclic complexes are among the best catalysts for carbon
dioxide reduction, yet their performances, both over-potential and catalytic
turnover, remain to be desired for large scale application. Initial experiments
are focusing on improving both the carbon dioxide binding to the metal center
and the stability of the complexes. To accomplish this aim, Professor Ren is
introducing various substituents on the carbon atoms of the macrocyle with the
objective of tuning the conformation of complex. He is also examining ways to
stabilize carbon dioxide bound intermediates and reduce activation barriers
through the introduction of pyridyl and proton-donor substituents. Optimized
catalysts are being incorporated into photocells with a p-NiO photocathode that
perform solar-driven carbon dioxide reduction. Professor Ren is working with
Purdue's Science Express Program in bringing modern laboratory experiments to
rural high schools across Indiana.