* 1609212
* Depsipeptides as Tissue Engineering Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Laura Suggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 389,802.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of Texas at Austin is to develop a novel
class of self-assembling, peptide-based hydrogel scaffolds with the unique
advantages of biologic compatibility, degradability and the ability to
incorporate cells in a spatially defined manner. This award is co-funded by
BioMaPS funds in the Division of Materials Research, and the Biomedical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems. An ideal tissue engineering scaffold would possess the
properties of being adhesive and supportive to living cells, degradable by the
body and compatible with living tissues. Furthermore, such a scaffold should be
easily processable into 3D configurations, and this is ideally performed in the
presence of living cells. This project would develop a novel class of hydrogels
prepared from molecules known as depsipeptides. This award will study the
spontaneous self-assembly of these small molecules into self-supporting
hydrogels when patterned using focused ultrasound. These hydrogels are expected
to fulfill all of the requirements of an ideal tissue scaffold. The cell-
interactive hydrogel scaffolds have increasingly been explored for use in tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine, particularly those that can both self-
assemble and mimic the biological features of structural proteins. The planned
educational and outreach activities include: 1) development of a learning-
centered framework with instructional modules; 2) support and mentor the
UTeachEngineering Master of Arts program in the campus in the area of
biomaterials; and 3) develop hands-on outreach activities to serve high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: With this award, this researcher will
study self-assembling depsipeptides, also known as ester amides. This system
makes use of two molecular regions of the peptide: a hydrophobic tail to control
assembly; and a hydrophilic depsipeptide oligomer which confers biologic
activity and degradability. These molecules can self-assemble into different
ordered structures including nanoparticles and fibrous, hydrogel scaffolds. The
side chains can be varied among a wide range of chemical groups, resulting in a
family of molecules with a host of possible bioactivities. The current proposal
seeks to synthesize depsipeptide analogs of the canonical Arginine-Glycine-
Aspartic acid sequence, an ubiquitous amino acid motif known to bind cell
integrins to mediate cell adhesion and interaction with the extracellular
matrix. Furthermore, due to the unique kinetics of this self-assembly, the
project will utilize a focused ultrasound transducer to produce patterned, cell-
laden and tissue engineered constructs. This work will develop a unique platform
to explore the rational design of materials for applications in tissue
engineering, where a microstructured and degradable material is needed with
biologic specificity. The proposed studies are unique in that they offer a
tailorable platform for the precise definition of cell and tissue responses, and
the design strategy could be broadly applied for the development of other
biomaterials. The overall educational goal of this proposal is to develop a
learning-centered framework of outreach and instructional modules specifically
geared around biomaterials education, and hands-on outreach activities to serve
high school students.