* 1609914
* Cationic Diblock Polymer-Drug Conjugate-Based Nanoparticles for Drug-Gene Co-Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Yun Wu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical:

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University at Buffalo, The State University at New York is to develop a novel
drug-gene co-delivery system with potential applications in cancer treatment.
Biodegradable polymers with two building blocks per molecule will be prepared.
One building block will attach chemically anticancer drugs; the other building
block will carry positive charges and can physically adsorb negatively-charged
anticancer genes. The biodegradable polymers will assemble to form core-shell
nanoparticles (NPs) in aqueous solutions, with inner core domains for drug
loading and outer shell domains for gene loading. Comprehensive studies will be
conducted to investigate the preparation and assembly of the biodegradable
polymers, therapeutic delivery and degradation behavior of the assembled NPs, as
well as the biomedical effects of the drug-gene co-delivery system on cancer
cells and tissues. This project can lay a significant foundation for the further
development of drug-gene combination therapies for the synergetic treatment of
cancers. Outreach will be conducted through YouTube broadcasting of short
polymer videos and educational activities directed to kids in local schools.
Research participation of students from underrepresented groups will be
guaranteed. Substantial efforts will also be made to update a classic polymer
textbook.

Technical:

The goal of this project is to develop multifunctional biodegradable
nanocarriers enabling not only noncompetitive high loadings of drugs and genes
but also sustained release of these therapeutics. To this end, amphiphilic
biodegradable di-block polymer-drug conjugates (PDCs) with a drug-conjugated
block and a cationic block are designed as novel biomaterials for the
preparation of multifunctional NPs, to integrate combination therapy, controlled
release, imaging, targeting and biodegradability into one well-defined
nanoscopic system for the precise delivery of both drug and gene. Well-defined
di-block PDCs, as well as the corresponding assembled NPs with anticancer drug-
conjugated cores and cationic shells, will be prepared and characterized. Drug
conjugation, complexation with anticancer genes, drug/gene release profile,
degradation behavior and multifunctionalization of the NPs will be studied. In
vitro and in vivo studies using breast cancer models will be performed, and the
anticancer efficacy of the multifunctional NPs with conjugated drug and
complexed gene as compared to various controls will be evaluated. These NPs can
serve as unique platforms for detailed systematic studies to understand and
optimize the parameters governing the success of the co-delivery approach. The
project will provide excellent interdisciplinary research opportunities for
various students, including these from underrepresented groups. Broad
educational outreach activities will be conducted.