* 1609997
* CDS&E: Toward a Pattern Recognition Framework to Identify Reaction Coordinates for Order-Disorder Transitions: Application to Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2021
* USD 355,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT This award supports computational research and education
to develop a new method to identify the degree of organization contained in an
arrangement of atoms or molecules as it changes from a disorganized or
disordered arrangement to a more organized or ordered arrangement, particularly
in computer simulations of materials. In the processing of many materials, from
soft materials made of long chain-like molecules, or polymers, to inorganic
solids like metal alloys, transformations often occur that involve changes in
the nature of the way atoms or molecules self-organize from a more disordered
arrangement to a more ordered arrangement. Such changes in internal order
typically translate into substantial changes in the properties of the material.
Among the many promising building blocks available to generate desirable ordered
structures, block copolymers, a class of polymers, stand out because a variety
of materials can be made from them with highly regular patterns and pores of
nanoscale dimensions, for potential applications in the making of semiconductor
films, filters, and conducting membranes. However, the realization of such
highly regular structures is difficult and often involves more art than science.
Paramount to understanding and controlling microscopic ordering is to have good
"order parameters," quantities that researchers can use to monitor the progress
towards the desired well organized or ordered state. Such order parameters
distill a huge amount of microscopic and atomic-scale data into just a few
crucial quantities; currently, they are developed in a case-by-case fashion,
often involving significant computational effort and trial and error. In this
project, the PI aims to advance a framework to help identify useful order
parameters based on ideas from the area of pattern recognition. Just like
effective computer programs have been developed and deployed for face
recognition, for example, the PI aims to develop techniques for describing the
key geometrical signatures that accompany the onset and propagation of
microscopic order. The close collaboration of the PI with experimental groups
will ensure a synergy between computational and experimental efforts. The
project provides an environment to train and support a doctoral student and to
provide research experience for two undergraduate students, one of whom will
develop outreach educational modules. Results from this investigation will also
be used in advanced chemical engineering modeling classes taught by the PI.

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT This award supports computational research and education
with the goal to apply and develop pattern recognition (PR) algorithms that
would allow users to screen out and identify good descriptors of the transition
kinetics from input trajectory data containing a large number of snapshots of
configuration files of the system as it goes from one state of order to another.
In particular, this proposal seeks pattern-recognition-based reaction
coordinates to track the kinetics of order-disorder phase transitions involved
in block copolymer systems, emphasizing the not-well understood processes that
form bicontinuous phases like gyroid, double diamond, and plumbers nightmare,
all made of periodic interweaving 3D networks. The PI envisions that by
identifying appropriate reaction coordinates discovered in this way, a more
complete and intuitive understanding will be attained of the ordering process
and how the system could be steered into alternative pathways that lead to
different stable and metastable states. The PI plans to execute the following
activities: (a) Determine the conditions at which sought after bicontinuous
phases form, a step entailing free energy simulations to discriminate stable
from metastable phases and generation of the reference ordered structures of
interest. (b) Simulate transition-path ensemble data for varying supercooling
conditions. (c) Develop candidate pattern-recognition-based descriptors from the
phases simulated in step (a), and assess their quality based on data collected
in (b). (d) Apply the best reaction coordinate thus found to gain physical
insight into the kinetics of the process and phase bifurcation. This
investigation will provide pattern-recognition algorithms and pattern-
recognition-based descriptors proven to be helpful in describing the formation
kinetics of geometrically complex ordered phases. The method can find numerous
new applications, including kinetic studies of thermal, laser and solvent
annealing, and directed assembly of block copolymer thin films on patterned
substrates.