* 1609554
* Fundamental Issues for Thermal Atomic Layer Etching
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Steven George, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Steven George of the University
of Colorado at Boulder studies the fundamental chemistry issues involved in
thermal atomic layer etching (ALE). One of the greatest accomplishments in the
last 50 years has been the progressive miniaturization of semiconductor devices.
This progression is described by "Moore's Law" which states that transistors
decrease in dimension by one-half approximately every two years. As
miniaturization continues, increasing demands are placed on how these devices
are made, and now it requires atom addition (deposition) and removal (etching)
methods to produce feature sizes at the atomic scale. Atomic layer etching (ALE)
techniques have recently emerged to provide control of the etching process so
that a single layer of atoms can be removed in a single step. Professor George
employs a number of techniques to determine the amount of material deposited or
removed with atomic layer sensitivity. These experiments also are able to
measure the material removal and to identify the surface species present during
the etching process. This research is important for the fabrication of advanced
semiconductor devices, and makes a direct impact on electronics and other high-
technology industries. The research is interdisciplinary and involves students
with interests ranging from basic science to engineering applications. Dr.
George and his group members also actively make their results available through
publications and numerous talks at scientific meetings.

In this project, Dr. George explores the thermal ALE process that leads to
atomic layer controlled etching. The thermal ALE process is based on sequential
and self-limiting surface fluorination and ligand-exchange reactions. The
surface fluorination reactions are thermochemically favorable and yield a metal
fluoride with a surface coverage on the order of a monolayer. The ligand-
exchange reactions are analogous to well-known transmetalation reactions in
organometallic chemistry. This research investigates various precursors and
reaction products for the fluorination and ligand-exchange reactions and
examines the dependence of these reactions on temperature and other reaction
conditions. This research also explores the conformality of the etching process
and determines the effect of film structure on the etching. The understanding of
these fluorination and ligand-exchange reactions defines a new important family
of surface reactions that are important for advanced semiconductor fabrication
and has broader impacts on the field. Dr. George involves undergraduate and
graduate students in his research and is active in scientific outreach. The
results of his research are widely presented at various scientific meetings
including the American Vacuum Society (AVS) and Atomic Layer Deposition
meetings.