* 1609240
* Collaborative Research: Advances in High-Frequency Magnetics for High-Efficiency, High-Density Power Electronic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Perreault, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 265,000.00

Power electronics - electronic circuits that process energy - plays a key
enabling role in a wide range of energy-efficient and renewable-energy
technologies, and is also essential for powering other types of electronic
systems. Smaller, more efficient, and less costly power electronics are critical
to continued improvement of all these systems. Magnetic components such as
inductors and transformers are typically the largest and usually lossy
components in power electronics. Moreover, limitations in magnetic component
design have been a major obstacle to realizing substantial improvements in
miniaturization. To date, advances in power electronics have been enabled by
increases in operating frequency, but limitations in magnetics technologies are
inhibiting continuation of this trend. This project will develop design methods
for high-frequency magnetics, mitigating these limitations, and will apply them
to develop miniaturized, high-efficiency power electronics. The results will be
useful across many different applications in electronic systems, efficient end-
use of energy, and renewable energy systems, reducing their cost and improving
their energy efficiency. The project will engage undergraduate and graduate
students in the research, strengthening their skills in this important area.
Participation of under-represented groups will be sought, and research
participants will be carefully mentored. An ongoing research collaboration
between Dartmouth and MIT will be strengthened and extended to include
educational activities, including outreach to K-12 students to promote science
and engineering.

A key route to improvement of power electronics is the development of converters
that operate efficiently at substantially higher switching frequencies than are
presently used (e.g., in the High-Frequency, or HF, range of 3-30 MHz). Higher
switching frequencies result in reduced energy storage requirements of the
passive components (including magnetic components), which can be leveraged to
reduce size and cost of power electronics, and to improve performance (e.g.,
higher bandwidth.) Joint advances in high-frequency power circuits and magnetic
component design are needed to realize these benefits. Advances have been
hindered both by a lack of performance data for HF magnetic materials and a poor
understanding of how to design power magnetics for HF. Recent work has revealed
that some commercial low-permeability magnetic materials have high performance
in this frequency range, enabling substantial miniaturization of power
electronics (e.g., factors of 2-10 reduction in overall size) if magnetic
component and circuit designs leveraging these materials can be developed. The
proposed research program will develop design methods for power magnetic
components at HF frequencies utilizing low-permeability materials, and will
further investigate how these components can best be applied to realize high-
density, high-efficiency power electronics. The research will develop design
techniques for achieving reduced core and winding losses with low permeability
materials; investigate optimized core and winding geometries; create improved
models and designs for high-frequency windings, and develop new self-shielding
HF magnetic structures. Moreover, power converter designs that can effectively
leverage the capabilities of these HF magnetic components will be investigated
and applied to realize miniaturized power electronics operating at HF.