* 1609306
* SusChEM: Design and Synthesis of New Lead-free Organometallic Halide Perovskite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jiangeng Xue, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description. In recent years a new class of materials, called
organometallic halide perovskite materials, has emerged with a potential to
improve a solar cell's performance while fabricated at low cost. Concerned with
the adverse effects to environment and health due to the use of lead in the
existing perovskite materials, which can be dissolved in water, the research
team aims to discover and develop new lead-free organometallic halide perovskite
materials that are environmentally friendly and stable. The expected outcome of
this project enables a sustainable solar cell technology that is safe for
commercial deployment to generate low-cost solar electricity. The research team
participates in multiple educational and outreach activities to recruit, train
and mentor graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, particularly from
underrepresented groups, who are interested in materials science and
engineering. In addition, the project team intends to openly disseminate the
computer codes used to design these materials and to predict their structures
and properties.

Technical Description. The goal of this project is to use a computation-guided
approach to study new lead-free organometallic halide perovskite materials with
mixed metal ions. The lead-containing organometallic halide perovskite materials
have shown great promise for offering superior optoelectronic properties to
enable high performance photovoltaic action while allowing to be easily
processed in solution or high vacuum. In this project, the research team seeks
to replace the lead in these perovskite materials with ion pairs with the same
or different valence states in specific ratios. The scientific tasks include:
(1) computationally screening a large number of material candidates to identify
promising candidates for further studies by employing high-throughput framework
of MPInterfaces; (2) computational simulation of structure and properties of the
identified candidates using density functional theory calculations; (3)
solution-based synthesis of these perovskite materials in both thin film and
bulk crystal forms; and (4) characterization of the electronic, optical,
photovoltaic, and multiferroic behavior of these new perovskite materials. The
ultimate goal is to explore the large family of lead-free, perovskite-structured
organic-inorganic hybrid materials and to identify the most promising,
environmentally-safe materials with improved performance for photovoltaics
applications.