* 1609066
* Artificially Inhomogeneous Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Casey Miller, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 397,758.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the progress
of science by exploring how to control magnetic properties by making materials
in new and very well controlled ways, and evaluating what new applications may
be realized with such magnetic materials. Advances in magnetism are integral to
new sensors, computing technologies, energy efficiency, and data storage, all of
which impact US health, prosperity, and national defense. The project may also
benefit manufacturers that use advanced magnetic materials in their products,
which will help the US maintain technological superiority. Additionally, this
project will support the training of young scientists so that they become
familiar with modern research techniques and scientific collaboration, and
ultimately develop the skills needed thrive in the US scientific and engineering
workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this work are to create and investigate nanoscale magnetic
heterostructures that contain intentional distributions of magnetic properties.
We will investigate how well-controlled composition gradients in magnetic
structures can lead to new functions that may enable the design of new devices
relevant to applications such as: magnetic recording and data storage;
telecommunications; and energy harvesting. Focus areas include thermally tunable
exchange coupling in magnetic films; magnonic waveguides; and graded magnetic
structures for electrical energy generation via spin motive forces.
Understanding how to define and control magnetic properties with temperature
will have implications for energy harvesting and energy assisted magnetic
recording. Understanding how magnons propagate in inhomogeneous magnetic
materials may impact the future of telecommunications and enable novel computing
architectures with reduced energy requirements. Understanding the novel
phenomenon of spin motive force may lead to energy harvesting and advanced
battery technologies. The artificially structured materials will be fabricated
by thin film deposition techniques, and their physical properties will be
characterized using magnetometry, diffraction, transport, and neutron scattering
in collaboration with national laboratories.