* 1609550
* SusChEM: Cytochrome P450 based catalysts for C(sp3)-H amination
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Rudi Fasan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2020
* USD 530,287.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Rudi Fasan of the University of Rochester to
develop and investigate enzymes (biological catalysts) that convert carbon-
hydrogen (C-H) bonds into carbon-nitrogen (C-N) bonds. Carbon-nitrogen bonds are
common in both man-made and naturally occurring organic molecules. Currently
available methods for making C-N bonds from C-H bonds largely rely on the use of
rare and expensive metals and wasteful reagents. Catalytic methods for the
construction of C-N chemical bonds are potentially extremely valuable for the
manufacture of commodity chemicals and pharmaceuticals. This project is
developing enzymes that increase the rate of new C-N bond formation starting
from easily accessible, low or zero waste raw materials. Since these chemical
reactions do not occur in nature, this research has broad and far-reaching
implications toward expanding the range of synthetically-valuable chemical
reactions. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project are
receiving cross-disciplinary training. Minority students actively participate in
the research. Dr. Fasan offers of a hands-on chemistry course to high school
students of the Rochester City School District. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fasan
research group has recently discovered that engineered cytochrome P450 enzymes
constitute promising systems for promoting intramolecular C(sp3)-H amination
using azide-based substrates. Organic azides are particularly attractive
substrates for C-H amination due to their ready synthetic accessibility,
excellent atom economy, and the release of inert nitrogen gas as the reaction
by-product. Building on these promising results, this project explores the scope
of P450-catalyzed C-H amination reactions in the context of different azide-
containing substrates and implements strategies to enhance the C-H amination
activity and selectivity of these catalysts. In addition, the mechanism and
catalytic intermediates involved in the P450-mediated C-H amination reactions
are determined via a combination of complementary approaches. Ultimately, this
research is expected to generate knowledge about the scope of engineered P450
enzymes as catalytic platforms for mediating the aminofunctionalization of
unactivated aliphatic C-H bonds and fundamental understanding of the mechanism
of these novel enzymatic transformations. Graduate and undergraduate students
involved in the project are receiving cross-disciplinary training in chemistry,
enzymology, protein engineering, and spectroscopy.