* 1609533
* Quantifying the Thermo-Mechanical Response and Strain-Rate Effects in Magnesium Microcrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jaafar El-Awady, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 402,976.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

This project will focus on quantifying the deformation mechanisms that dominate
at elevated temperatures and different deformation rates in magnesium (Mg) and
its alloys. One approach to reduce carbon dioxide emission from fossil-fuel
powered vehicles is to increase their fuel efficiency by reducing the vehicle
structural weight. To that end, Mg alloys demonstrate a favorable strength-to-
weight ratio and provide valid alternatives to aluminum alloys and high strength
steels. Thus, there is a growing interest in utilizing Mg alloys in many
automotive, aerospace and defense applications. However, at present, one of the
limiting factors for the wide production and use of Mg alloys is their low
formability at room temperature, which leads to many technological and
economical constraints. This is mainly due to the low ductility of Mg alloys at
room temperature. As such, most Mg sheets are formed at elevated temperatures
below their recrystallization limit (~400ºC). Another challenge is the high
strain-rate sensitivity of Mg, which necessitates low speed forming processes.
This award will thus supports research to fundamentally identify the deformation
mechanisms through a set of state-of-the-art multi-length scale experimental and
simulation techniques. The results of this project are expected to assist in the
process of developing new Mg alloys that demonstrate improved formability and
enhanced ductility and toughness at a wider range of temperatures and strain
rates. The integration of research, education and outreach in this project will
also: (1) improve STEM achievement in a predominately African American
elementary school in Baltimore, currently ranked below 92% of schools in
Maryland; (2) involve under-represented students from a local historically black
college through internships on research in mechanics and materials; and (3)
develop an education portfolio that intensifies the knowledge of undergraduate
and graduate students in fundamentals of state-of-the-art multiscale modeling
and micro-scale experiments.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:

The primary research objectives of this research are to fundamentally identify
the coupled strain rate effect and thermo-mechanical response of Mg and AZ31
microcrystals (fabricated in bulk single crystals) through coupled novel in situ
scanning electron microscopy elevated-temperature experiments, and novel large
scale three-dimensional discrete dislocation dynamics simulations that account
for dislocation-twin boundary interactions. The research hinges around
addressing four challenging objectives: (1) Quantify the thermo-mechanical
properties and deformation mechanisms in the range of 30 to 400ºC in Mg and AZ31
microcrystals; (2) Identify the origins of the anomalous hardening response
observed at 30% of the melting temperature of Mg; (3) Quantify the strain rate
effects at different temperatures on the deformation mechanisms in the range of
1e-4 to 0.1 s; and (4) Generate a four dimensional model of the correlation
between temperature, strain rate, crystal size, and strength.