* 1609842
* CDS&E: Exploiting Multiple Levels of Parallelism in Quantum Chemistry Software
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Edmond Chow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 690,710.00

Quantum chemistry methods and software give scientists a computational tool to
predict and study the properties of molecular systems. These tools are used
widely, ranging from fundamental chemistry and biochemistry to pharmaceutical
and materials design. Improvements in these methods and software give scientists
an even more powerful tool for discovery. This project will develop new methods
and software for quantum chemistry aimed at fully exploiting the parallel
capabilities of today's computer hardware. Parallel capabilities within
individual processor cores will be specifically exploited, as well as the
ability to use multiple compute nodes concurrently for a single calculation.
Success in this project will promote the progress of science, specifically for
efficiently studying very large molecular systems with quantum chemistry tools,
by decreasing the computer time needed for studies with the same accuracy and
increasing the accuracy of studies that use the same computational time. This
project will first target the computation of electron repulsion integrals (ERIs)
used in essentially all quantum chemistry software. The calculation of ERIs
using the Obara-Saika (OS) method will be reorganized to exploit the single
instruction multiple data (SIMD) capabilities of modern computer processors. The
calculation of the Boys function used in the OS method will also be addressed.
An optimized, open source software library for ERI calculation will be released,
which will include functionality for one-electron integrals and integral
derivatives. This project will also further develop the GTFock quantum chemistry
framework to make it easier to use by adding several interfaces. GTFock, which
has efficient distributed parallel capabilities, will be extended to include
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory. GTFock will be used to study large
protein-ligand systems. In addition, this project will involve undergraduate
students and will be used to motivate research in the classroom.