* 1609557
* Synthetic Biomimetic Design of Radical S-Adenosylmethionine Maquettes from Experiments and Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Valerie Copie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 456,114.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding a collaborative local team at Montana State University
comprised of Dr. Eric Shepard (PI), Dr. Joan Broderick, Dr. Valérie Copié, and
Dr. Robert Szilagyi to investigate the minimal protein structural requirements
for generating and controlling organic radical chemistry in biology. The largest
known superfamily of enzymes in Nature is the radical S-adenosylmethionine (SAM)
superfamily. These metalloenzymes contain an iron-sulfur cluster that is
responsible for the coordination and cleavage of the essential cofactor SAM. The
cleavage of SAM generates a radical intermediate species, known as the
5'-deoxyadenosyl radical, which is responsible for propagating a diverse array
of chemical transformations essential to life. Examples of such transformations
include DNA repair, RNA modification, protein activation, vitamin biosynthesis,
and cofactor formation. This project employs parallel synthetic, spectroscopic,
and computational investigations to develop and characterize iron-sulfur cluster
complexes that are functional in SAM chemistry. These synthetic compounds are
used to understand the specific SAM-based carbon-sulfur bond activation event
that leads to 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical formation. Students are being trained in
interdisciplinary research that encompasses biochemical, spectroscopic, kinetic,
computational and synthetic methodologies. Outreach and educational activities
are within the Native American and home-schooling communities from rural
Montana. As part of these activities young scientists are being exposed to basic
chemistry/biochemistry laboratory exercises, as well as advanced scientific
problem solving techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes in the radical
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) superfamily catalyze an incredible array of chemical
transformations essential for life's processes. This diversity is propagated
through a stoichiometrically simple Hydrogen-atom abstraction event. At the core
of radical SAM catalytic processes is a redox active [4Fe-4S] cluster that
harbors a site-differentiated iron site that promotes the bidentate coordination
of SAM. Using a retrosynthetic approach, minimalist protein maquettes that
coordinate site-differentiated [4Fe-4S] clusters are prepared to probe the
importance of protein environment in fine-tuning the stability, reactivity, and
selectivity of SAM based radical reactions. Complementary NMR, EPR, CD, UV-vis,
HPLC, SAXS, XAS, and Mössbauer techniques, along with multi-layered DFT/MO/MM
computational models are techniques that interrogate the structure, stability,
and reactivity of the maquette complexes. Chemical, structural, and mechanistic
characteristics of the maquette complexes are investigated through structure-
function relationships. The insights gained from [4Fe-4S] maquette studies may
contribute to understanding how and why Nature uses this platform as its
preferred method for generating and propagating radical reactions.