* 1609080
* Data-driven modeling, monitoring and mitigation of cascading outages in transmission and distribution systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Zhaoyu Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2020
* USD 347,938.00

Cascading outages are complicated series of dependent failures that
progressively weaken the large-scale electric power grid that transmits and
distributes electric power to the nation. These cascading outages happen
occasionally and can cause widespread blackouts, with up to tens of millions of
people affected. The risk of cascading blackouts is present and could even
increase because of the aging of power system infrastructure, severe weather
events, increased variability due to the integration of renewable energy
sources, and new threats such as cyber and physical attacks. Given the
tremendous economic and societal impacts of blackouts, it is imperative to model
and monitor the interactions and propagation of cascading outages, as well as
develop effective mitigation techniques to reduce the risk of their occurrence.
The causes of cascading outages are diverse and very complicated. However, the
large amount of historical outage data collected by electric utilities provides
an opportunity for new analysis of cascading outages. This project will use this
data to understand the propagation and interactions of cascading outages,
advance the monitoring of high-risk operating conditions, and provide
engineering principles to reduce outage propagation. The research contributes to
the grand national challenge of improving resilience of critical infrastructure
systems by enhancing the resilience of power transmission and distribution grids
against cascading blackouts. The project provides unique multi-disciplinary
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students that combine
research work and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pioneer data-
based approaches for extracting insights and actionable information from the
considerable data already available to utilities. The outage data will be
clustered using big data learning techniques to reveal patterns of similar
outages. New models will characterize key aspects of complicated outage
interactions. For example, how outages affect one another will be expressed as a
network of interactions between power grid components. Data will be used to
identify observable correlates of high-risk cascading conditions from the
historical data, so that mitigation schemes for cascading events can be applied
only when needed. Finally, the new models and data will be used to develop a
framework for effective monitoring and mitigation. Since large transmission
blackouts are high risk due to their catastrophic impact on society, and the
smaller distribution blackouts are frequent, the research team will analyze
outage dependencies and cascading using recorded data from both the transmission
and distribution power grids. Prototype software will be developed for
processing data, identifying model parameters and key metrics, and performing
risk-based and data-driven analysis of cascading outages. The project integrates
engineering and science approaches from data analysis, risk analysis, complex
networks, and power systems engineering to mitigate blackout risk.