* 1609764
* Use of Chromium(III) to Enhance the Protonation of Biomolecules by Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2020
* David Dixon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the research of Professors Carolyn Cassady, David Dixon, and John
Vincent from the University of Alabama. Their project improves the sensitivity
of mass spectrometry (MS), which is a common analytical tool for identifying and
characterizing chemical substances. The researchers use experimental and
computational approaches to optimize MS conditions. This project specifically
improves MS analysis of peptides. Peptides are used in the study of protein
structure and function. The ability to better identify and characterize peptides
has benefits for basic molecular biology research, drug development, human
health, and biotechnology. Students working on this project receive mentoring
and training in an interdisciplinary, collaborative research environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project improves the sensitivity of mass
spectrometry (MS), an important means of characterizing biomolecules.
Specifically, the researchers are probing the use of trivalent chromium,
Cr(III), to enhance the intensity of the protonated ion signal obtained during
the analysis of peptides and other organic molecules. This work includes
optimization of experimental MS parameters and determination of the most
suitable reagents for inducing proton transfer. Both metal salts and
organometallic complexes are studied. The fundamental mechanism of the enhanced
protonation process is also being explored. High level electronic structure
calculations are used to elucidate the enhanced protonation mechanism with
Cr(III) and to determine the locations of the added protons on the organic
molecule. This novel Cr(III) method benefits proteomic researchers who use MS to
identify peptides in protein digests. The ability to better identify and
characterize peptides increases our understanding of biological processes and
leads to the development of new pharmaceutical drugs to target specific
metabolic pathways.