* 1609303
* Single nanowire spin-valve based infrared photodetctors and equality bit comparators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 454,680.00

Infrared light is not visible to the human eye. It is usually detected with
semiconductor detectors which exhibit a change in their electrical resistance
under infrared illumination. The relative change in resistance at room
temperature is, however, quite small, which necessitates cooling the detector
with liquid nitrogen. In this research, a novel detector will be demonstrated,
which relies on light changing the detector's resistance by affecting the
quantum mechanical spin properties of the electrons that carry current. With
this principle of detection, it is possible to make the resistance change in the
detector much larger at room temperature. Room temperature infrared detectors
are used in night vision, forensic science, astronomy, missile defense, car-
collision avoidance systems and monitoring of global warming, to name a few. Bit
comparators are electronic devices that compare two digital (binary) bits of
information and render a yes/no decision based on whether the two bits are the
same or different. They are important ingredients of electronic circuits and are
typically implemented with transistors which cannot remember the decision once
the decision has been rendered. A comparator that exploits spin dependent
properties and uses magnetic devices instead of transistors can remember the
decision and also use less energy. The ability to remember makes it possible to
build superior digital electronic circuits that are faster and more error-
resilient. In this research, such a comparator will be demonstrated. This
project will also integrate research with graduate and undergraduate education,
K-12 outreach through the Dean's Early Research Initiative program, and minority
enrichment through the Richmond Minorities in Engineering
Partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to fabricate and
demonstrate two novel spintronic devices - an infrared photodetector and a
reconfigurable bit comparator - working at room temperature. They will be
fabricated with 10- and 50-nm diameter nanowire spin valves with InSb spacer and
cobalt contacts. In the InSb spacer, only a single electronic subband is
occupied at room temperature. Preliminary experiments in the lab have shown that
in these nanowires, the major spin relaxation mechanism of electrons - namely
the D'yakonov-Perel' mechanism - is eliminated owing to single subband
occupancy, resulting in several-fold increase in the spin relaxation time. It
has also been shown that the spin relaxation time can be modulated with infrared
light, which will be exploited to build the photodetector. Such a photodetector
can, in principle, exhibit near-zero dark current, giant light-to-dark contrast
ratio and very high detectivity which always elude conventional photo-detectors
because of phonon excitations. Controlling the magnetization state of a
nanomagnet with electrically generated strain has been recently demonstrated in
our lab. That property will be leveraged to build the reconfigurable bit
comparator with unprecedented energy efficiency. These bit comparators are "non-
volatile" since they incorporate magnetic elements and hence the result of the
comparison can be stored indefinitely in the comparator. The devices will be
fabricated with electrochemical self-assembly of nanowires, electron-beam
lithography for patterning ferromagnetic contacts, and dielectrophoresis for
capturing a single nanowire between a pair of contacts to implement the
photodetector and bit comparator.