* 1609451
* Photophysics and Stability of Multichromophoric Polyelectrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 284,956.00

Nontechnical description: The research team studies a class of water-soluble
polymers that are capable of light emission. The materials are being studied in
collaboration with chemists who are developing them for biomedical imaging of
tumors, and for applications to detection of proteins and DNA sequences of
medical interest. These polymers organize into geometries that are determined by
factors such as salt and acid concentrations in the water. Those geometries
strongly influence both the color and brightness of the light emitted from the
polymers. The project employs microscopy of single polymer strands to
investigate how the polymer conformation and solution conditions affect the
intensity and stability of the emitted light. Participation in the research
provides training for graduate students in optics and polymer science, as well
as interactions with international collaborators working on problems with
medical significance. Since the materials under study are non-toxic, the
research team is using them to develop hands-on activities as part of a summer
course at the University of Rochester for gifted students, and for exhibitions
for the general public at the Rochester Museum and Science
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The research team is testing
models of how energy transfer in multi-chromophore ensembles comprising
fluorescent conjugated polyelectrolytes controls their degradation, fluorescence
intensity, and spectrum. In particular, the group is investigating the
circumstances under which chromophore aggregation leads to fluorescence
quenching and fluctuations in the emission intensity and spectrum. The
hypothesis that intense fluorescence arises from bleaching of nearly non-
emissive chromophores is being tested using superresolution imaging combined
with simultaneous spectroscopy. A complementary approach to measure the
absorption of single chains using photothermal detection is being developed to
test the "dark matter" hypothesis for fluorescence quenching in these materials.
The researchers are studying the spectroscopy and fluorescence dynamics for
these conjugated polyelectrolyte chains in different salt and pH environments,
as well as when adsorbed on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces. The team is
developing computational models of energy transfer for guiding the design of
polymer morphology, to improve fluorescence efficiency and stability for imaging
applications.