* 1609218
* NSF/DMR/-BSF:  Universality and Control of Wave Propagation Inside Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 11/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The scattering of waves, whether acoustic,
radio or optical, is an inescapable part of our environment. When this
environment is disordered the wave can scatter along many different paths and
this can impair our ability to communicate or to image or excite electronic
circuits. This project will study the propagation of waves through disordered
media using a combination of experimental approaches supplanted by theory and
simulations. The effort is a collaboration between the PI and the group of
Patrick Sebbah at Bar-Ilan University as part of the NSF/DMR-BSF program. The
work will focus on developing a universal description of wave propagation in
finite random media and will provide an excellent training ground for students.
The results of this work will also have a broad impact on a range of
interdisciplinary problems in condensed matter physics, acoustics and
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research extends the range of a universal description of wave propagation from
the reflected and transmitted wave at the boundaries of disordered media into
the interior of the sample and from samples many times thicker than the mean
free path to samples so thin that propagation is nearly ballistic.
Phenomenological properties of transmission, such as the extrapolation length,
upon which the scaling of transmission depends, will be related to universal
parameters such as auxiliary localization lengths of different transmission
eigenchannels. These parameters depend only on the ratio of sample length and
the localization length and the eigenchannel number. An important aspect of the
research is finding the relationship between the transmission eigenchannels,
modes of waves in the medium, and solutions of a generalized diffusion equation
with a position-dependent diffusion coefficient. The relationship between these
approaches provides key clues to the control the wave within random media and
disordered metamaterials. Such control of the wave inside disordered media
provides a path towards improved imaging, resource exploration, local heating
within the body, telecommunications, and low-threshold random lasing. The
characteristics of a new class of quasi-one dimensional scattering sample, in
which the local density of states vanishes in the interior of the sample, is
investigated to understand the relationship of the density of states and
localization. This provides new pathways to localizing waves and isolating
regions from the surrounding environment.