* 1609650
* SusChEM: Multiscale Interaction Potentials for Cellulose
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Feng Wang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2020
* USD 402,886.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division contribute funds to this award. This SusChEM project involves
computational research on the conversion of cellulosic biomass to biofuel as a
sustainable energy source and a sustainable feedstock for new materials. Biofuel
derived from perennial plants, such as grass, is most desirable since these
plants grow on marginal land and can be harvested repeatedly. One major
roadblock for economical utilization of plant biomass is the resistance of
cellulosic fibrils to pretreatment to facilitate their conversion to usable
fuels. Many questions regarding the detailed structures of fibrils and their
interactions with water, other chemical solvents, and enzymes are poorly
understood. The team will use high quality quantum mechanical computer
simulations to develop accurate computational models to describe these
interactions, with the ultimate goal of improving the efficiency of biomass
conversion and for applications for the discovery and modeling of cellulose-
based materials.

The research team will engage undergraduate and graduate students in
sustainability research which aims to find solutions to enable the balance of
carbon emission with carbon sequestration. Students will have the opportunity to
visit Oak Ridge National Laboratory and experience research in a government
laboratory. The team will develop a self-contained computational chemistry USB
memory stick with packages to perform electronic structure and other modeling.
The computer programs contained will include many that can be used without a
detailed knowledge of molecular quantum mechanics. The team will disseminate the
USB memory stick to regional colleges and help the faculty to incorporate
modeling in their classrooms. The PI will also develop modeling modules and
tutorials to teach concepts in physical and organic chemistry curricula.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division
contribute funds to this award. Through this SusChEM project, the research team
will develop a multiscale model for cellulose fibrils and investigate
fundamental properties of fibrils and fiber bundles with application to
sustainable energy and the discovery of sustainable cellulose-based materials.

The research team will develop an accurate potential for cellulose by fitting to
accurate electronic structure forces using the adaptive force matching method.
Through an iterative procedure, adaptive force matching provides both high
quality reference forces and representative training sets for fitting. This
allows accurate force fields to be developed without using very complex energy
expressions. As a consequence, larger structures can be modeled efficiently.
Once the adaptive force matching cellulose force field is available, an accurate
coarse-grained potential will be developed using the multiscale coarse-graining
approach. The coarse-grained potential will allow long cellulose fibrils and
fibril bundles to be modeled. The cellulose potential will be developed with
only electronic structure information as input. The model will be validated to
reproduce experimental properties, such as lattice constants and rotamer
distributions. The validated all-atom and coarse-grained potentials will be used
to address fundamental problems of cellulosic fibrils, including the number of
chains in a fibril, the tendency for twisting, rotamer conformations at the
interface, free energy of polymorph transformations, and the persistence length
of the fibril. The accurate multiscale potentials to be developed will enable
reliable modeling of hydrated cellulosic fibrils, and further research in
modeling cellulosic biomass and cellulose-based materials. The cellulose force
field will be a stepping stone for the developments of additional models that
involve alternative solvents, such as ionic liquids, and enzymes.

Successful development of an accurate cellulose potential will represent a major
advance of adaptive force matching. The development of adaptive force matching
into a reliable protocol for mapping an expensive electronic structure potential
to a simple molecular mechanics force field will have broad impact for material
research in general.

This award also supports educational activities to integrate computational
modeling into Chemistry education. A self-contained computational chemistry USB
memory stick will be developed to facilitate computer modeling by undergraduate
students and the use of computer modeling in classrooms. No installation or
licensing is needed, allowing the user to focus on the problem instead of
computational details. The PI will disseminate the USB memory stick to regional
colleges and help the faculty incorporate modeling in their classrooms. The PI
will also develop modeling modules and tutorials to teach important concepts in
physical and organic chemistry. The PIs will engage undergraduate and graduate
students in carbon neutral sustainability research and provide them with the
opportunity to visit Oak Ridge National Laboratory and experience research in a
national laboratory.