* 1609044
* Water reorientation and proton transport at the nanoconfined water/amorphous oxide interface
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Stephen Garofalini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2020
* USD 397,722.00

This project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Stephen H.
Garofalini of Rutgers University addresses fundamental questions regarding
proton transport at the environmentally-important hydrophilic interfaces such as
between silica and nanoconfined water. There are many examples of these types of
interactions in our everyday lives. These examples include: low cost water
purification methods, batteries for energy storage, glasses used in touch-screen
devices and solar panels, and cements and building materials. By participating
in this research, graduate and undergraduate students are able to expand their
education to applications in environmental chemistry using computational
methods. Professor Garofalini currently works with undergraduates from
underrepresented groups performing computational studies. Additional students
from the University's Aresty Research Program, which provides support for
undergraduates to perform research with faculty, are offered positions on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to determine the proton
transfer mechanisms near interfaces as well as the structure and role of the
first and second shell waters adjacent to the H3O+ ion. The roles of an
amorphous silica surface structure and the higher density of water adjacent to
the interface effects water reorientations and proton transfer. The as effect of
nanopore size and water saturation on transport is also being studied. Using
molecular dynamics computer simulations that employ reactive force fields
combined with ab-initio calculations, this research provides an atomistic
explanation of interactions between hydrophilic interfaces and nanoconfined
water. In addition to environmental applications, the results provide a
fundamental basis for further expansion into other nanoconfined solutions where
the interface plays an important role. These include, enabling studies of ion
transport for low cost water purification methods, ion transport in new aqueous
electrolytes for energy storage, proton exchange in catalysts, stress corrosion
cracking of glasses used in touch-screen devices and solar panels, and local pH
on mineral growth or dissolution in cements and building materials.