* 1609027
* Iron geochemistry and controls on phosphorus bioavailability in northern peatlands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Lauren Kinsman-Costello, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2018
* USD 100,567.00

Arctic and subarctic peatlands are highly sensitive ecosystems that are
experiencing rapid changes in plant cover, permafrost thaw, and water saturation
due to increasing annual temperatures. These changes are expected to increase
organic matter decomposition and release greenhouse gases. Plant growth may
sequester carbon in terrestrial ecosystems via photosynthesis and mitigate
releases to the atmosphere over short time-scales, but the ability of increased
plant growth to offset soil carbon losses is complicated by soil nutrient
availability. In particular, the critical nutrient phosphorus may become
increasingly limiting to plant growth as demand exceeds current supply; however,
non-biological controls on phosphorus bioavailability remain a major knowledge
gap for northern peatlands. This research will investigate geochemical controls
on phosphorus bioavailability in high-latitude soils to evaluate the potential
for tundra and boreal ecosystems to act as future sinks for atmospheric
greenhouse gasses. The project will provide graduate and undergraduate students
with research training in a sensitive and dynamic ecosystem. The investigators
and their students will also engage in community outreach by running an
educational program on soils at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. They
will use hands-on activities to teach K-6 students and their families about
Arctic soils, soil diversity, and the importance of soil as a natural resource.

Specifically, the PIs will explore the hypothesis that phosphorus limitation at
high-latitudes will be exacerbated by phosphorus adsorption to poorly-
crystalline iron oxyhydroxides that rapidly precipitate during widespread
drainage of iron-rich peatlands under changing hydrologic regimes. Phosphorus
availability to plants is strongly regulated by hydrologic conditions due to
redox-dependent interactions with iron oxyhydroxide minerals. Increases in iron-
bound phosphorus in drying soils may lead to phosphorus limitation that
constrains plant growth and limits carbon storage in plant biomass. The
objective of this research is to integrate geochemical analyses (e.g., coupled
iron and phosphorus extractions) with synchrotron-source spectroscopy to
evaluate geochemical associations between iron and phosphorus across an
experimentally-manipulated gradient of flooded to well-drained soils at the
Alaska Peatland Experiment (APEX). Additional geochemical analysis of soils
obtained from long-term observatories in tundra (e.g., Toolik Lake, Barrow
Environmental Observatory) and boreal peatlands (e.g., Marcell Experimental
Forest) will provide broader context for this study.