* 1609219
* Cultivating Scientific Literacy and Action through Place: Using a Campus Farm as an Interdisciplinary Learning Hub
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Brandon Sorge, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 296,377.00

Place-based, experiential (PBE) learning is an effective pedagogy that enhances
student content knowledge, course engagement, critical thinking, and civic
mindedness. This project is exploring the impact of PBE learning in the context
of school gardens and campus farms. Since 1992, there has been a 15-fold
increase in the number of college agriculture spaces, but, despite their broad
interdisciplinary potential, these spaces are used narrowly for agriculture or
sustainability majors, independent projects, and co-curricular activities that
lack disciplinary diversity. This project will expand how college agriculture
spaces can integrate STEM with the humanities, and foster cross-curricular
scientific literacy, civic mindedness, and interdisciplinary collaboration. The
project will explore efforts to critically assess the impact of agricultural
spaces on students, faculty, and host institutions; and how such spaces can
provide a holistic framework for learning STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's goal is to implement and assess a cohesive program of
interdisciplinary urban agriculture-themed PBE modules in four Butler University
courses using a campus farm as a hub for learning and collaboration. Pre- and
post- module surveys, observations, and focus groups will assess impacts to 1)
student course engagement, content knowledge, critical thinking, place
attachment, and civic mindedness; 2) faculty teaching and research; and 3)
distribution of institutional resources. Future applications will test efficacy
of this approach in non-STEM courses and at other institutions. As a means to
train the future STEM workforce, this project will determine the impacts of a
themed PBE pedagogy implemented across institutional curriculum in fostering
scientific literacy, civic mindedness, and interdisciplinary collaboration among
STEM and non-STEM majors. This approach will serve as a model for resource-
limited institutions where themed learning efforts may stimulate faculty support
networks, interdisciplinary research, and institutional support of cross-
curricular efforts.