* 1609459
* SusChEM: Block Polymers for Advanced Membrane Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 560,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of accessible clean water is
a global problem affecting human health, agriculture, energy production, and the
environment at large. Providing adequate sanitation, safe drinking water, and
food are among society's grand challenges. The development of low-energy,
materials-based technologies that facilitate water treatment and reuse is
central to overcoming those challenges. Improvements in water purification
technologies, for which materials science and chemistry will play a vital role,
are needed to provide clean water around the world. This SusChEM research
project is centered on the design, discovery, and development of new polymeric
materials for advanced separation applications. Specifically, the project aims
include the synthesis, morphology, and structure-property fundamental
understanding of new, nanostructured polymeric materials for high-efficiency
water purification. The principal technologies that will be impacted by this
fundamental polymer-materials research are water ultrafiltration and
desalination; however other membrane-based technologies will benefit from the
insights gained. Partnerships with industry will be actively pursued, and broad
training of a diverse cohort of graduate, undergraduate and postdoctoral
researchers will also be an important product of the efforts. Moreover, the
continued development of an outreach program aimed at enthusing school age kids
about science and engineering will be emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strides in the synthesis, self-assembly, and
implementation of block polymer-based materials in membrane applications have
been accomplished. In this research project, significant and innovative new
synthetic approaches to block polymer materials for membranes will be pursued,
the complete and detailed characterization of the resultant materials will be
undertaken using a bevy of modern techniques, and the implementation and testing
of new membranes derived from these materials will be accomplished. The target
materials for two separate but interrelated projects have tremendous potential
to impact a broad swath of technologies. One of the main efforts will be on
tailored approaches to functional block polymers via polymerization-induced
phase separation as precursors to robust nanostructured materials for
ultrafiltration, water remediation, and metal sequestration. The other main
effort is focused on the design, synthesis, development, and application of new
high-performance charge mosaic membranes for piezodialysis from block polymer
precursors containing independent anionic and cationic nanodomains separated by
a mechanically robust block. Both of these efforts will result in fundamental
and basic knowledge associated with block polymer synthesis and self-assembly
and build a foundation for the development of polymers for advanced water
purification technologies.