* 1609236
* Identification of Drug Targets and Their Validation in Cancer Therapy Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Aniruddha Datta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The number of cells in an adult multicellular organism such as a human being is
under very tight control and, under normal circumstances, there is some kind of
a balance between new cell production and cell death. Roughly speaking, cancer
results when there is excessive cell division or reduced cell death due to some
malfunctioning in the cell number control system. A possible approach to cancer
therapy is to quickly and robustly induce the death of cancer cells and this
project seeks to use an engineering approach to explain the rationale behind the
dramatically successful induction of cell death by a particular therapeutic
molecule. In addition, the hope is that in the process, additional therapeutic
molecules will be discovered and successfully validated. Since the work is
driven by the goal of improving cancer treatment, the potential societal
benefits of this project could be enormous. In addition, the project will be
carried out at the newly formed Center for Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems
Engineering (CBGSE) at Texas A &amp; M University, where widespread
dissemination of the research results, imparting truly interdisciplinary hands-
on education to graduate students, and beneficially targeting minorities and
minority institutions, are top priorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is an
umbrella term for a large number of diseases that are associated with loss of
cell-cycle control, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation and/or reduced
apoptosis. This loss of cell-cycle control usually manifests itself as
malfunction(s) in the cellular signaling pathways. These malfunctions can occur
in many different ways and at many different locations in a particular pathway.
As a result, a proper design of cancer therapy should first attempt to identify
the location and type of malfunction in the pathway and then arrive at a drug or
drug combination that is particularly well suited for it. Unfortunately, the
current approach to cancer therapy does not follow such a systematic procedure.
Thus, for the vast majority of cancers, there is a critical need for precisely
identifying the failure point(s) in the pathway, hopefully leading to a more
targeted therapy with a better likelihood of success.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
cancer therapies to date have mostly focused on blocking the pathways essential
to cell proliferation. However, more often than not, even if the drugs are
initially successful in treating the cancer, the success is usually short lived
as the cancer cell is able to activate some other pathways not targeted by the
drug. An alternative approach to treat cancer would be to use drugs that are
capable of inducing cell death. Chemotherapeutic drugs targeting cell death also
display drug resistance which occurs when the cancer cells figure out mechanisms
to evade the cell death inducing activity of the drug. If, however, one could
identify molecules along the cell death pathway that can play a decisive role in
ensuring cell death, regardless of the upstream signaling breakdown(s), then
targeting such molecules with drugs would provide a robust strategy for treating
cancer. Based mainly on expert domain knowledge, one such molecule MCL1 has been
identified over the last couple of years. This molecule has remarkable success
in achieving robust cell killing across a diverse panel of melanoma cell lines
has also been experimentally demonstrated. Motivated by this preliminary
success, the goal of this project is to combine prior pathway information
concerning cell death along with data, in a Bayesian framework, to develop
models that would allow the identification of decisive modulators of cell death.
The effectiveness of the modulators identified will also be experimentally
validated.