* 1609974
* Revisiting the Dehydroannulenes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* John Anthony, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 421,237.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor John E. Anthony, Department of Chemistry, University
of Kentucky. Professor Anthony and his research group are synthesizing and
characterizing an unusual class of molecules called annulenes, which have carbon
atoms arranged in a ring form. The molecules interact in solution to form
aggregates and order in the solid state. Through this aggregation the molecules
are able to communicate electronically and generate interesting optical
properties. Such molecules could be applied to improving solar energy
harvesting, enabling the construction of flexible color displays, and improving
the sensitivity of sensors. The project is providing training to graduate and
undergraduate researchers not only in the field of organic synthesis and
characterization, but also in the use of new materials in electronic
applications such as transistors. Professor Anthony is also partnering with the
current Broadening Participation in Engineering program at the university to
assist in recruiting students underrepresented in science to this project.
Outreach activities involving high-school students are also being pursued.

The field of organic electronics is built on traditional aromatic (or
heteroaromatic) ring systems. As the field pushes toward higher-performance and
multi-functional materials, traditional aromatic compounds are beginning to
reach their limit. This project will explore dehydroannulenes, particularly
formally anti-aromatic dehydro[12]annulenes, as potential components with highly
exploitable properties. Key to this project is the effort to understand and
control aggregation and solid-state order, as Professor Anthony's group has
demonstrated with acenes. By exploiting key functionalization strategies, new
molecules are being devised that exhibit ambipolar charge transport, minimized
charge-carrier anisotropy, and understand how the nature of aggregation (in
solution and solid state) impact singlet fission properties. Students involved
in this project (graduate and undergrad researchers, as well as interns from a
local high school) are performing the full range of tasks from material
conception and design all the way to screening in electronic devices. In
addition, a diverse group of students through NSF Broadening Participation in
Engineering are being engaged in this research.