* 1609603
* A Supramolecular Chemistry Approach to Precisely Controlled Multi-Porphyrin Arrays in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Janarthanan Jayawickramarajah, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 412,170.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professor Jayawickramarajah, of the Department
of Chemistry at Tulane University. Dr. Jayawickramarajah is developing an
synthetic approach to make precisely controlled mutli-porphyrin arrays in water.
The goal of this research is to design a system of 2-dimensional cyclic
structures to form 3-dimensional cylinders that can improve light absorption and
direction for electron transfer. The project uses a process called self-
assembly, where the synthetic color molecules (porphyrins) spontaneously form
the desired 3D architectures by mixing of carefully chosen components. Further,
the project utilizes water (an abundant and non-toxic liquid) as the medium for
the reaction. In addition to increasing our fundamental understanding of
molecular assembly and light-collection, this project also includes an outreach
component that focuses on enhancing the interest of K-12 students in chemistry
and science.

The construction of defined 3D cylinders composed of multiple rungs of 2D cyclic
chromophore arrays is attractive for photonic applications since such 3D
architectures may provide enhanced light absorption, and directionality for
excitation energy transfer (EET). The porphyrin rings can be packed densely onto
functional solid substrates. The research team synthesizes the components and
then studies the assembly of the cylinders in water. The strategy harnesses an
array of supramolecular assembly modes, including cation-induced guanosine or
isoguanosine oligonucleotide hybridization to form cylindrical quadruplexes and
pentaplexes. Importantly, the researchers propose to position unique
chromophores at specific sites along the cylinders to achieve directional EET.
The light-harvesting porphyrins are precluded from undergoing detrimental self-
stacking and thus exhibit superior photophysical properties. These properties
are analyzed via steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence measurements that
are conducted in collaboration with the Rubtsov and Schmehl research groups. The
outreach plan includes a service-learning course pioneered by Professor
Jayawickramarajah and focuses on undergraduates from Tulane conducting
chemistry-centered service learning activities at inner-city New Orleans public
schools.