* 1609889
* Collaborative Research: The chemistry of lignin's photochemical transformation in the environment: implications for global carbon cycling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christopher Hadad, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the
Chemistry Division, Drs. Patrick Hatcher of Old Dominion University, Satish
Myneni of Princeton University, and Christopher Hadad of The Ohio State
University employ a multidisciplinary approach to study lignin, a complex
organic polymer deposited in the cell walls of many plants, making them rigid
and woody. Lignin is an Earth abundant organic biopolymer that provides the
starting point to recycle carbon from plants into the environment. In this
project, the researchers explore pathways for the molecular rearrangement of
lignin to form the molecules present in soil, water and sediments. A
postdoctoral associate, graduate students, and several undergraduates are
trained to combine geochemistry, fundamental molecular studies, advanced
analytical techniques, and modern computational modeling of complex reaction
pathways. This training provides these future scientists with an
interdisciplinary experience. Undergraduate and high school engagement,
including diversified recruitment, is included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research project, lignin is subjected to oxidative degradation by reactive
oxygen species (ROS) to partially reorganize and polymerize to form humic
substances. These humic substances may effectively sequester lignin-derived
carbon in contrast to the theory that lignin is completely oxidized to carbon
dioxide and contribute to greenhouse warming. This research subjects both
synthesized and natural lignin to oxidative decomposition by ROS in the presence
of aqueous iron species, mimicking environmental oxidation. The study employs
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry, multidimensional
liquids and solids NMR, and synchrotron-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy to
discern molecular transformation pathways. The research also provides new
information regarding both the pathways and magnitude with which photochemistry
and ROS affect the cycling of terrestrial carbon among Earth's large reservoirs
of carbon, impacting the chemistry of terrestrial systems and oceans.