* 1609032
* Development of Fully-Printed and Eco-Friendly Light-Emitting Diodes Using Organometal Hybrid Perovskite Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Zhibin Yu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Light-emitting diodes have evolved
as important commercial products. They are believed to replace traditional
incandescent and fluorescent light bulbs for displays and lighting luminaires.
While the brightness and stability of light-emitting diodes have greatly
improved over the past decade, cost per diode still remains relatively high.
This has become a bottleneck limiting their wide market penetration. This
project aims to develop a revolutionary technology that can employ scalable
printing processes to fabricate large area light-emitting diodes with high
throughput. No existing light-emitting diodes can be printed due to the demand
for a multilayer device architecture. In contrast, the proposed devices utilize
an extremely simplified single-layer device structure. Such a distinctive
approach opens up a novel path towards obtaining fully printed light-emitting
diodes, in which every single fabrication step may be performed by printing. The
project will focus on the material chemistry and process development that will
eventually lead to the manufacturing of light-emitting diode displays and light
panels on both rigid and flexible substrates. Such advancements will greatly
reduce the cost of light-emitting diode products, while allowing for greater
energy savings in multiple application fields especially where large area and
diffused light are both desired such as: solid state lighting, information
displays and illuminated wallpapers.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The new
generation light-emitting diodes are based on organometal hybrid perovskites, an
emerging class of semiconducting materials that can be readily dissolved in an
organic solvent and crystalized into luminescent thin films after solvent
evaporation. The perovskites are mixed with a polymer to control the
crystallization dynamics and morphology of the resulting light-emitting thin
films. The first research task is to optimize the nucleation and growth of
light-emitting perovskite crystals in polymer matrices, and obtain the optimal
perovskite morphology for light-emitting applications. The optimal morphological
structure will be determined by measuring the opto-electronic properties of the
composite and determining the efficiency and brightness. This will allow the
characterization of relationships between different structures and properties of
the materials and design scientific models to describe the compositing process.
Once the structure property relations between the perovskite materials and
polymers have been fully determined the results will be used as a scientific
basis to make LEDs of various colors; as well as improving the environmental
stability of those devices. The final step of the project will be investigating
the rheological behaviors of the perovskite polymer solutions and optimize the
processing techniques to produce uniform, large area light-emitting thin films.
The process resolution will simultaneously be investigated to allow pixel size
features to be created. This work would allow for establishing a novel type of
light-emitting technology on the market. In addition the work will enhance the
fundamental understanding of the structure-process-property relationship of
perovskite emitters. Such knowledge is crucial for the rational design and
optimization of perovskite light-emitting diodes for achieving large area and
low cost displays and light panels.