* 1609272
* Advanced Electrochemistry of Na-ion Battery Cathodes Through Chemically Controlled Materials Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Ekaterina Pomerantseva, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intercalation reactions lie at the heart of the
operation mechanism of lithium-ion battery, which remains the most used energy
storage device for portable electronics and electric cars. Intercalation is
usually a reversible process that involves the introduction of a guest species
into a host electrode material. The realization that lithium is a limited
resource, which potentially can result in a significant increase in the cost of
lithium-ion batteries, has shifted research directions towards investigation of
alternate intercalation systems, such as sodium-ion batteries. However the
larger size and higher weight limits intercalation and diffusion of sodium ions
through common electrode materials, compared to lithium ion. This results in
significant electrode degradation (thereby resulting in capacity loss after the
first cycle and reduced cycle life) and limitations in operation at high current
rates. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program of the
Division of Materials Research, this project focuses on addressing these
shortcomings through chemical pre-intercalation of the specific types and
amounts of inorganic ions. The proposed work has the potential to enable the
development of sodium-ion battery cathodes that can be used to replace current
lithium-ion batteries, providing sustainable energy storage that is cheaper,
reliable, and environmentally friendly, contributing to the development of next-
generation energy storage systems for transportation, grid-storage and other
renewable energy applications. The project offers an excellent opportunity to
engage senior undergraduate and graduate students in masters and doctoral-level
research in the field of Materials Science and Engineering and its broader
impact on Materials Chemistry and Electrochemistry. The principal investigator
plans to integrate the results of this research in the course on materials for
energy storage applications. This project enhances the dissemination of
knowledge to a broad research community and general public through presentations
at National/International conferences, refereed journal publications and
demonstrations at science events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Chemical pre-intercalation is a wet chemistry approach, in
which the inorganic ions are inserted into the crystal structure of the
electrode material in a solution followed by the formation of a gel and/or sol,
or another form of a precipitate, with inorganic ions being 'trapped' in the
structure of a solid material. The goal of this proposed research is to test the
hypothesis that high capacity, long cycle life and high power can be achieved in
Na-ion battery electrodes by introducing specific types and amounts of
chemically pre-intercalated ions, which enables materials with high specific
capacity, enhanced structural stability and fast ionic diffusion. Vanadium
oxide, a material with rich crystal chemistry, structural flexibility and
morphological architectures, is chosen as a host structure for chemical pre-
intercalation. The project seeks a systematic understanding of synthesis -
structure - performance relationships for chemically pre-intercalated vanadium
oxide electrodes in Na-ion batteries. Electrochemical properties of the
synthesized materials are evaluated by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic
discharge/charge cycling, rate capability experiments and impedance spectroscopy
measurements. The research team plans to determine how changes in the synthesis
parameters affect electrochemical performance with the aim to understand
fundamental phenomena related to materials chemistry and structure that may lead
to larger amount of the stored charge, faster ion and electron transport, and
excellent stability during reversible cycling of sodium ions.