* 1609940
* Collaborative Research: Controlling Microstructure in Resilin-based Hydrogels: Linking Microscale Mechanical Properties to Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 120,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;Elastomeric proteins in
living organisms provide outstanding mechanical properties to tissues such as
skin and muscle, and generally exist in heterogeneous structures that provide
mechanical reinforcement. Materials engineering approaches that enable the
production of elastomeric materials with defined structures would thus have
enormous potential in applications ranging from protective materials, drug
delivery, and regenerative medicine. PIs approaches for producing such materials
employ resilin, an insect protein that has among the best elastomeric properties
reported; resilins are able to deform to a large extent and completely recover
their original shape. PIs will use resilin-like proteins that are designed with
specific mechanical and biological function and make materials that comprise
these proteins and commonly employed synthetic polymers. Simple processing
protocols with light-initiated chemistries will be used to generate hybrid
materials of different compositions and predictable structures. Novel
characterization methods will be used to characterize the mechanical properties
of individual domains and determine structure-function relationships in this
class of soft materials. The research in this program has the potential to not
only impact societal needs in energy and medicine, but also educational
activities for students of a variety of ages and experience. A series of
workshops and student-initiated activities, in which the PIs will participate,
will help transfer concepts of this program into biomaterials technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Of many approaches to generate 3D
heterogeneity in hydrogels, the use of polymer-based microparticle composites
has been of significant interest, given the many opportunities to engineer
particle size, surface area, and chemistry. The development of simple, one-step
methods to generate microstructured protein-polymer matrices would thus offer
significant advantages for making heterogeneous materials for systematic study.
We propose to exploit the well behaved phase separation of solutions of the
highly elastomeric polypeptide resilin (RLP), to form microstructured hydrogels.
The RLPs exhibit outstanding elastomeric and physicochemical properties that
will advance the utility of the resulting materials, particularly in the
development of models to understand energy dissipation in soft hydrogels. The
PIs will functionalize RLPs so that they are competent for photo-initiated
crosslinking, and will map the phase separation of RLP and solutions of
synthetic polymers. This fundamental information will allow PIs to identify
appropriate compositions and processing conditions for photocrosslinking the
solutions into microstructured hydrogels that have domains of defined
compositions and mechanical properties. Two distinct chemical modifications of
the RLPs will allow PIs to probe the local mechanical properties of the domains
and the impact of the domains on hydrogel deformation. The microstructure of the
hydrogels will be characterized via microscopy methods, while the mechanical
properties will be characterized via a suite of atomic force microscopy,
cavitation rheology, small-strain contact mechanics, blunt puncture mechanics,
and bulk oscillatory rheology. Given the wealth of target applications and the
widespread use of hydrogel materials, proposed studies will in the long term
advance the use of microstructured elastomeric hydrogels in applications such as
energy storage, protective gear, drug delivery, and regenerative medicine. PIs
will facilitate the transfer of these concepts into technological applications
by hosting a series of workshops and activities for students from the secondary
to postgraduate levels.