* 1609642
* ParCell: A Parallel Computation Framework for Scalable and Mechanistic Modeling and Simulation of Multicellular Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 349,995.00

PI: Barua, Dipak Proposal Number: 1609642

This multidisciplinary proposal aims to model multicellular biological systems
based on modeling of the behavior of each individual cell. This research will
relate sub-cellular protein interactions to full scale cell behavior, and to the
behavior of a system of many cells using computational methods. Cell division,
growth, death and function will be modeled. Results from this work can have an
impact both on Bioengineering and on Computer Science.

Traditional computational modeling and simulation methods are inadequate to
address the biological complexity of cells. In recent years, considerable
efforts have been devoted to developing multiscale models that capture
biological complexity at distinct time and spatial resolutions. However, little
progress has been made in developing multiscale models capable of integrating
high resolution biological details with long-time cellular behavior. The primary
goal of this proposal is to develop a parallel computation framework, called
ParCell, for multiscale cell population modeling and simulation. ParCell will
link subcellular biochemistry to long-time cell behavior determined by cell
death, division, fate decision, and other cellular functions. Current multiscale
population models mostly rely on serial computation-based simulation techniques.
Such limitations and challenges prohibit the understanding and analysis of many
important biological systems, such as tissue regeneration, clonal expansion of
antigen-exposed immune cells, cell migration in wound healing, evolution of drug
resistance in cells, and cellular phenotypes under disease and treatment
conditions. ParCell will be the framework for modeling of heterogeneous
multicellular systems that will link high resolution molecular details of
signaling and gene transcription to evolutionary cell fate decisions and
population dynamics. Current cell population models are mostly based on agent-
based modeling (ABM) technique, where cells are represented as software objects
or agents. Instead, it is proposed that cells will be represented as stand-alone
parallel simulations (i.e., threads) rather than software objects. Using
parallel computation, ParCell will systematically expand a single-cell
biochemical network model, created using other software or languages, into a
population model. Specifically, it will launch parallel simulations on a single-
cell biochemical network model, and treat each simulation thread as an
independent cell. It will also use a message passing interface (MPI) to link
subcellular network dynamics (parallel thread corresponding to each cell) to
cellular fate decisions and phenotypes based on model-specific (user-supplied)
rules. Such distributed structure of the models combined with parallel
computation will enable unprecedented scalability and mechanistic abstraction.
Additionally, ParCell will use a novel load-balancing scheme for arbitrary model
scalability in dynamic and heterogeneous cloud environments. The models can be
made as mechanistic as any single-cell reaction network without adding model
complexity or programming efforts. The PIs will leverage various summer camp
programs organized by the Diversity, Outreach, and Women's Programs to recruit
female and underrepresented minority students into the project.