* 1609917
* Investigating multi-functional cytochromes P450 from gibberellin phytohormone biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Reuben Peters, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 328,858.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division of NSF is funding Dr. Reuben Peters from Iowa State University for
studies into how certain enzymes catalyze the production of natural products.
These natural products have a variety of industrial uses, including as flavors
and fragrances. Key roles in the production of these compounds are played by
enzymes which typically simply insert an atom of oxygen, but are now known to be
capable of much more complex chemical transformations. Several such multi-
functional enzymes have been identified in the biosynthetic pathway leading to
production of an important plant hormone and these will be studied in detail in
this project. The researchers are elucidating how these enzymes accomplish their
chemical reactions. The project has clear biotechnological relevance, as one of
the enzymes targeted has already drawn interest for use in the production of
natural sweeteners. Additionally the graduate and undergraduate students
participating in this work are gaining expertise in cutting-edge studies of
enzymes with industrial relevance. Finally the inclusion of high-school science
teachers extends the reach of this project to the K-12 community.

This project investigates cytochromes P450 (CYPs), which are heme-thiolate
mono-oxygenases that generally catalyze hydroxylation, but are capable of much
more complex reactions. This can be seen in biosynthesis of gibberellin (GA), a
phytohormone whose effect on plant-microbe interactions has led to the
independent evolution of GA biosynthesis in plant-associated microbes, including
bacteria, from which the relevant multi-functional CYPs have been recently
identified. These soluble enzymes are amendable to more detailed investigations.
Through these studies, the reaction mechanisms and enzymatic structure-function
relationships of the multi-functional CYPs from bacterial GA biosynthesis are
being elucidated, furthering understanding of how the basic CYP catalytic cycle
is modified to accomplish more complex/unusual reactions, which is currently one
of the outstanding questions in enzymology/bioinorganic chemistry, with clear
biotechnological implications.