* 1609417
* Transmission electron microscopy of conjugated polymers using energy-filtering and phase contrast enhancement
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Enrique Gomez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 417,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The properties of various polymeric materials depend on the structure at the
nanoscale. As a consequence, characterizing the arrangement and order of
polymers at nanometer length scales is crucial for the continued development of
new materials. Much progress in this area is due to the application of advanced
microscopy techniques (transmission electron microscopy) to complex polymeric
systems in order to resolve the structure at very high resolutions. New
developments in electron microscopy instrumentation are pushing the limits of
what is possible, but these advances have not been tailored for the microscopy
of polymers, which are very sensitive to electron beams and undergo rapid
damage. This project will develop electron microscopy tools to image the
structure of electrically conducting polymers used in a variety of emerging
electronic applications, such as transistors and solar cell devices. By
demonstrating new approaches for resolving the morphology with sub-nanometer
resolution, this research will advance the fundamental science of how the
chemical composition of polymers leads to the microstructure and aid in the
development of polymers for flexible electronics applications. Furthermore,
integrated educational and research activities will also include recruitment and
retention of students from underrepresented groups. The investigators involved
in this project will further support diversity in engineering education by
offering mentorship and research experiences to undergraduate students.



PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project will develop advanced electron microscopy tools for the study of
polymeric materials. New methods to generate contrast in the electron microscope
are warranted because of the complexity of the microstructure of conjugated
polymer systems. The proposed work begins by examining radiation damage in the
transmission electron microscope using two observables: diffraction intensities
and low-loss electron energy-loss spectroscopy. These measurements will guide
further experiments and establish limits of imaging modalities. Low-loss energy-
filtered transmission electron microscopy will generate high-resolution images
of long-range order in conjugated polymers. Phase plates will enhance contrast
in both bright-field and focused-probe modes to enable imaging of
polymer/fullerene mixtures, polymer blends, and block copolymers used in
photovoltaics. Furthermore, charge transport heterogeneity will be examined
using low-loss spectrum imaging to see deviations in density of states under
bias, and by imaging local variations in electric fields that result from charge
heterogeneity using a phase plate. Overall, this proposal will demonstrate the
utility of monochromated electron sources and phase plates for imaging of
conjugated polymers. Educational objectives are motivated by the need to enhance
diversity in engineering. A number of specific programs will be implemented
encompassing recruitment, retention, and mentoring of underrepresented groups.