* 1609939
* Rational Design of Surface Modified Nanoparticles for Modulation of Amyloid Protein Aggregation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Melissa Moss, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The aggregation of amyloid proteins is
involved in a wide range of processes including the pathogenesis of numerous
diseases (Alzheimer's disease, type 2 diabetes, etc.) as well as in biofouling
associated with applications such as food production or water purification. The
development of tools to prevent or slow this aggregation would thus be important
in both therapeutics and industrial processes. The main goal of this work is to
develop a platform for the rational design of nanoparticles capable of
modulating amyloid protein aggregation. By coupling experiments and molecular
modeling, this project will develop a novel description of the complex
interactions that occur at the interface of biological environments and
synthetic materials. This theory can then be applied to predict the influence of
nanoparticle-protein interactions upon amyloid protein aggregation, thus
representing a design platform. By advancing our understanding of interactions
between nanoparticles and amyloid proteins, we will be able to rationally design
nanoparticles for treating debilitating diseases, reduce unwanted biofouling,
and facilitate industrial applications. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the project will acquire cutting-edge experimental techniques
and frontier modeling approaches to train them for future careers in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research considers surface modified nanoparticles for the modulation of amyloid
protein aggregation, which plays a deleterious role in disease and industrial
processes. Recently, nanoparticles have emerged as attractive tools for
selective protein interactions. Nanoparticle surface properties, size, and shape
can be accurately controlled, and therefore nanoparticles provide an ideal
tunable platform to modulate amyloid protein aggregation. The main goal of this
work is to couple experiments and molecular modeling to develop a novel
description of the complex coupling of interactions that occur at the interface
of biological environments and synthetic materials. These interactions can be
subsequently used for the rational design of nanoparticles for modulation of
amyloid protein aggregation. The research is guided by the central hypothesis
that nanoparticle-induced changes in the local solution environment drive their
ability to influence amyloid protein aggregation. The coupling of experiments
and modeling will provide the fundamental understanding needed to create design
platforms for building nanostructured biomaterial interfaces that influence
protein aggregation. First, fully atomistic molecular simulations will be used
in conjunction with detailed molecular theory to describe the local solution
environment. Second, a molecular thermodynamic model of amyloid protein
aggregation will be implemented. Finally, molecular level theories for
nanoparticles and amyloid proteins will be coupled to quantify how a single
nanoparticle influences local solution conditions to affect the stability of
aggregates. This coupled model will be used to rationally design and synthesize
surface modified nanoparticles to experimentally evaluate their predicted
effects on amyloid protein aggregation. Agreement between experimental data and
theoretical predictions will substantiate the proposed hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative nature of the research environment created in this project will be
exploited to promote biomedical engineering education within both research and
classroom settings. The proposed research will establish a summer undergraduate
research internship in which students will complete complementary computational
and experimental research tasks. To introduce this research area to pre-college
students, a design-based module will be developed that familiarizes students
with the concepts of biomaterial design for applications in protein aggregation.
Together, these efforts will provide both undergraduate and pre-college students
with an understanding of how engineering technologies can facilitate the control
of biological phenomena.