* 1609114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Cooperation, grooming exchange, and supply and demand among free-ranging primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Carol Berman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,607.00

One defining characteristic of humans is their unusually cooperative nature,
which is unparalleled among animals. An important goal for anthropology is to
understand the nature and evolution of this "altruistic" behavior. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate cooperative exchanges among free-ranging
rhesus macaques in order to test predictions from several competing evolutionary
hypotheses about altruism. Studying cooperative exchanges among rhesus macaques
will provide a comparative model for understanding the behavioral evolution of
humans and our ancestors. The broader impacts of this project include the
support of science education and outreach, through valuable field experience for
research assistants, data analysis experience for undergraduates, and
presentation of research results in various public formats, including local zoos
and conferences.

This study will observe grooming interactions among 50 adult female rhesus
macaques from three social groups at Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico, using focal
animal sampling methodology, for eleven months (spanning both mating and birth
seasons). Specifically, the project will examine how well reciprocal grooming
exchanges resemble those predicted by several competing theoretical hypotheses
(kin selection, reciprocal altruism, biological markets theory, and social bond
investment), in one comprehensive and integrated analysis, via AIC model
ranking. These exchanges will be examined across multiple time scales and across
groups of variable sizes. Additionally, there will be a more detailed
investigation of biological markets theory. By focusing on exchanges of grooming
for mates or infant handling, this study will test a key prediction that such
exchanges conform to supply and demand relationships. The extent to which
apparent supply and demand relationships may be artifacts of, or mediated by,
stress responses will be examined, with stress measured both behaviorally and
via fecal glucocorticoid metabolite assays.