* 1609107
* Fundamental Mechanisms for Mechanochemical Behaviors of Glass Surfaces - An Integrated Experimental and Computational Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Carlo Pantano, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 607,982.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The strength and wear resistance of glass
are important properties for many consumer products including mobile phones,
displays, automotive/aerospace windows, and for the safety of glass, in general.
Although several strengthening processes such as tempering and ion-exchange are
currently used in industry, the scientific foundations are not all fully
understood. This limits further improvements in glass strength and reliability.
The strength of glass is controlled by surface damage created in manufacturing
and handling, as well as by the composition of the glass. This project engages
in research to better understand the combined effects of mechanical stress and
surface chemistry (called mechanochemistry). The scientific findings of this
research are directly beneficial to glass manufacturers as well as users of
glass in product development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical and mechanochemical properties of silicate glass surfaces
in ambient air are sensitive to alkali ion leaching and its exchange with
hydrous species (hydroxyl or water). This research hypothesizes that interfacial
shear or mechanical deformation causes local distortion of the silicate network
surrounding the hydrous species such that the distance between the bridging
oxygen of the Si-O-Si network and the hydrous species becomes shorter than the
critical length needed to induce hydrolysis of the Si-O-Si network. This
hypothesis is relevant to several important questions that are outstanding in
glass science such as stress-induced transport of sodium ions and the catalytic
effects of metal ions on hydrolysis of glass network. While existing stress
corrosion theory can explain crack growth under an applied tensile stress, it
cannot fully explain the chemical reactivity of confined water in contact with
glass under both compressive and shear stress. This project employs density
functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with reactive
force fields (ReaxFF) to study the key hypothesis and related questions, and
theoretical calculation results are tested and validated experimentally using
state-of-the-art surface analysis techniques. This project educates
undergraduate and graduate students in the engineering and science of materials
with a focus on glass and its strength. The research team recruits students from
underrepresented groups to work on the project. All students benefit from
participation activities associated with various interdisciplinary materials
research activities at the Materials Research Institute (MRI) and Material
Computation Center (MCC) at Penn State. The team offers computational data to
the Nanohub and the Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (OpenKim) websites, so
that their user-base can access these materials for future force field
development and validation projects. Selected examples of the ReaxFF and DFT
simulations and surface analysis results are integrated in two existing graduate
courses.