* 1609693
* Compressive Imaging Beyond One Trillion Frames Per Second
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Mark Foster, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

This research program will develop a video imaging system operating at frame
rates beyond one trillion frames per second and that is capable of recording
isolated (non-repetitive) events. No current camera technology can operate at
these extremely high frame rates and video durations for the observation of
isolated events. The primary challenges for such a technology are the short
time-gating and high light irradiance necessary to achieve fast exposure times
with extremely high frame rate and the massive information bandwidth associated
with such high-speed image acquisition. Such a high-speed single-shot imaging
system is an enabling technology for numerous applications throughout
engineering and the physical and life sciences. In particular, we plan to
leverage the ultrafast single-shot imager developed through this program to
better understand the dynamics of materials under extreme conditions. This
research can positively impact society from a health and safety perspective
through better understanding of the effect of impacts on materials and thus
facilitate the development of materials that can better control and prevent
injuries to the human body. In addition, through this research program we plan
to offer undergraduate research experiences, provide the project data and
experimental system for educational purposes such as class design projects and
hands-on lab demonstrations, and further our participation in outreach
activities for young students from severely underrepresented groups within the
engineering discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research
program is to develop and experimentally validate a photonic imaging system
employing compressed sensing (CS) for video acquisition at frame rates well
beyond a terahertz (THz). Our approach leverages the dimensionality reduction
afforded by CS to reconstruct three-dimensional spatio-temporal video
information from a single high resolution two-dimensional image captured by a
camera. Thereby, the measurement efficiency of CS will also mitigate the
traditional challenge of the acquisition of a large amount of image data in an
extremely short amount of time. Furthermore, our approach is built upon a
temporal Fourier processor using a time-lens to imprint the temporal scene
dynamics onto an ultrafast laser pulse's spectrum allowing for capture of three-
dimensional spatio-temporal video information using a hyperspectral CS camera
architecture. This time-lens approach fully leverages the available optical
bandwidth maximizing both the frame rate and the number of frames captured in a
single exposure. We aim to reach frame rates beyond 1 THz and record lengths of
more than 100 frames. No current technology can achieve this combination of
performance, yet such a technology can be revolutionary for understanding of
ultrafast physical phenomena. Specifically, such single-shot imaging is
necessary for observing isolated events such as destructive, rare, and/or costly
events and is extremely challenging on ultrafast time-scales. Through this
research program we will develop this imager, investigate methods for increasing
image contrast, and begin to explore its application to the understanding of
material failure under extreme conditions.