* 1609895
* OP: Semiconductor Materials for Extremely Nondegenerate Photonics and 2-Photon Gain
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 415,226.00

Nontechnical Description: Typical lasers emit streams of single photons - small
bundles of light - that are all at the same energy. In this project, the
investigators are studying ways to make lasers simultaneously emit two photons
at very different energies. This gives tremendous flexibility in controlling
laser outputs, since one of the emitted photons can be at almost any desired
energy, as long as the energy of the other is appropriately chosen. This may
lead to semiconductor lasers that deliver radiation that is broadly tunable
across the infrared spectrum. The availability of such lasers will impact a wide
variety of applications, including sensing of pollutants in the atmosphere,
biological imaging, microscopy, telecommunications, art restoration and laser
radar. The research team is focusing on investigating the materials properties
that enable lasers to emit light in this way, and on how to mitigate factors
that cause light to be absorbed, as absorption of light could hinder laser
operation. In particular, the use of nanometer-thick semiconductor layers for
laser emission is being addressed. This research is largely carried out by
graduate and undergraduate students who are members of the University of Central
Florida's diverse student body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
research team aims to study the nondegenerate absorption and emission properties
of semiconductors, particularly quantum wells, to verify the team's recent
calculations that nondegenerate two-photon absorption or emission of Transverse
Magnetic (TM)-polarized light is enhanced in quantum wells compared to bulk
semiconductors. At the same time, the research team is characterizing the
relevant loss mechanisms for nondegenerate two-photon gain and lasing, namely
free-carrier absorption, Urbach-tail absorption and nondegenerate three-photon
absorption, especially with a view to finding regimes where two-photon gain
overcomes losses. Of greatest interest is the mid-IR spectral region where
multiple semiconductors are appropriate for testing two-photon gain. Quantum-
well systems with TM polarization attract particular interest because, at this
polarization the two-photon transitions are calculated to be the most enhanced
while free-carrier absorption can vanish. Additionally, unlike in bulk
semiconductors, the enhancement of two-photon emission and three-photon
absorption are expected to occur at different photon energies. However, each one
of these processes needs to be carefully measured in order to build a practical
picture of the overall losses.