* 1609567
* Electrically-Induced Nonlinear Optical Processes in Plasmonic Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Wenshan Cai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Title: Electrically-Induced Nonlinear Optical Processes in Plasmonic
Metamaterials &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This
research project aims to explore the active control of nonlinear optical
processes in photonic metamaterials using electrical means. Metamaterials are
able to provide unorthodox properties not found in nature through ordered
arrangements of artificially structured building blocks, and nonlinear optics is
a critical branch of the science of light that facilitates the active
manipulation of photons and the generation of new spectral components. The
proposed research offers potentially transformative means to achieve dual
electrical and optical functionalities for photonic applications by producing
engineered photonic metamaterials with electrically enabled nonlinear optical
effects. The research effort addresses fundamental questions about the laws of
nonlinear optics, and meanwhile offers practical insights into how metamaterials
can be utilized for electro-optic applications in both integrated photonics and
liquid environments. Successful execution of this project will lead to a
fundamentally new paradigm in the design and implementation of metamaterial-
based optoelectronic systems for signal processing, biochemical sensing, and
optical computing. This research is closely integrated with educational programs
at the high school and collegiate levels, and is expected to enhance
interdisciplinary thinking in future scientists and engineers through a rich set
of educational and outreach activities. The research program will educate and
interact with local K-12 school systems that are historically underrepresented,
and highlight STEM related career pathways by facilitating interactive
activities, demos and workshops with students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this project is to harness the
electrically-enabled nonlinear processes in plasmonic devices, and explore the
use of metamaterials as self-sufficient electro-optic platforms for nonlinear
signal generation, information processing, and optical sensing. Leveraging the
optical and electrical functions simultaneously supported by nanostructured
metals, this research comprehensively investigates electrically-enabled,
nonlinear light-matter interactions that encompass material, component, and
system levels. The goal of this project is to resolve the underdevelopment of
photonic metamaterials in the electro-optic regime, and advance the state-of-
the-art in the design and implementation of functional metamaterials. In this
research, the investigator aims to unlock the full potential of plasmonic
metamaterials for optoelectronic information technology by exploring
metamaterials from an entirely distinct perspective. Instead of their
conventional role as artificially structured materials with exotic optical
properties, plasmonic metamaterials will be exploited to serve as a complete and
generalizable electro-optic platform with intrinsically embedded electrical
functions and optical nonlinearity. In particular, effective second-order
nonlinear processes will be electrically enabled and actively controlled, thanks
to the breaking of inversion symmetry induced by a low-frequency electric field
or accumulation of electric charges. Central themes of the research include
electrically-induced nonlinear optical generation in photonic metamaterials, and
electrically-controlled nonlinear characterization with plasmonics in aqueous
systems. The project addresses a grand challenge to push metamaterials beyond
the scope of basic scientific research and towards real-world applications,
which serve as a concrete step towards the national needs for seamless
integration of photonics and electronics.