* 1609625
* Exploring Growth Mechanisms of Nonequilibrium Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* ZhiFeng Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports theoretical and
computational research on the study of novel materials growth mechanisms and the
integration with education and outreach activities. An important phenomenon
during the materials growth or fabrication process is the formation and
evolution of structures at the nanoscale, which plays a pivotal role in
controlling material properties that are of fundamental and technological
importance. This research addresses a fundamental challenge of understanding and
predicting the growth and self-assembly of nanostructured materials,
particularly how to effectively tackle the complexity of the systems which are
far from the tranquil state of equilibrium and require a description that can
span a wide range of length scales and include interconnected processes across
length scales. The PI will develop predictive modeling methods and conduct
theoretical analyses and computer simulations to investigate the growth and
dynamics of novel nanostructures that emerge from these processes, and predict
new types of modulated structures in thin films under various material growth or
processing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the training
and education of graduate students, and involves the PI's broader education
efforts for the research community through lecture development for summer
schools and workshops. This project incorporates the PI's outreach activities
for STEM education in an all-girls minority public school in Detroit. The
activities include the instruction and support of high-school student science
projects and the training of Wayne State education undergraduates, to enhance
the K-12 STEM education for young women who are underrepresented minority
students and the professional development of both pre-service and in-service
science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports theoretical and computational
research integrated with education to provide a systematic study on the growth
and dynamics of nonequilibrium nanostructured materials. The research addresses
a fundamental challenge of understanding and predicting the growth mechanisms
underlying the nanostructure assembly in functional material systems,
particularly for systems that are out of equilibrium and governed by effects of
coupling among different spatial scales that control material microstructures
and dynamics. This research focuses on the exploration of novel nanostructures
that are both morphologically and compositionally modulated, through three parts
of investigation: (i) the development of modeling approaches based on the phase
field crystal method and amplitude formalism, which can bridge mesoscopic and
microscopic scales and incorporate system elasticity and plasticity, (ii) the
study of nanostructure formation and dynamics during material heteroepitaxy,
particularly for strained quantum dots modulated by nanoscale compositional
patterns or eutectic microstructures, and (iii) the investigation of coupling
mechanisms at meso and micro scales, for the coupling between morphological and
compositional meso-scale instabilities and the coupling between meso and micro
scales determining different growth modes. Comprehensive studies will be
conducted numerically and analytically to identify various material growth
mechanisms and the growth conditions for achieving controllable and coherent
nanostructures, and predict new types of modulated structures in heteroepitaxial
systems. The overall objective of this research is to advance our understanding
of both structural and compositional dynamics in nonequilibrium and
nanostructured material systems. This project also integrates the efforts of
graduate and undergraduate education, and outreach activities designed for pre-
service and in-service science teachers and their high-school students' science
projects, to enhance K-12 science education for young women in Detroit who are
underrepresented minority students.