* 1609952
* Plasmonically Enhanced Stimulated Coherent Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Lawrence Ziegler, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2019
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the NanoBiosensing Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, Professors Ziegler and
Reinhard at Boston University merge two very active research areas that have
independently already impacted many aspects of our lives; nanomaterials and
laser technology. The goal of the project is to exploit the special capabilities
afforded by the combination of these two disciplines to advance a technical
solution to some important societal needs. More specifically, these researchers
explore how ultrafast pulsed laser light interacting with metal nano-materials
can be used to enhance and control chemistry on metal surfaces for applications
such as chemical catalysis, pollution mitigation, energy conversion, chemical
imaging and sensing applications. The on-going experiments develop a detailed
description of how molecules interact with nanostructured metal surfaces. Well-
established methodologies are already in place that allow the design of
nanoscale surfaces with exquisite control. The results of these experiments
reveal molecular level details of how these materials interact with molecules
and thus provide information on optimizing nanostructures design strategies for
the applications cited above. The collaborative nature of this research effort
provides participating students with unique experience at the interface of
materials and ultrafast science, and thus promote cross-disciplinary activities
in science and technology at Boston University. In synergy with the research,
this grant supports a substantial education and outreach program to include
participation of local Community College students and faculty, inner city and
greater Boston area High School students, and High School teachers in
conjunction with a newly awarded NSF research experience for undergraduates
(REU) site program, as well as other BU based outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merger of ultrafast spectroscopy and
nanotechnology is being used to study the dynamics and interactions of molecules
on plasmonically active surfaces via three ultrafast laser techniques.
Plasmonically enhanced (PE) optical heterodyne detected Raman spectroscopy (PE-
OHD-RIKES) offers sensitivity advantages for viewing Raman responses on
plasmonic surfaces, especially for low frequency modes resulting from molecular-
surface physi-adsorption, and a phase sensitive methodology for understanding
vibrational and plasmon contributions to nonlinear responses. Analysis of PE
three-pulse photon echo peak shift measurements (PE 3PEPS) yields a dynamical
description of optical dephasing, or equivalently solvation, of molecules on
plasmonic surfaces (inhomogeneous energy distributions, spectral diffusion and
fluctuation timescales). Finally, the successful implementation of PE
femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy (PE-FSRS), could have enormous impact
as a new probe of surface chemistry allowing vibrationally-specific labels to
follow the evolution of short-lived intermediates and rapid conformation changes
of excited molecules on plasmonic surfaces. Determined dynamical and structural
properties of analytes on plasmonic substrates is being contrasted with those of
liquid solutions and correlated with observed plasmonic based phenomenon such as
SERS enhancement factors. Substrates are being fabricated by a template-guided
self-assembly procedure which results in electromagnetically strongly coupled
nanoparticle cluster arrays where optical fields are enhanced by both near field
coupling between nanoparticles, and diffractive coupling between clusters.
Detailed molecular level information about how molecules interact with
engineered plasmonic surfaces is providing rational design strategies for
maximizing plasmon enhancement of optical responses and chemical outcomes. The
implementation of this methodology is impactful upon optical imaging
capabilities in terms of improved sensitivity and faster acquisition times, real
time monitoring of photoinduced surface chemical reactivity, enhanced chemical
and biological sensing capabilities, and improved strategies for subsequent
spontaneous SERS and other plasmonic based techniques.