* 1609369
* Controlling Charges on Oxide Surfaces for Enhanced Photochemical Reactivity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Paul Salvador, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 632,094.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The economically feasible separation of hydrogen fuel
from water using light remains an important technical goal for the scientific
community. Hydrogen is a valuable fuel because it has a high energy density and
its combustion does not generate greenhouse gases. One factor that limits
efficient hydrogen synthesis by water splitting is the performance of the
available catalysts. For the surface of the catalyst to split water, it must
perform two functions: it must transfer both negatively-charged electrons and
positively-charged holes to water molecules on the surface. Whichever of these
functions occurs more slowly limits the overall reaction. In this project,
catalysts are created that have two different types of surfaces. Some areas of
the surface promote the transfer of negative charge and the other areas promote
the transfer of positive charge. The relative areas are adjusted to optimize the
overall reaction rate. This approach provides a valuable tool for the design of
water splitting catalysts for economic solar hydrogen production. The project
will have broader impact through the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, web-based applications for education and integration into a course on
sustainability, the dissemination of the research results beyond the campus, and
broadening participation, particularly of women in
engineering/science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project is
based on the hypothesis that the relative areas of reducing (positive) and
oxidizing (negative) domains on an oxide surface can be controlled and that this
ratio influences the overall photochemical reaction rate of catalysts that can
be used to produce solar fuel or degrade environmental pollutants. Controlled-
atmosphere high-temperature annealing is used to tailor the surface termination.
The surface charge distribution is measured by scanning potential microscopy and
evaluated using photo-reduction and oxidation reactions that leave insoluble
products at the site of the reaction. The novelty and merit of this project lie
in the efforts to control the termination chemistry and correlate the types and
relative areas of polar domains to the chemical properties of the surface.
Because oppositely charged surface terraces promote separately the reduction and
oxidation half reactions, surfaces with a combination of oppositely charged
domains provide a nearly ideal environment where photo-generated charge carriers
are separated, reaction products are separated, and the relative rates of the
two reactions are controlled by the relative areas of the charged domains. Each
of these factors improves photocatalytic efficiency by mitigating losses
associated with recombination, back reaction, and an imbalance in the number of
reactive sites for the two half reactions. This project demonstrates how to
control polar surface domains and create more efficient photocatalysts needed
for the practical production of solar hydrogen.