* 1609135
* RUI: Structural Determinants of Permeation and Nucleation at a Self-Assembled Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sunghee Lee, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2020
* USD 334,937.00

In this research program, with support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sunghee Lee of
Iona College and her undergraduate students gain greater fundamental
understanding of how living cells maintain their water balance - a property that
is essential to life. They use nature-inspired techniques to create tailor-made
particles - these particles are cell-sized water droplets which are used as
models for natural cellular systems. A large number of undergraduate students
are engaged in this research and many of these students publish peer-reviewed
manuscripts. Diverse outreach seminars and science symposia involving high
school students and teachers are conducted to inspire and encourage the next
generation of STEM educators. Professor Lee reaches out to underrepresented
groups in particular. In addition to understanding the water balance in living
cells, the research could also have industrial applications in the design of
reverse osmosis systems used to purify water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on understanding how supramolecular aggregates assembled at liquid-
liquid interfaces (including surfactant bilayers) mediate the passage of small
molecules and direct biomineralization. Systematic studies determine the effect
of bilayer-incorporated materials (e.g., nanomaterials) upon the characteristics
of water transport through the droplet interface bilayer (DIB). Experimental
activities primarily focus on acquisition of water permeability parameters for
osmotic flow in conjunction with the determination of electrical properties, and
compositional studies via Raman quantification. Experimental strategies provide
insight into how bilayered supramolecular assemblies promote the crystallization
of important targets (biominerals and proteins), through nucleation studies of
biomineral formation. Biomineralization is the process by which living organisms
produce minerals that are often used to harden or stiffen existing tissues.