* 1609572
* Using conduction spin electron spectroscopy as a sensitive and selective probe for understanding the surface chemical control over the electronic behavior of metallic nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Lear, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jong-In Hahm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 376,800.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry supports Dr. Benjamin Lear from the Pennsylvania State University,
University Park. Dr. Lear's project characterizes the interactions between
metallic nanoparticles and their surrounding environment. Metallic nanoparticles
are extremely small particles of metal where at least one of the structural
dimensions (length, width or thickness) is in the nanometer size range (1 to 100
nm). Metallic nanoparticles have a wide range of applications including chemical
manufacturing, electronics design, and cancer treatment. In these applications,
the environment near the nanoparticle surface can be quite diverse. Little is
known about how these changes in environment affect the desirable electronic
properties of the nanoparticles. This project develops and applies a new
technique to understand the effects of the surrounding environment on the
electronic properties of metal nanoparticles. The results of this research will
lead to the development of new advanced technologies where the nanoparticle and
surrounding environment interactions are optimized. As part of this project, Dr.
Lear has multiple high school students working in his lab as part of a
Pennsylvania State University outreach program that provides training to
students from "at risk" schools.

This project examines the influence of surface chemistry and chemical
environments on the electronic structure of small (diameters of about 2 nm) gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs). A large set of surface chemistries are examined, and the
properties of the nanoparticles are studied using x-ray powder diffraction
(XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
electrochemistry, and conduction electron spin resonance (CESR). CESR provides a
sensitive and selective probe of the electronic environment experienced by
electrons near the Fermi energy within the metallic core. This project
establishes the mechanism for the CESR response to changes in surface chemistry.
Furthermore, this project explores the sensitivity of AuNPs to changes in their
local environment by exploring the effects of changes in solvent,
electrochemical potential, and ligands. A detailed understanding of the
synergistic relationship between the electronics and surface chemistry of metals
are critical for advances in device design and development. The project funding
also support the involvement of high school students from "at risk" schools in
cutting edge science aimed at understanding how surface chemistry affect
electronic properties of metals.