* 1609365
* Synthesis, Synthetic Mechanism, and Single Particle Microscopy of Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 468,357.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Todd Krauss of the University of
Rochester is studying tiny inorganic particles called colloidal semiconductor
nanocrystals (NCs). These NCs have the potential to impact numerous areas of
active research and technology due to their size-dependent properties. However,
the lack of a rational synthetic mechanism has impeded advances in NC design and
applications. This project investigates new fundamental strategies for low-
temperature NC syntheses that are potentially scalable to industrial volumes,
and thus are compatible with current chemical manufacturing procedures. Large-
scale synthesis of semiconductor NCs, especially those with reduced toxicity,
may enable the development of new applications in biology and medicine, optics
and photonics. This project provides for the education and training of two
graduate students and one undergraduate student. The two graduate students also
organize and direct outreach efforts through interfacing with the Rochester
Museum and Science Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-standing and significant
challenge in the field of colloidal semiconductor NCs is to understand at a
fundamental level how NCs are synthesized, and to use this knowledge to make
improved NCs in a rational manner. The overall goal in this project is to
develop a more detailed understanding of NC synthesis mechanisms in route to
synthesizing NCs with improved chemical or photophysical properties. Several
experiments are conducted utilizing optical, mass and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopies to obtain more complete understanding of the chemical reaction
mechanism for the NCs of interest. Also, the important relationship between
charge, photoluminescence and impurity atom concentration for doped
semiconductor NCs are being determined. These studies will aid in the
understanding of unexplained photophysical phenomena in a wide class of
nanostructured materials.