* 1609788
* Collaborative Research: Probing and Controlling Binding Structure and Electron Transport in Molecular Electronic Devices--A Coordinated Computational and Experimental Study
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Bingqian Xu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2019
* USD 178,174.00

Abstract:

Non-Technical: Molecular electronics started with the idea of wiring an
individual molecule to two metal electrodes, called single-molecule junctions,
as an analogy of single electronic components in commercial microelectronic
devices to overcome the limit of famous Moore's prediction. In a single
molecular junction, perhaps the most elusive factor that influences the electron
transport properties lies in the molecule-electrode contact interfaces. Despite
continuous experimental achievements and the conceptual simplicity of molecular
electronic devices, challenges for their theoretical understanding of the
correlation between electron transport and molecular binding structures are
still unresolved. Therefore, probing and controlling the structure and dynamics
of single-molecule junctions and consequently controlling the molecular
transport of these junctions are critical to the development of this field. The
project will integrate molecular simulations for the self-assembly and
nanocontact dynamics at surface and interface, and experimental mechanics and
electron transport measurements of single-molecule junctions. The project will
provide a deep understanding of many transition phenomena observed in molecular
force and conductance measurements. If successful, the research will have
tremendous impact on molecular electronics community and many other areas, such
as energy research and molecular force spectroscopy. The education and outreach
objective of this proposal is to tightly integrate the research efforts and
results with graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 education and to globally
disseminate both research and the education outcomes. Technical: Although the
electrical conductance and mechanical properties of single-molecule junctions
have achieved significant progress over the past decade, challenges of a
detailed understanding of molecular binding structures and electron transport,
and the structure-force-conductance correlations, are still unresolved. This
research will develop a combined molecular simulation and scanning probe
microscope break-junction technique to probe and control the structure and
dynamics in molecular electronics devices: (1) Performing molecular simulations
by using as close as possible the experimental parameters, dynamics of electrode
and realistic atomic interactions to understand the binding structure and force
measurement in scanning probe experiment; (2) Developing a dual-mode feedback
system with AC-coupled high speed amplifier at radio frequency to capture the
key transitions of molecular binding sites that induce conductance changes. The
experimental data at nanosecond (ns) timescale will be directly compared with
molecular simulation results; (3) Using the coordinated molecular simulation and
scanning probe break-junction experiment to probe the structure and dynamics of
selected benchmark systems under different mode trainings. Multi-variable force-
conductance two-dimensional cross-correlation histogram analyses for the force
and conductance traces will be performed in experiments and simulations, and the
distinct stable configurations of molecular junctions will be identified. The
coordinated computational and experimental research project will also provide an
interdisciplinary research for students in materials, mechanics, chemistry,
electronics, and computational materials science.