* 1609290
* Examining the Effects of Retrieval Practice and Spacing on Engineering Students' Retention of Precalculus Knowledge
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Patricia Ralston, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 166,751.00

The need and benefits of increasing and diversifying the number of
undergraduates obtaining STEM degrees is well-known. Unfortunately, inadequate
retention of mathematics knowledge prevents many students from obtaining
engineering degrees. Research in cognitive psychology suggests poor retention
results from educational practices that minimize: 1) the number of times
students retrieve information they have acquired (i.e., retrieval practice), and
2) the amount of elapsed time between retrievals (i.e., spacing). Increases in
the frequency and spacing of retrieval practice, as individual factors, are
known to be effective interventions for increasing retention. This project will
investigate the independent and additive effects of the two interventions to
reveal whether one is more efficacious than the other, and whether the
combination of interventions is better than either one alone. The research will
be conducted in an actual college classroom, extending the previous research
conducted in a laboratory setting, and will directly inform educational
approaches that aim at helping students retain requisite mathematics knowledge
and succeed in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
aims to assess the impact of increasing the amount and spacing of retrieval
practice, as separate factors and in combination, on short- and long-term
retention of precalculus knowledge. The number and temporal spacing of quiz
questions will be varied in order to track and target specific learning
objectives in a precalculus course for engineers. Measures of short-term
retention will be collected to gain insight into students' performance on
objective-specific questions on the final exam in the precalculus course, and
measures of long-term retention will be collected from an exam administered to
the subset of subjects who advance into a subsequent calculus course. Results
will inform how engineering and other STEM educators should implement techniques
from cognitive psychology to increase retention of core knowledge. More
effective educational practices could reduce the number of students transferring
out of STEM fields.