* 1609326
* Condensed Matter and Quantum Information Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Steven Girvin, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in theoretical quantum physics focusing on the study of the quantum
properties of electrical circuits operating at microwave frequencies and at
temperatures close to absolute zero. Rather than dealing with lasers, photons at
optical frequencies, and individual real atoms, the PI studies microwave photons
and artificial atoms constructed from superconducting circuit elements. Because
the artificial atoms (called qubits) are enormously larger than individual real
atoms, their interaction with photons can be significantly larger than the
interaction between ordinary light and atoms. This permits testing the
implications of quantum mechanics in completely new regimes, as well as creating
exotic quantum states of qubits and photons, which can be used as the basis for
building a quantum computer and for secure quantum communication based on the
transmission of photons. This project will also develop and study methods for
storing and faithfully transmitting quantum information using photons, even if
photons are lost during transmission over long distances or during storage over
long periods of time in a quantum memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
recent enormous experimental progress, it is now possible to detect individual
photons with unprecedented sensitivity. This project will take advantage of
these advances to propose methods that will dramatically speed up the search for
a certain class of dark matter particles known as axions, which will forge
important new connections between the fields of condensed matter physics and
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the PI will continue his collaboration
with experimental colleagues to study quantum optomechanics, in which the feeble
radiation pressure of light is harnessed to control the motion of mechanical
objects, and make position measurements with unprecedented accuracy. The recent
discovery of gravitational waves at LIGO is an example of one of the practical
applications for this type of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
achieve broader impacts by its interdisciplinary nature and the close
collaboration with experiment. The PI is fostering communication among the
condensed matter, atomic physics, quantum optics and electrical engineering
communities. As part of the project a postdoctoral fellow will be trained in
cutting-edge theoretical methods. The PI is also responsible for an annual
lecture for approximately 200 high-school students from across New England as
part of the Yale Physics Olympics, focused on explaining ideas from quantum
mechanics and quantum information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical quantum physics focusing on the application of ideas from quantum
optics and cavity quantum electrodynamics to circuit QED. The project involves
four main areas of research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Strong-coupling of a
superconducting qubit to a multi-mode cavity: This project will study nonlinear
quantum optics in the limit where the free spectral range of a one-meter-long
resonator is small enough to be comparable to the vacuum Rabi coupling of a
qubit to that resonator. Thus, many modes are jointly coupled to the qubit and
hence to each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Efficient Detection of Microwave
Photons for Axion Searches and Remote Entanglement: This project will propose
and develop novel methods to use tools from circuit QED to detect cosmological
axion dark-matter particles. Two different schemes will be analyzed, the first
using two-mode squeezers to amplify the axion signal without amplifying the
vacuum noise, and the second using recently developed capabilities for quantum
non-demolition detection of microwave photons to create a "photomultiplier" for
microwave photons. The PI will develop an optimal Bayesian filter to minimize
the dark count rate of the detector and hence dramatically increase the signal-
to-noise ratio for the detection of axions relative to current methods. The same
ideas can be applied to the remote entanglement of qubits in independent
cavities, which will have important application in the development of quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Error Correctable Photonic Codes for Quantum
Memories and Communication: This project sits within fundamental quantum
information theory. It will take advantage of new experimental capabilities,
which allow essentially universal control and measurement of complex
superpositions of Fock states of small numbers of microwave photons and
superconducting qubits, and have no analog in ordinary optics. The PI will
develop approximate continuous quantum error correction protocols for bosonic
modes. These will have applications to using microwave resonators as quantum
memories, to quantum communication using microwave photons, and to faithful
conversion of quantum information stored in microwave photons up to optical
frequencies where it can be transmitted large distances over fiber
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Optomechanics: This is a fundamental quantum
optics collaboration with experimental colleagues at Yale. The PI is
particularly interested in the development of a fully quantum theory of non-
adiabatic evolution near so-called "exceptional points" in the parameter space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve broader impacts by its
interdisciplinary nature and the close collaboration with experiment. The PI is
fostering communication among the condensed matter, atomic physics, quantum
optics and electrical engineering communities. As part of the project a
postdoctoral fellow will be trained in cutting-edge theoretical methods. The PI
is also responsible for an annual lecture for approximately 200 high-school
students from across New England as part of the Yale Physics Olympics, focused
on explaining ideas from quantum mechanics and quantum information processing.