* 1609081
* Collaborative Research: Photolytic CVD Processes for Thermally Sensitive Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Amy Walker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 294,233.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation electronic devices
using plastics and other flexible materials have the potential for revolutionary
societal benefits in medicine, sustainable energy and information technology.
Development of reliable, widely applicable methods to apply metals to heat-
sensitive materials such as organic and polymer thin films will be an important
step in the production of these devices. This project is developing methods to
use light as an energy source to drive placement of metal contacts on heat-
sensitive materials. Because the metal can be applied in patterns, the method
could eventually be used to print circuits on flexible electronics.
Participation in this research provides graduate students with technical and
collaborative skills valuable in either academic or industrial careers.
Undergraduate researchers contribute significantly to the proposed work, which
encourages them to pursue graduate education in the physical sciences and
engineering. To communicate the excitement of science to the general public,
participants in the project are involved in public outreach on chemistry and
chemistry-based nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing photolytic chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) processes for the selective deposition of metals onto
thermally sensitive materials, such as organic thin films. The reliable
formation of stable metallic contacts to organic thin films is critical to many
technologies from energy harvesting to sensing to organic/molecular electronics.
The development of photoassisted low temperature CVD will advance the state-of-
the-art in organic electronics by enabling the integration of molecular
assemblies into complex devices. In this collaborative project, design and
synthesis of ruthenium, platinum and gold complexes as photosensitive CVD
precursors is followed by a screening process involving identification of the
primary photoprocess, determination of the quantum yield for ligand loss,
elucidation of thermal decomposition steps, and modeling reactivity with
functional groups on the substrate surface. Promising precursor complexes are
subjected to photolytic chemical vapor deposition experiments with self-
assembled monolayers (SAMs) as model substrate systems. SAMs are used as the
substrates because they have highly organized structures with a uniform density
of terminal organic functional groups that will allow the quantitative
investigation of the precursor-molecule interactions. Further, SAMs can be
easily patterned to produce multifunctional surfaces, which are used to
determine the selectivity of the deposition reactions.