* 1609440
* RUI: A Mechanistic investigation on How the Redox Chemistry of MitoNEET Regulates Energy Homeostasis on Cellular and Molecular Levels
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Michael Menze, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2017
* USD 396,360.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Mary E. Konkle (Department of Chemistry, Eastern Illinois
University), Dr. Michael A. Menze (Department of Biological Sciences, Eastern
Illinois University), and Dr. Nilay Chakraborty (Department of Engineering,
University of Michigan-Dearborn) to investigate the novel chemical properties of
the recently described human protein mitoNEET and their impact on life
processes. Energy can be produced through different pathways in cells. How the
traffic of fuel through these pathways is directed is still unclear. Evidence
suggests that mitoNEET, a novel iron-sulfur containing human protein, regulates
the flow of fuel through different pathways in a tissue specific manner. This
role directly links chemistry of iron-sulfur proteins to the life process of
energy generation. Our integrated approach combines techniques from
biochemistry, molecular biology, and bioengineering to address the role of
mitoNEET in cells. Students are acquiring training in protein expression,
genetic engineering, and cellular imaging provided by the three participating
laboratories. Furthermore, the Investigators are extending outreach
opportunities to high school students and teachers. This collaboration gives
students access to cutting edge molecular research while simultaneously
encourages development of diverse talent in the science and engineering
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MitoNEET was discovered as the first member of
the [2Fe-2S]-containing family of CISD proteins in 2004, but the biochemical and
physiological function(s) of these proteins are still ill-defined. Knockdown
models of mitoNEET have shown that this protein impacts the generation of ATP by
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in a tissue specific manner. The central
hypothesis of this project is that the oxidation state and association of
mitoNEET with dehydrogenase enzymes constitutes a tissue specific link between
cellular energy metabolism and iron redox chemistry. In three different cell
types, the cellular distribution of oxidized and reduced mitoNEET is
characterized with the use of Raman interferometry. In addition, the impact of
mitoNEET binding on allosteric control of glutamate dehydrogenase 1 and the
cellular functions of cytoplasmic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase are
characterized through a range of cellular experiments. The project goals are to
elucidate the mechanisms by which mitoNEET modulates cellular energy production
through regulation of iron homeostasis and control of carbon flux through
dehydrogenase enzymes in various tissue types.