* 1609391
* Combinatorial exploration of stability regions of high component single-phase solid solutions with near-equiatomic composition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jan Schroers, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 448,121.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological advances require
higher performing materials, which are often realized by increasing the
material's complexity. A new class of materials, called "High entropy alloys"
consist of at least 5 components and exemplify this trend. This is in contrast
to traditional alloys that are typically composed of a principal element with
other constituents in only small fractions. Identifying these materials out of
the potential vast compositional space has been challenging. Addressing this
vast composition space with theories or correlations with a priori known
information has been very limited. In this work, a new combinatorial strategy
will be employed.&lt;br/&gt;This approach will allow considering ~1,000 alloys
simultaneously, hence generating an unprecedented quantity of data. All data
will be openly shared through an online data repository. The rapid data
generation and open sharing of such data will allow the scientific community to
develop improved theories for understanding and eventually developing new
materials. More generally, proposed strategy offers a novel approach to
materials research where very large amounts of data that are consistently
measured are accessible to the entire scientific community. The students
involved in this project will be trained in this open approach to materials
science, which will contribute greatly to the training of the next generation of
scientists at the cutting edge of their field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High Entropy Alloys (HEAs) form single-phase solid
solutions at equiatomic or near-equiatomic composition. This design principle
provides a new perspective on alloy discovery, by turning our focus away from
the corner of the phase diagram towards the center. A broad range of promising
mechanical properties drives technological excitement about HEAs. However,
identifying HEAs out of the potential vast compositional space has been
challenging. Addressing this vast composition space with first principle
theories or correlations with a priori known information has been very limited.
Due to the vast potential compositional space and the weak predictability, a
combinatorial strategy will be employed. This approach will allow considering
~1,000 alloys simultaneously, hence generating an unprecedented quantity of
data. All data will be openly shared through an online data repository. The
rapid data generation and open sharing of such data will allow the scientific
community to develop improved theories for understanding formation motifs and
eventually predicting HEAs. More generally, the proposed strategy offers a novel
approach to materials research where very large amounts of data that are
consistently measured are accessible to the entire scientific community. The
students involved in this project will be trained in this open approach to
materials science, which will contribute greatly to the training of the next
generation of scientist at the cutting edge of their field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a high-throughput materials synthesis method,
combinatorial sputtering is used to create large libraries of ~1000 alloys.
Rapid screening chemical analysis and structural analysis are used to
characterize the alloys within the library. Altogether, over 100,000 alloys will
be fabricated and phase boundaries identified within this project. These data
will be curated and shared with the community through the Materials Atlas
Project online repository. Curated data sets will indicate the compositional
space of the single phase solid solution, these of multiple phase regions, and
their boundaries. Mining of the data will be employed to identify correlations
between properties of the alloy and alloy components. Based on such
correlations, current theories can be tested and new theories developed. For
example, quantifying if and when enthalpic motifs can be overwritten by entropic
benefits, e.g., suppression of phase separation.