* 1609089
* RET Site: Water ECubeG (Engineering, Ecology, Environment, Geosciences)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Kang Xia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 610,000.00

To "Provide Access to Clean Water" is one of the 14 Grand Challenges identified
by the National Academy of Engineering. A recent United Nations report projects
that virtually every nation will face a water supply problem within the next 20
years. A key component to any solution to address water-related challenges is to
educate our youth about the interdisciplinary aspects of water research to make
them aware of water-related issues; and to train them as future professionals
who will develop appropriate solutions to meet these challenges. This Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site,
entitled Water ECubeG (Engineering, Ecology, Environment, Geosciences) at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) is targeted at
developing a model 6-week professional development program to engage grades 9-12
STEM teachers and community college faculty in Southwest Virginia in
interdisciplinary water research. Successful implementation of this RET Site
will result in the development of innovative learning modules that will motivate
students in grades 9-12 and community colleges to pursue the breadth of water
related STEM careers. The proposed region for teacher recruitment will enable
many teachers to educate a diverse group of students throughout Southwest
Virginia serving high-need rural and urban student populations. The Site's focus
on interdisciplinary water research will enable early exposure of future
scientists and engineers to critical issues for solving complex water problems
such as pollution in the Chesapeake Bay. The goal of this Site is consistent
with the priorities identified by the Virginia Governor's office and upon
successful completion this Site will serve as an excellent model for teacher and
student training in interdisciplinary water research elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period this RET Site will offer an
intensive summer interdisciplinary water research experience to a total of 30
STEM precollege teachers and community college faculty. The specific objectives
are to: (1) Develop and implement a 6-week research experience program for RET
Site participants involving hands-on learning experiences in engineering,
ecology, environment, and geosciences, (2) Develop and implement a professional
development program for teachers, (3) Guide RET Site participants in developing
and implementing STEM-based interdisciplinary water research learning modules
for their curricula, and (4) Establish a community of teachers mentored in
interdisciplinary water research for support, collaboration, and dissemination
of Site activities to a larger group of teachers. Annual workshops will be held
by RET alumni to educate and motivate additional 9-12 STEM teachers and
community college faculty. RET participants will present their work at K-12 and
Community College conferences. The project outcomes will be published through
the TeachEngineering digital library.