* 1609679
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: 3D Printed Graded-Index Magnetodielectric Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2019
* USD 210,000.00

Magneto-dielectric devices, such as microwave and radio frequency lenses, are
indispensable to communication systems, needed for example, for radar, mobile,
cyber security and internet-of-things applications. Similar to glass lenses,
which focus light, these devices allow for focusing or otherwise manipulating
radio and microwaves. In particular, devices with spatially varying magnetic and
dielectric properties offer exciting and innumerate possibilities for
electromagnetic wave shaping but remain to be realized due to lack of practical
fabrication techniques. Inkjet printing provides a promising approach to
manufacturing such devices: inks of different composition (e.g., containing
magnetic and dielectric nanoparticles) can be dispensed in varying ratio within
the volume of the device to implement the desired spatial gradient in magneto
dielectric properties. The goal of this industry university collaboration is to
demonstrate devices, fabricated by 3D inkjet printing, with tailor-made spatial
variation in magnetic and dielectric properties to achieve wave shaping as
needed by a given application. The demonstration will pave the way for advanced
devices such as antenna lenses that beam radio or microwave signals only to a
specific WiFi enabled machine or within the perimeter of a specific room to
mitigate the risk of signal interference or interception. The project will also
create a unique educational and professional development opportunity for
participating students, who will acquire expertise and industry experience, via
internships, in advanced manufacturing, an area of significant economic
importance to the U.S. Further, in partnership with a local library, talks aimed
at public education in 3D printing technologies will be presented.

This collaborative GOALI project seeks to demonstrate the fabrication of
microwave and radio frequency magneto-dielectric devices, with specifically
designed, spatially varying electric permittivity and magnetic permeability. The
project will combine transformation optics techniques for design of
electromagnetic media with 3D inkjet printing for digitally directed device
fabrication. Graded index microwave lens antennas, with individually customized
radiation patterns, will be printed in proof of concept. The devices will be
printed in a layer-by-layer sequence with polymerizable inks containing high
permeability magnetic and high permittivity dielectric nanoparticles. A key
challenge, due to particle loading constraints when jetting inks, will be
attaining the requisite range of permeability and permittivity in the printed
composite medium. Inks formulated with commercial nanoparticles will be used to
conduct a rapid survey of electromagnetic properties possible in the composites.
The results of the survey will guide subsequent ink design with custom
nanoparticles. The size, dispersion and loading of the nanoparticles in the inks
will be optimized for ink-jettability and range of electromagnetic properties
achieved in the printed composites.