* 1609284
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Colin Donihue, Donihue                 Colin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 250,440.00

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016,
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Colin Donihue is
"Human-driven evolution of European lizards." The host institution for this
fellowship is Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jonathan
Losos.

The research investigates whether and how human-caused land use change has
instigated evolutionary changes in the morphology of 15 European lizard species
that are known to live within human-built environments. Humans have been
transforming landscapes for centuries. Some species are capable of rapidly
adapting to human-wrought changes, while others are not. Understanding the
capacity to adapt would inform fundamental questions in evolution and shape
future conservation action. Using lizard specimens collected over the last 150
years, and archaeological remains deposited over the past 10,000 years
(concurrent with humans? expansion through Europe) the Fellow is comparing
lizards spatially, temporally, and phylogenetically to understand the extent to
which they have adapted to human land use. The Fellow is producing the first
cataloguing of a large collection of lizard remains from archaeological sites in
Europe, creating an extensive database of 3D scans of specimens and
archaeological material, and providing new insight into the predictability of
human-driven evolution.

The Fellow is receiving training in the latest approaches to morphological
analyses, including tomographic analysis, virtual dissections, and cutting-edge
micro-CT scans. The Fellow is developing collaborations with European
scientists, training and mentoring high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in the U.S, and developing educational outreach material
for a broad audience. The project culminates in an interactive web map showing
human land use through time in Europe paired with interactive 3D scans of
lizards from different time periods and contexts, which will engage the public
and serve as a valuable resource for middle and high school science classrooms.