* 1609581
* High Capacity MM-Wave Wireless Communication Systems Using Spatially Adaptive Smart Antenna Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Gokhan Mumcu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Over the past two decades, wireless technologies operating at traditional
frequency bands (&lt;6GHz) evolved into data intensive communication systems by
enjoying innovations such as cognitive radio, multiple antenna systems,
heterogeneous networks, and machine-to-machine communications. These innovations
are currently not satisfactory to address the significantly enhanced data rate
needs for future generations (5G and beyond) of wireless communication systems.
Consequently, wider frequency bandwidths available at mm-Wave bands (above
10GHz) have recently attracted a strong interest from the wireless community to
be able to serve the future data rate demands. Therefore, in this project, the
aim is to enhance the capacity and the data rate of wireless communication
systems based on the wireless channel control phenomenon by investigating the
use of spatial (i.e. position) adaptation of smart antenna arrays. At mm-Wave
bands, position adaptations on the order of a few centimeters can practically be
realized within compact devices and yet provide new wireless channel
opportunities and interference mitigation. The preliminary studies demonstrate
that wireless channel opportunities achieved through such spatial adaptations
can improve the wireless system capacity beyond a factor of 2.5 to 5. Hence, the
results of this project are expected to be transformative in adaptive wireless
communications area and the resulting knowledge base is expected to have effects
on commercial, emergency, and military communication domains. Immediate tangible
outcome of this project will be a system level test bed that will provide
results, outcomes, and design guidelines to prospective designers within
academia and industry. The proposed activity will also lead to improve the
curriculums through developing lab experiments and test beds. Efforts will be
made to incite the participation of the minority students via seminars,
technology fairs, and specialized events. Broad dissemination is ensured via
conference and journal publications, workshops, and tutorials. Specialized
outreach sessions will be organized at local high schools and community colleges
to expose and attract students, particularly minorities to STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal introduces a novel wireless
system adaptation strategy based on repositioning of mm-Wave antenna arrays
during the system operation to control the wireless channel gain. The recent
developments in the areas of microfluidic based reconfigurable RF devices and
multi-dimensional (i.e. frequency, time, and spatial domains) dynamic spectrum
access techniques are jointly investigated, for the first time, to significantly
enhance wireless communication system performance. Beam and position adaptable
antennas at the transmitter and receiver are used to control the multipath
channel characteristics so that a favorable effective channel response for the
communication link can be obtained. Unlike the on-going research efforts that
focus on mm-Wave wireless systems harnessing beam-steering capability, the
proposed system envisions a paradigm shift in the physical layer by controlling
the wireless channel using a combination of the beam-steering and position
adapting functionalities. Position adaptation is planned to be carried out in a
compact, efficient, and high precision device by introducing microfluidically
reconfigurable feed networks. The proposed unusual combination of beam-steering
and position reconfiguration generates a need for this proposed effort to
investigate and revise the long-time established channel estimation, tracking,
prediction, and compensation techniques. The proposed main research thrusts are
(1) Controlling mm-Wave Wireless Channel; (2) System Design in Heterogeneous
Networks; (3) Spatially Adaptive Smart mm-Wave Antenna Arrays; (4) Verification
of Theory Predicted Channel Capacity Enhancement with mm-Wave Wireless
Communication Scenarios.