* 1609339
* RET Site: Smart Sensors and Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Andrew Kim, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site
focusing on smart sensors and sensing systems at Michigan State University
(MSU). The RET Site will continue to develop a strong partnership between MSU
and schools in the greater Lansing-Detroit area to advance pre-college science
and engineering education by training a cadre of leaders of middle and high
school teachers in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM). The RET site will expose teachers to leading engineering
research spanning biological and chemical sensors, robotics sensors, micro and
nano-electro mechanical sensors, microelectronic sensing circuitry, human-
computer interaction, biomechanics, innovative sensing materials and
manufacturing techniques, and will connect them to the profound changes that
sensors and sensing technologies are having on the daily lives and quality of
life of all citizens. The interdisciplinary nature of the research theme will
provide a fertile ground for developing creative and appealing middle and high
school lessons and teaching activities in biology, physics, chemistry, and
technology that align with state and national curricular standards.

RET participants will attend a 6-week summer institute to participate in
cutting-edge research projects with mentoring from engineering faculty who lead
vibrant sensor and sensing related research programs. Working with principal
investigators, faculty mentors, and a curriculum development specialist,
teachers will develop innovative, standards-compliant curriculum modules and
participate in a number of professional development activities. The teacher-
created modules and lessons will be disseminated nationally through
TeachEngineering.org, a nationally recognized repository for searchable,
standards-based engineering curricula. Extensive follow-up activities are
planned throughout the academic year to ensure the translation of lab experience
into classroom practice, and to foster and strengthen long-term partnership
between engineering faculty and the local school districts. A third-party
professional program evaluator will track and evaluate the program and provide
feedback for improvement. The evaluator will also conduct longitudinal studies
on participants to assess the longer-term impact of the RET program.