* 1609291
* RUI: Investigations of hydrogels formed by semenogelin I-derived peptide sequences
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Karin Akerfeldt, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 281,610.00

Hydrogels are materials with a tremendous capacity to absorb water, which makes
them useful for a variety of every-day applications such as baby diapers,
contact lenses and drug encapsulation. Hydrogels consist of polymer networks and
new types of hydrogel polymers are continuously being developed. There is a
considerable interest in learning what the detailed structure of a hydrogel
looks like and how the structure of the network influences the hydrogel
properties as well as how the hydrogel polymers can be modified at will. The aim
of this research is to investigate the formation of a hydrogel from natural
proteins. This hydrogel, because it is of natural origin, is non-toxic,
biocompatible, biodegradable and environmentally friendly. This research
involves an international collaboration between research groups at Haverford
College, US; Lund University, Sweden; and the University of Cambridge, UK. The
project provides interdisciplinary and international research opportunities to
undergraduate students. The project also includes participation by students from
underrepresented groups, preparing them for graduate studies in a variety of
chemically related fields, as well as for careers in industry. The undergraduate
participants of this project gain direct hands-on experience and training in
state-of-the-art methodologies for solid-phase protein synthesis and
purification.

This research aims to understand gel formation by peptide scaffolds. The
oligopeptide under investigation self-assembles to form fibrils consisting of
extended beta-sheets. This short 10-residue peptide forms a hydrogel with
properties that are particularly well suited for systematic investigations. This
project probes the sequence-specific determinants of hydrogel formation by
studying a series of mutants and truncated versions of the oligopeptide,
employing predominantly circular dichroism and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy for their characterization The research interrogates the self-
assembly process by incorporating isotopically labeled residues into the
sequence. Finally, the researchers follow the kinetics of fibril formation using
a thioflavine-based assay, which is also used as a tool to assess the effects of
external variables, such as pH, on aggregation.