* 1609077
* OP: Nonlinear Optical Properties of Organic Cavity Polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Kenneth Singer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 455,501.00

Nontechnical description: The interaction of light with matter capable of light
absorption and emission is of fundamental and long-standing scientific and
technological interest. This interaction can be enhanced by using miniature
optical cavities made of two mirrors, in which light repeatedly bounces back and
forth while traversing the absorbing medium. This structure forms the basis of
the laser. Organic dyes, commonly used for making lasers, exhibit particularly
enhanced behavior when placed in ultrasmall optical cavities, often exemplified
by unusually large color changes. This project addresses nonlinear optical
effects in optical cavities smaller than the wavelength of light, in which the
aforementioned enhancements are particularly strong. The optical cavities
coupled with the special optical materials exhibiting these exceptionally strong
interactions can be dynamically controlled, and, as a result, the optical
performance of these systems. The phenomena addressed in this project have
potential applications in optical information processing and communications, and
in such technologies as holographic displays. The graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project are also involved in mentoring and outreach
programs for students from underrepresented groups in the inner cities in
northeast Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Ultrastrong coupling
between photons and excitons in microcavities containing organic dyes and
semiconductors has been recently observed at room temperature. The unusually
strong interactions dovetail with the robust nonlinear optical responses of the
same materials. This provides a new and promising hybrid material for photonics.
This project explores the nonlinear optical properties of organic materials as
active elements in nanoscale low-Q optical cavities in the regime of strong and
ultrastrong photon-exciton coupling of cavity polaritons. In this regime, the
physics of quantum cavity electrodynamics describes significant changes in the
spectral dispersion of the composite structure. Contributions to the AC Stark
effect is the focus of studies implying particular attention to spectral
response of the nonlinear optical interaction and manipulation of the spectrum
by varying the cavity resonance, for example, by angle tuning. Well-studied
organic glass forming nonlinear optical materials incorporated into metal mirror
cavities of low-Q are being investigated, experimentally and theoretically, in a
number of cavity configurations to determine their nonlinear optical response
for the optical Kerr effect, third harmonic generation and photorefraction.