* 1609168
* Phase-locked arrays of high-power terahertz lasers with ultra-narrow beams
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Sushil Kumar, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 361,570.00

Abstract title&lt;br/&gt;High-power terahertz lasers radiating in ultra-narrow
beams based on a novel phase-locking scheme for applications in sensing and
spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;The
terahertz region of electromagnetic spectrum is significantly underdeveloped due
to lack of high-power sources of radiation. Existing monochromatic sources have
low output power and/or highly divergent beams, which makes them unsuitable for
important applications in terahertz sensing, imaging, and spectroscopy. This
project aims to develop terahertz semiconductor lasers that could emit up to
hundred milliwatts of average optical power in a narrow beam with less than five
degrees of angular divergence. Such a performance is predicted for lasers
operated in a compact cryocooler, and will be a significant improvement over
present state-of-the-art. A new distributed-feedback scheme that allows phase-
locking of multiple terahertz metallic cavities is proposed, which leads to
significantly improved radiative efficiencies. The lasers will be developed with
the semiconductor quantum-cascade technology that will allow integration of tens
of different lasers, each emitting at a range of discrete frequencies, on a
single semiconductor chip for broad spectral coverage. &lt;br/&gt;The
availability of such integrated arrays of high-power terahertz lasers could lead
to a transformative impact in the field of terahertz science and technology, by
enabling development of cost-effective scientific-instruments for rapid non-
invasive/remote sensing, detection, and analysis of a variety of chemicals and
biomolecular species such as packaged drugs and explosives, pharmaceutical
compounds, and biological samples. There is a strong probability that new
business directions will be established in photonics industry if the goals of
this project are met successfully. At educational level, the research will be
made accessible to undergraduate students especially from diverse backgrounds,
who will get hands-on training toward advanced concepts in laser design and
characterization, plasmonics, terahertz science, and cryogenic electrical and
optical measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Cryogenically cooled semiconductor quantum-cascade lasers
(QCLs) are the most powerful solid-state sources of coherent terahertz
radiation; however, presently, single-mode terahertz lasers operating at
practically viable temperatures could only radiate average optical power in the
order of a milliwatt, which is insufficient for most targeted applications. This
proposal seeks to improve power output from such QCLs by two-orders of magnitude
in the range of hundred milliwatts with significantly improved beam quality. A
portable electrically operated Stirling cryocooler will provide the required
cooling for the semiconductor laser chips that could have tens of such phase-
locked QCL arrays emitting at a range of discrete terahertz frequencies. Such a
development could lead to commercialization of terahertz QCLs similar to the
highly successful mid-infrared QCLs that have spawned recent economic activity
in tens of companies worldwide. Terahertz QCLs utilize parallel-plate metallic
cavities with strong mode confinement, for which a unique modal coupling scheme
for multiple cavities through surface via the surrounding medium (vacuum or air)
is proposed. Owing to the very long wavelengths at terahertz frequencies, it is
shown that in-phase surface-plasmon-polariton modes for coupled cavities can be
excited with periodic photonic structures fabricated using conventional
lithography. Radiation in an ultra-narrow beam is expected owing to the
spatially extended radiated wavefront of the phased-locked optical
mode.&lt;br/&gt;Development of high-power terahertz lasers has the potential to
enable commercial activity in terahertz spectroscopy, sensing, and imaging.
Laser based terahertz instruments could lead to new insights in fields as
diverse as cell-biology for study of biomolecular structure and dynamics, non-
destructive evaluation and detection of drugs, pharmaceutical products,
explosives, non-invasive imaging of biological samples, and remote-sensing of
Earth's atmosphere and outer space. A successful outcome of this project will
potentially lead to collaborations with industry (specifically, semiconductor
laser companies), some of which have shown recent interest for development of
terahertz instruments. At the University level, special efforts will be made to
involve undergraduate students especially from diverse backgrounds in the
research activities during each year.