* 1609791
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated In Silico and Non-Target Analytical Framework for High Throughput Prioritization of Bioactive Transformation Products
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Gloer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Today, water resources are threatened by a complex mixture of chemical
pollutants, many of which are poorly removed by traditional water and wastewater
treatment technologies. These include potent pharmaceutical classes including
synthetic steroids, whose bioactivity can persist in the environment despite
their transformation through natural and engineered processes. In this project
funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Chemistry Division
at the National Science Foundation, a collaborative team of researchers at the
University of Iowa, University of Washington at Tacoma and Seattle, University
of California at San Diego, and Stony Brook University develops a predictive
framework to help catalyze more robust water regulations and improved chemical
risk assessment. Ultimately, outcomes of this project moves society toward more
safe and sustainable water supplies, particularly as society becomes more
reliant on reuse of treated wastewater to bridge the widening gap in supply and
demand. The broader impacts of this work include advancing undergraduate
education by enabling the participation of under-represented groups in research
activities, integrating modern computational tools into student learning, and
promoting scientific literacy in non-technical audiences through general
education coursework development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work represents a
new paradigm in water quality management. Focusing on a widely utilized abiotic
treatment process, chlorination, and ubiquitous but understudied pollutant
classes, potent synthetic progestins and glucocorticoids, this project will
develop a high-throughput framework built upon computational and experimental
methods for the a priori prediction of high risk, bioactive transformation
products. This approach integrates (i) theoretical calculations to identify
probable chlorination products using descriptors for both parent (partial
charges, oxidation potentials) and likely product (thermodynamic stability)
species. (ii) Potential product species are prioritized based on bioactivity
(i.e., risk) using high throughput virtual ligand screening. Once identified,
formation and yield of high risk products are evaluated (iii) in bench-scale
experiments across a range of chlorination conditions and (iv) via high
resolution mass spectrometric detection in wastewaters and receiving waters.
Research outcomes ensures that when emerging pollutant classes are inevitably
regulated, a more holistic approach is available that also addresses risks posed
by their bioactive products. This collaborative project provides
transdisciplinary training of 2 graduate students, 2 postdocs, and several
undergraduates at the interface of environmental chemistry, computational
chemistry, and biochemistry.