* 1609782
* Dynamics and Noise in Individual Mesoscale Magnetic Particles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* E. Dan Dahlberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 425,550.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Noise is considered to be a nuisance or problem
in most situations such as a engaging in conversation or detecting a signal.
However a phenomenon known as stochastic resonance (SR) is where noise makes it
easier to hear a conversation or detect a signal under certain conditions. This
phenomenon has been used to model brain function and in medical devices. To
fully realize its potential, we need to investigate the underlying physics using
a model system. The Principal Investigator has developed such a model system
consisting of magnetic nano/mesoscale particles as small as 200 atoms on a side.
The magnetic state, the orientation of the North and South poles (NS) can be
determined by electrical properties measured by four wires attached to each
particle. The particles are so small that the NS orientation fluctuates from
thermal noise. Understanding how the NS directions change with time when a small
time dependent magnetic field is applied is the missing key to a fundamental
understanding of SR. This fundamental understanding provides the foundation for
greater applications of SR and extensions of it previous applications. In
addition the nano/mesoscale particles are an ideal model system for other
outstanding physics questions related to our understanding of fundamental noise
theory. The research is conducted by both graduate students and undergraduates
as part of their technical training in economically important advanced
technologies and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
research explores both the fundamental model of stochastic resonance (SR) and
the untested attribution that 1/f noise is due to a collection of random
telegraph noise (RTN) oscillators. Both of these long physics questions are
within reach with the technology developed by the Principal Investigator (PI).
This consists of the manufacture of individual magnetic particles as small as
40nm with four nonmagnetic leads attached for four terminal resistance
measurements of the anisotropic magnetoresistance. Previous research by the PI
has measured RTN in individual nano/mesoscale magnetic particles. For the SR
research a single dot exhibiting RTN is subjected to a small ac magnetic field.
The ac field is not sufficient to drive the magnetization through the energy
landscape giving rise to the RTN. The thermal noise, however, can enable the
transition between states which is at the heart of SR. Exploring the response of
the magnetization as functions of ac field magnitude, temperature, particle
energy barriers tests the models of SR. The hypothesis that 1/f noise evolves
from a collection of uncorrelated RTN oscillators is tested by chaining
individual dots exhibiting RTN and measuring the noise of both the individual
dots in the chain and the total chain. The effect of correlations on the noise
is measured by decreasing the separation between the dots that increases their
magnetic interactions.