* 1609162
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Dynamically configurable memory technology based on ferroelectric-gated field effect transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Tso-Ping Ma, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2020
* USD 345,000.00

The main objective of this NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF proposal is to demonstrate the
feasibility and scalability of a novel dynamically configurable memory
technology based on ferroelectric-gated FET's (FeFET's). Specifically, the
'dynamical configurability' enables the fabricated memory array to behave as
either nonvolatile memory (NVM, with 10 years retention time and 105-106
endurance cycles) or as DRAM (with &gt; 1012 endurance cycles but &lt; 1 hour
retention) by adjusting the write/erase programming strength. This unprecedented
capability is a paradigm shift from the conventional semiconductor memory in
which the NVM and DRAM are two entirely different technologies and have rigid
boundaries to separate them. The successful breakthrough of these rigid
boundaries through proposed research project will open up numerous opportunities
for device engineers, circuit designers, and systems integrators to continue to
push the frontiers of the conventional scaling approach of both NVM and DRAM
technologies. The PI and Co-PI outreach activities involves recruitment of
undergraduates and K-8 teachers from neighboring Southern Connecticut State
University which has 25+% underrepresented minority enrollment and trains K-8
teachers, for participation in the proposed research project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed dynamically configurable memory technology represents a
paradigm shift from the conventional concept of pitting nonvolatile memory (NVM)
against DRAM, where the two memory technologies are considered to be
fundamentally different, not only in the basic memory cell structure but also in
the array architecture, and operating principles. To achieve this objective, the
PI/Co-PI at Yale University in collaboration with the research team at the
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology will take advantage of complementary
strengths in addressing fundamental as well as technological issues related to
device physics, device engineering, device fabrication, modeling/simulation,
circuit design, device/circuit characterization, and materials science, to
achieve the research objective. The successful demonstration of this proposed
research will serve to break through all these boundaries, as the same
fabricated hardware will serve the functionality of both NVM and DRAM in a
system by merely controlling the programming software. For the semiconductor
memory community, this will open up new opportunities for innovative research
that goes beyond the conventional methodology that is confined by the
traditional boundaries between the compartmentalized NVM and DRAM.