* 1609208
* Dynamics and Mechanics of Active Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in active matter, consisting of assemblies of self-driven entities,
such as bird flocks or living cells, that take energy from the environment to
produce coordinated motion. The ability to turn energy injected at the molecular
scale into organized motion and function at the macroscopic scale is a defining
property of living systems. One may then think that such organization must be
controlled by complex communication pathways or biochemical signaling. In recent
years researchers have, however, engineered a number of synthetic analogues with
life-like properties, from microswimmers powered by chemical reactions to swarms
of nanobots capable of self-organized behavior, demonstrating the key role of
physical interactions in controlling collective behavior. The central goal of
the research by the PI and her team is to quantify the conditions under which
physical models based on a minimal set of interactions can capture complex
organization in both living and engineered systems, and to develop and test such
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a new powerful
mathematical framework for describing quantitatively emergent phenomena in
nature, where large groups exhibit coordinated behaviors that are very different
from those of the individuals. Working with experimentalists at Syracuse
University and at Princeton University, the PI will employ the active matter
paradigm to identify the physical mechanisms that drive the life cycle of the
soil-dwelling bacterium Myxococcus xanthus, which is controlled by a continuous
feedback loop between collective and individual behavior. The PI and her
students will also model the collective behavior of synthetic microswimmers and
examine the conditions required for such active particles to drive the assembly
and organization of inert particles. This work will pave the way to the
engineering of smart materials capable of active-assembly, reconfiguration, and
self-healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have transformative impact
across several fields, from physics to biology to engineering, and benefit
society in several ways. For instance, by differentiating transformations that
are triggered by physical mechanisms as opposed to genetics, the work on M.
xanthus will help cut down the vast number of possibilities that must be
investigated in routine genetic studies. The research will include opportunities
for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Its highly
interdisciplinary nature will provide broad training at the interface between
science and bioengineering, opening up a variety of employment
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on active matter. This name refers
to extended systems composed of many interacting entities that are driven out of
equilibrium by energy injected at the microscopic scale, breaking detailed
balance. Examples include many living systems, from bird flocks to living cells,
and engineered ones, from in vitro biopolymer networks activated by motor
proteins to synthetic microswimmers. The PI will use a multipronged approach
ranging from agent-based models to continuum phenomenology, and informed by
collaborations with experimenters to advance understanding of the organizational
principles and mechanics of active matter. The problems addressed are organized
around three objectives: (1) using minimal models to formulate the
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of active matter, with specific attention
to spatially inhomogeneous behavior induced by confinement; (2) identifying
generic properties of active flows in confined geometry by examining the
dynamics and emergent behavior of topological defects; and (3) applying the
active matter paradigm to elucidate the physical mechanisms that drive the
complex life cycle of Myxococcus xanthus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on
self-propelled particle models combines computation and theory to address
fundamental questions on the nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of active
systems with no microscopic time reversal symmetry. It will specifically examine
the extent to which effective descriptions in terms of equilibrium concepts may
be possible. The study of the role of topological defects in driving and
maintaining self-sustained active flows will provide a powerful framework for
characterizing transitions between flow patterns in biofluids in vivo and in
vitro, from the cytoplasm to bacterial suspensions. Through the work on M.
xanthus, the PI will demonstrate that the active matter paradigm provides a
useful way for organizing biological data and isolate the physical mechanisms at
play in controlling complex developmental cycles of living systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of active matter brings together communities
from a broad range of disciplines and impacts areas ranging from biology to
materials design. The proposed work on self-propelled particle models and active
assembly will guide the development of new materials with programmed functions.
The research on microbial development aims at differentiating transformations
that are triggered by physical mechanisms as opposed to genetics and will help
cut down the vast number of possibilities that must be investigated in genetic
studies. The proposed work will provide broad training for graduate students and
postdocs at the interface of physics, engineering and biology and promote the
development of a diverse STEM workforce. The PI will continue her engagement
with the scientific community by organizing conferences and school that will
provide professional development opportunities for young scientists.