* 1609024
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Danelle Seymour, Seymour                 Danelle        K
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Danelle Seymour is "Exploring the causes and consequences
of rapid transposon evolution in grass genomes" The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of California, Irvine and the sponsoring scientist
is Dr. Brandon Gaut.

The most economically important crop species, including rice, maize, wheat, and
barley are members of the grass family. The genomes of these species are
extremely variable in size, and this is largely the result of rapid
proliferation of mobile genetic elements, or transposons. While the genomic
distribution of transposons in each species has been reported, the evolutionary
forces that shape rapid, global changes in their distributions are unknown. This
project aims to characterize the evolutionary forces that drive large changes in
genome structure in eight grass species and whether such changes also have
functional consequences. This project will provide the fellow with an
evolutionary perspective important for connecting basic genomics research to
plant phenotype, as well as the opportunity to provide long-term mentoring to
undergraduates interested in genomics research.

Transposons are insertional mutagens and host genomes have evolved mechanisms to
mitigate their spread. Transposon silencing can reduce transcription of flanking
endogenous genes, but the duration of these changes is unclear due to the rapid
evolution of inserted sequences. Exploring the interplay between these two
forces, transposon proliferation and host silencing of transposition, is central
to understanding how plant genomes evolve. This research aims to characterize
the extent that transposon proliferation impacts the evolution of host genomes
and ultimately the host phenotype using a comparative phylogenetic approach
focusing on eight grass species. First, a unified framework for transposon
identification and annotation in all eight species will be developed which will
serve as an important community resource. Next, this resource will be used to
characterize the role of transposons in the evolution of gene expression. Using
a phylogenetic approach, it is possible to characterize the duration of
transposon-induced phenotypic changes, in this case gene expression, and the
extent that such changes shape the evolution of gene expression networks in this
important plant family.