* 1609022
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Manuela Dal Forno, Dal Forno               Manuela
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Manuela Dal Forno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1609022&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to take
transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ biological
collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Manuela Dal Forno is "Using museum specimens to explore the
diversity and variation of lichen microbiomes in space and time." The host
institution for this fellowship is the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Eric Schuettpelz and Martin
Grube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to evaluate whether
biological collections can be used to study characteristics of the microbiome
(microbial communities composed of many species, living within plants, fungi and
animals). This research is important because if microbiomes do not change
significantly over time while housed in museum specimens (i.e., they represent
microbiomes found in living organisms at the time they were collected), this
opens up a remarkable opportunity to analyze the microbiomes of millions of
samples already deposited in museums worldwide, facilitating the study of many
biological questions. This research explores this question using lichens and
their microbiomes as a model system. Lichens were long thought to be symbiotic
associations of just two organisms (or rarely three), fungi plus photosynthetic
algae and/or cyanobacteria. However, we now realize that lichens harbor diverse
microbiomes, which may vary over space and time. The Fellow is examining museum
lichen collections and testing the hypothesis that observed microbiomes
represent those living in the lichen when it was collected (i.e., when it was
alive), utilizing new and existing collections of tropical lichens from Brazil,
Panama, and Jamaica. The research is risky to the extent that the Fellow may
find that microbiomes cannot be adequately characterized from collection
specimens, but whether or not this is the case, the findings have broad
implications for future research on the microbiome dynamics of lichens and other
organisms (e.g., plants) that are maintained under similar museum conditions.
The results will also be used to determine how microbiomes vary within and among
lichen species, and how they vary with changes in the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is acquiring valuable training in areas such as
comparative microbiome analyses, bioinformatics, and the handling of large data
sets and data layers from collections portals, ecological statistics, and the
establishment of novel pipelines. During a visit to the Institute of Plant
Sciences, University of Graz, Austria, the Fellow will learn the fluorescence
techniques and use it on selected samples. All of these new skills are important
for developing a strong interdisciplinary research program that merges
traditional taxonomy with modern molecular techniques and data analyses. The
Fellow is mentoring high school and undergraduate students of historically
underrepresented groups, while also creating opportunities for the inclusion of
lichens in all levels of education. Internships and public outreach activities
are utilizing existing programs available at the National Museum of Natural
History, and being expanded to local citizen science communities and
institutions in the greater Washington DC metropolitan area. Educational
products include protocols, portfolios and field guides for lichen
identification.