* 1609159
* Development of JB Recognition Codes for Manipulation of RNA Structures and Functions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Danith Ly, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

RNA molecules have diverse and essential functions in cells, related to their
three-dimensional structures. This project is developing a more comprehensive
molecular toolbox than is currently available to manipulate RNA structure in an
attempt to advance the understanding of their biological roles. This research
program serves as a training ground for high school, undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral associates. Training is provided in synthetic,
physical organic, analytical, and biophysical chemistry, as well as in molecular
and cellular biology. Implementation of this research project is strengthening
the ongoing effort to build a Chemical Biology program, at Carnegie Mellon
University. The program promotes rigorous undergraduate research training and
fosters interest in science among K-12 students and teachers in the Greater
Western Pennsylvania area. This interdisciplinary program is providing students
and research associates with a unique skillset essential for their future career
in graduate schools as well as in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is developing an entirely new set of nucleic acid recognition codes,
namely "Janus" bases (or JBs). These bases are capable of forming bifacial
H-bonding interactions with adjoining nucleobases on the opposing strands of RNA
double helix. In particular, the research is chemically synthesizing JBs and the
corresponding millamolecular ligands and evaluating their binding properties
with a fluorescence-based assay. The proposed JBs are designed to bind to all 16
possible combinations of matched and mismatched base-pairs, providing a complete
toolset for manipulation of RNA structure and function. In addition to their
small size and digital recognition, the other benefits of JBs include
improvements in recognition specificity and selectivity. Completion of this
project will allow the determination of the feasibility of JB recognition and
the ability to manipulate RNA structure and function, pertinent to the
development of a malleable molecular platform for binding rapidly evolving RNA
targets.