* 1609355
* Development of New Electronic Materials Using High-Throughput Epitaxial Film Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul Salvador, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Description: Materials show remarkably different properties when
they adopt different structures. Many new materials are predicted to have
exciting electronic properties, but have never been made. Efforts to fabricate
materials in specific structures generally use trial-and-error, low-throughput
processes that inhibit the discovery, development, and ultimate deployment of
materials in technology. In this project, a novel high-throughput structure-
directing fabrication method is being explored to make a short list of
breakthrough materials expected to impact energy and information technologies.
Specifically, thin layers of a material are deposited simultaneously on hundreds
to thousands of novel surfaces, and the structural relationships between the
thin layers and all surfaces are efficiently determined. The structure-directing
surfaces are tailored to favor specific target materials. Using this method, the
research team is establishing the scientific underpinnings of materials
stability, discovering new materials, and accelerating the development cycle of
electronic materials. The investigators are incorporating research outcomes in
undergraduate and graduate courses and developing technology enhanced learning
tools for delivery of primary content and practice of essential skills.
Specifically, a web/app interface is being developed to replace the traditional
passive textbook experience with an interactive learning environment moving at
the student's pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: A high-
throughput epitaxial film growth methodology is being used to produce entirely
new electronic materials - previously unrealized, metastable complex oxides. The
method is called combinatorial substrate epitaxy, and investigators are using
this to study local epitaxial growth on hundreds to thousands of different kinds
of surfaces. The research team prepares their own novel substrates as polished
surfaces of sintered ceramics and specifically tailor them to support the
fabrication of new materials predicted to exhibit exciting electronic
properties. Electron backscatter diffraction is used as a high-throughput local
structural probe and pulsed laser deposition as a material flexible film growth
method. By exploring rapidly large regions of epitaxial synthesis space, the
preferred epitaxial orientations between film-substrate structural pairs are
determined and comprehensive epitaxial stability maps that plot phase as a
function of processing conditions are established. The research team thus
identifies the substrates and growth conditions that allow one to synthesize
epitaxially a given composition in a specific crystal structure. The project is
establishing the empirical scientific underpinnings of epitaxial stabilization,
which enables the accelerated discovery of materials and their deployment in
technologies. The investigators target the discovery of several specific
breakthrough compounds expected to be exciting electrodes, ferroelectrics, and
multiferroics.