* 1609129
* OP: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Multimode Optical Pulse Propagation: New Route to High-Performance Fiber Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2020
* USD 340,000.00

Title: High-Performance Lasers Based on Optical Fibers that Allow Many
Overlapping Light Modes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Lasers that produce very short pulses of light
(millionths of millionths of seconds in duration) have begun to find
applications that range from imaging of cells in tissue to surgery, to
industrial material processing, as examples. Such a laser can be made of optical
fiber, which is attractive because the light is automatically kept inside the
fiber. In fibers used for this purpose to date, the core of the fiber is very
small (a few millionths of a meter) and only a single mode, or pattern, of the
light propagates in the fiber. This mode is what most people associate with a
laser beam: a small spot that is brightest in its center. &lt;br/&gt;If the core
of the fiber is made larger, other patterns can propagate. All of the allowed
patterns overlap, so the beam that comes out is a complicated mix of them. The
light field varies in space and in time as it propagates in the fiber. Lasers
based on multiple patterns can theoretically reach much higher powers, which are
needed for applications, but the patterns must be controlled. Control of the
patterns will also allow new capabilities, such as the generation of short light
pulses at new wavelengths (colors, including infrared and ultraviolet).
&lt;br/&gt;Advances in theoretical understanding and experimental techniques in
the last few years now give researchers the tools to develop lasers based on
fibers with many overlapping patterns or modes. Groups from Cornell University
and the University of Central Florida will work to develop lasers and other
sources of short light pulses based on such fibers. &lt;br/&gt;Graduate students
who work on this project will receive theoretical and practical training, and
will be prepared for diverse careers in science and technology. In an effort to
increase exposure of science and enhance diversity of participants, the Cornell
group will work with the 4H organization to offer workshops aimed at exposing
junior-high-school students to science and possible careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A group from Cornell
University will perform theoretical and experimental studies of the propagation
of ultrashort light pulses in optical fibers that support many transverse modes
of the electromagnetic field. As a result of recent advances in understanding of
multimode pulse propagation, which is inherently spatiotemporal in nature, it is
now feasible to begin to design sources of ultrashort light pulses based on
multimode fiber. High-power lasers, and sources of broadly-tunable intense
infrared pulses will be constructed and studied. Collaborators from the
University of Central Florida will provide computational support.&lt;br/&gt;The
field of ultrafast science has been built largely with short-pulse lasers based
on a single transverse mode of a cavity, or optical fibers that support a single
transverse mode. Exploitation of spatiotemporal wave propagation for the design
of new sources of ultrashort pulses has not been considered previously. The new
pulse-shaping mechanisms that will be investigated offer enhanced or completely-
new capabilities for high-energy and ultrashort pulses. &lt;br/&gt;Optical fiber
offers an ideal setting to study new nonlinear waves. Knowledge gained in the
proposed effort will be pertinent to future telecommunications systems based on
mode-division multiplexing. The nonlinear dynamics investigated in this project
will correspond to related effects in a variety of systems, such as Bose-
Einstein condensates, and multimode propagation will be relevant to optical
studies of turbulence.