* 1609523
* Study of Synthetic/Living Feedback Systems Enabled by Innovation in Shape-Memory Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Patrick Mather, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 370,000.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials are often used to study cells
and tissues. Some biomaterials are designed with specific properties, such as
stiffness or surface shape, to study how cells and tissues respond to those
properties. This first category of biomaterials is improving understanding of
how cells and tissues work in health or disease and how cells and tissue respond
when in contact with biomaterials, such as those used in medical devices. Other
biomaterials are designed to be "smart", meaning that they can undergo changes
in properties such as stiffness or surface shape in response to exposure to
water, light, or other triggers. This second category of bio-materials is
providing new tools for controlling cells and tissues in research or therapies.
This project will create and study a new third category of biomaterials that
combine the properties of the first two. These new biomaterials will not only
have specific properties to which cells and tissues respond but will also be
"smart" and capable of responding to the presence of the cells and tissues. By
studying the back-and-forth interaction, with the material responding to the
cells and tissues and vice versa, new understanding will be developed regarding
how cells and tissues work and how materials can be used to control them.
Society will further benefit from a yearly workshop that will train central high
school teachers on "Making Smart Materials."&lt;br/&gt;Stimuli responsive
biomaterials have been developed to assay or control biological systems, but the
potential of these biomaterials may be largely untapped. The potentially
transformative opportunity is that of integrating stimuli responsive
biomaterials with biological systems to create hybrid feedback systems that can
provide new insight into phenomena at the interface of synthetic/living material
systems. The goal of the proposed research is to create new stimuli responsive
shape-memory polymers and study them in innovative synthetic/living feedback
systems. Three objectives will be pursued. First, to tune cytocompatible shape-
memory polymers for photo-thermal stimulation. Second, to develop and understand
enzyme-responsive shape-memory polymers. Third, to study synthetic/living
feedback systems, both systems that are imaging-enabled and semiautonomous and
systems that are material-enabled and fully autonomous. This work is designed to
be transformative in two ways: it will lead to novel material designs; and it
will enable discovery of new material phenomena. Society will benefit from both
the development of the individuals involved and through new knowledge that
promises to drive advanced in biomedical fields. In addition, a yearly 2-day
workshop will train central New York STEM teachers on "Making Smart
Materials."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stimuli
responsive biomaterials have been developed to assay or control biological
systems, but the potential of these biomaterials may be largely untapped. The
potentially transformative opportunity is that of integrating stimuli responsive
biomaterials with biological systems to create hybrid feedback systems that can
provide new insight into phenomena at the interface of synthetic/living material
systems. The goal of the proposed research is to create new stimuli responsive
shape-memory polymers and study them in innovative synthetic/living feedback
systems. Three objectives will be pursued. First, to tune cytocompatible shape-
memory polymers for photo-thermal stimulation. Second, to develop and understand
enzyme-responsive shape-memory polymers. Third, to study synthetic/living
feedback systems, both systems that are imaging-enabled and semiautonomous and
systems that are material-enabled and fully autonomous. This work is designed to
be transformative in two ways: it will lead to novel material designs; and it
will enable discovery of new material phenomena. Society will benefit from both
the development of the individuals involved and through new knowledge that
promises to drive advances in biomedical fields. In addition, a yearly 2-day
workshop will train central New York STEM teachers on "Making Smart Materials."