* 1609926
* Supramolecular Self-Assembly and Capture as a New Route to 3D Cyclophanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Darren Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Self-assembly -- a process analogous to a puzzle programmed to put itself
together -- is a powerful tool for synthetic chemists to assemble large, complex
organic molecules. This research program uses a self-assembly approach to
develop highly efficient routes to complex, three-dimensional (3D) organic
molecules known as "cyclophanes". These new chemical entities feature unusual
properties in their interaction with light, the binding of "guest" molecules
within their cage-like structures, and their ability to serve as precursors for
polymeric materials (plastics). One broader impact of this research is the
possible development of new building blocks for the parylene industrial
polymerization process that provides polymer coatings for sensitive devices and
electronics. Graduate student professional development activities continue to
encourage the transfer of basic science discoveries to application. New
professional development opportunities include implementing individual
development plans, providing opportunities for internships, developing
experience in mentorship, and supporting the Women in Graduate Sciences group at
the University of Oregon. The involvement of undergraduate researchers in the
program continues to be a priority as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
specifically seeks to advance a preliminary discovery showing that simple
treatment of thiol ligands and a pnictogen source with iodine provides
equilibrating thermodynamic mixtures of discrete disulfides that can be
"kinetically trapped" via sulfur-extrusion chemistry to yield complex
(thia)cyclophanes. This efficient two-step process of self-assembly and kinetic
capture provides cyclophanes in scalable, high-yielding reactions. This research
seeks to advance these methods and to convert the self-assembled
thiacyclophanes, which are known precursors to hydrocarbon cyclophanes, into new
cyclophane compounds through three primary aims. The researchers expand methods
to synthesize new 2D and 3D self-assembled discrete disulfides using soft metal
ions as directing elements. They also apply sulfur-extrusion chemistry to
"kinetically trap" new thioether and hydrocarbon cyclophanes. Finally, the
Johnson group scales-up the syntheses of new (hetero)cyclophanes and studies
their initial properties. Cyclophanes are screened for their host-guest
chemistry, optoelectronic properties, and use as monomers for new polymeric
materials.