* 1609621
* Design of Multi-Functional SplitCore HBV Capsids for Precisely Controlled Multi-siRNA Delivery in Cancer Therapeutics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;By 2030, there could be 27 million incident
cases of cancer worldwide. Gene silencing therapies offer unique promise for
cancer treatment by providing highly potent and target-specific silencing of
genes during cancer progression. The major technological hurdles confronting the
use of gene silencing for cancer treatment are the needs for improved delivery
and protection from rapidly degradation under physiological conditions. To
tackle this problem, this program will design multi-functional Hepatitis B Virus
(HBV) capsids suitable for cell-specific delivery by targeting receptors that
are highly expressed on the surface of tumors. HBV capsids are designed to
release the gene silencing agents inside of cells based on pH changes. The
students trained on this project will be exposed to multi-disciplinary training
in the context of research that is anticipated to significantly advance
biomaterials capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The development of effective therapeutic vehicles for
siRNA delivery is of essential importance in cancer treatment. Virus-like-
particles (VLPs) based on the SplitCore HBV technology are ideally suited for
this purpose by providing a transformative approach to attach four unique
decorations (3 exterior, 1 interior) to each HBV monomer into a highly modular
nanoplatform suitable for customizable cell targeting and siRNA capture/release.
This significant advance can enable key increases in both cell specificity and
therapeutic efficacy through incorporation of well-defined combinations of
targeting ligands as well as siRNAs, ultimately creating hybrid structures that
fuse the delivery efficiency of viruses to the design versatility of non-viral
vehicles. The simplicity of the design allows the creation of highly adaptable,
multi-functional HBV capsids suitable for a range of cancer targets.