* 1609796
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Ruthenium Catalyzed Reactions Leading to New Polymer Architectures and Improved Chemical Recyclability of Plastics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Carney, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 121,760.00

Plastics are made from polymers and polymer manufacture represents one of the
largest and most dynamic sectors of the chemical industry. Companies are
targeting better performing polymer materials derived from more economical and
environmentally friendly (bio-renewable) feedstocks. These improvements are
often driven by chemical advancements in polymer synthesis research, such as the
work supported by this award. It is critical to the field of polymer chemistry
to improve the basic understanding of the relationships between polymer
structure and the properties of the resulting plastic, which is a primary goal
of this research. Undergraduate students, including low income and first
generation college students, perform laboratory work for this study and receive
valuable training to prepare them for graduate school and/or employment in the
chemical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Prof. Robertson of Northland College and Prof. Carney of the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire conduct collaborative research to better
understand the properties of ruthenium catalysts in polymerization reactions.
Specifically, this project focuses on making advancements in five key areas: (1)
preparation of polymers from bio-renewable monomers, such as
5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), (2) polymer alternatives to polyurethanes (found
in many paints, varnishes, adhesives, and foams), (3) increasing the utility of
commodity plastics, (4) depolymerization methods to produce useful chemicals
from waste plastics, and (5) synthesis of new ruthenium compounds to better
understand the impacts of chemical structure on the catalyst's performance.
Toward this end, the research team is synthesizing and studying new ruthenium
catalysts with structurally versatile N-phosphinoamidine and beta-diketimine
ligand backbones.