* 1609051
* Critical Mechanical Structures: Topology and Entropy
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Xiaoming Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2020
* USD 285,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research,
outreach, and education on soft materials and designing new mechanical
metamaterials using new concepts. The concept of mechanical stability, which
dates back to the research of J. C. Maxwell in 1864, governs many fascinating
phenomena in soft matter physics, from jamming of granular matter to self-
assembly of novel materials and nonlinear elasticity of biological tissue. At
the same time, this concept also guides the design of new mechanical
metamaterials that can perform unprecedented functions. Mechanical metamaterials
display novel mechanical properties acquired through their structure instead of
their composition.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the interplay between
mechanical instability and the deformations of a soft material that cost very
little energy, called floppy modes. Structures can be identified that are rigid
in the bulk but have soft edges that are easily deformed with a fundamental
property that peeling away the soft edges leads to a new material that also has
soft edges. Using recently developed concepts related to topology, the branch of
mathematics concerned with the properties of objects that are preserved under
deformations, material phases with different mechanical properties can be
identified. The PI will study these material phases, how robust they are against
imperfections and thermally driven vibrations, and how soft deformations can
transform a material between different material phases when a material is close
to a mechanical instability.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use the understanding gained
from the study of these "topologically protected" mechanical phases and the
transformations among them to design new mechanical metamaterials. The PI will
also study what will happen when these novel devices are made small enough that
thermal fluctuations are important, as well as producing these structures via
self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;This project not only aims at a fundamental
understanding of the physics of structures near mechanical instabilities, but
also provides guidance to the design of new generation mechanical materials that
have robust properties and functions. Moreover, the project includes outreach
activities which increase the awareness of the general public on soft matter
physics and its contributions to our daily life, as well as educational
activities that broaden participation of women and other minorities in physics
through outreach in local schools and group discussions among female physics
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research, outreach, and education on soft materials and designing
new mechanical metamaterials using new concepts. Central to many fascinating
phenomena in soft matter physics are a collection of floppy modes, which are
modes of deformations that cost little energy and signals mechanical
instability. Examples include the yielding of jammed granular matter and the
nonlinear elasticity of biological tissue. In the meantime, recently there has
been an explosion of investigations on mechanical metamaterials, which are
materials that gain their novel mechanical properties, such as negative
Poisson's ratio, negative compressibility, negative thermal expansion, phononic
band-gap, via their structure instead of their composition. Interestingly, in
many cases the key to realize the novel properties of these mechanical
metamaterials, is also a collection of floppy modes, which are often called
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate the topology
and entropy of structures that are close to mechanical instabilities and exhibit
floppy modes. The two main thrusts are to investigate: (1) Topological
transitions in mechanical systems and design principles of transformable
topological mechanical metamaterials, (2) Entropic effects on floppy modes,
which will be used to understand self-assembly of mechanical metamaterials as
well as design principles of machines and robots at small scales with mechanisms
robust against fluctuations. The methods that will be used in this project
include analytic theory and numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project stems from (1) the general classification of the unusual
mechanical and acoustic properties of critical mechanical structures, (2) the
characterization of novel topological transitions in mechanical systems, which
share intriguing similarities with transitions in quantum topological states of
matter, (3) the characterization of thermal fluctuation effects on floppy modes
that exhibit interesting interplay with topology and guides the selection of
robust mechanisms, (4) the designs and predictions on the self-assembly of novel
open structures.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach activities which
increase the awareness of the general public on soft matter physics and its
contributions to our daily life, as well as educational activities that broaden
participation of women and other minorities in physics through outreach in local
schools and group discussions among female physics students.