* 1609695
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Sensing and Estimation under Energy and Communication Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrea Goldsmith, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 322,387.00

Many of the sophisticated electronic devices ubiquitous today have been enabled
by digital signal processing (DSP) that converts the analog signals associated
with the physical world to the digital domain. Moore's law allows such digitized
signals to be processed and communicated with small, low-cost energy-efficient
digital hardware. Yet fundamental questions regarding the performance limits and
tradeoffs associated with the sampling, quantization, communication, and
reconstruction of analog data with respect to both fidelity and overall energy
consumption remain open. Better understanding of these performance limits and
tradeoffs will significant enhance capabilities for collection, processing, and
communication of analog sensor data beyond the current state of the art. These
capabilities are particularly acute for emerging sensor network applications in
health and wellness, security, energy-efficient infrastructures, and smart
cities, where many low-cost low-energy analog sensors will be collecting large
amounts of data and transmitting it to remote locations for processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate the interplay
between sampling, quantization, communication and reconstruction of analog
signals under memory constraints, communication constraints, and energy
constraints. The goal of the proposed work is to develop a fundamental rate-
distortion theory for the sampling, quantization, and reconstruction of analog
data subject to these constraints. Specific Shannon-theoretical limits for the
performance of combined sampling and source coding - the tradeoff between the
digitizer's sampling rate and quantization precision in terms of distortion will
be investigated. In addition, the optimal fidelity in the reconstruction of
analog data from a sequence of samples will be derived. Fundamental limits on
communication under energy constraints, where an analog sensor must digitize and
communication its data under finite energy constraints, will be determined.
Methods used will draw from prior work in Shannon capacity, rate-distortion
theory, joint source-channel coding and separation, sampling, estimation, and
statistics. In particular, after extending existing results on rate-distortion
theory to incorporate sub-Nyquist sampling, joint source-channel coding
techniques applied to the sampled analog data transmitted over a rate-limited
channel will be developed. Energy constraints will be incorporated based on
information-theoretic models for computation energy along with recent results on
finite-block-length codes and minimum energy-per-bit capacity.