* 1609672
* INFEWS N/P/H2O (SusChEM): Understanding structure and organization of receptors at water interfaces for discovery of phosphate recognition design principles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Amar Flood, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Amar Flood of the Department of
Chemistry at Indiana University and Professor Heather Allen at the Ohio State
University are developing an understanding of how to bind phosphate selectively
in water. Phosphorous is a non-renewable resource and a critical nutrient for
enhancing crop yields to help feed the growing population of the planet.
However, a significant amount of the phosphorous that is added as phosphate to
agricultural fields is lost as run-off into streams and rivers. The resulting
buildup of phosphate in natural waterways helps fuel algal blooms that kill off
all other aquatic life, can lead to toxins in the municipal water supplies and,
when in the oceans, leads to toxic seafood. For these reasons it is important to
develop new chemistries for recovering phosphate dissolved in water. This
project also involves the education of undergraduate and graduate students
through interdisciplinary research training, the development of "Grand
Challenge" lectures on closing the human phosphorous cycle, and the design of a
new general chemistry course series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Flood and
Allen aim to understand and discover the factors controlling the recognition of
phosphate by making use of synthetic receptors organized in monolayers at water
interfaces. These interfaces create potent environments with dielectric
constants much below bulk water offering the potential to substantially enhance
affinities, yet such interfaces are poorly understood. Such interfaces also
serve as fundamental models for the sequestration materials needed to help close
the human phosphorus cycle. This collaborative effort involves the synthesis of
a series of receptors, the determination of the affinity and selectivity of
phosphate binding to the receptors when they are organized at air-water
interfaces, and spectroscopic studies to ascertain the geometries of the
resulting phosphate-bound complexes.