* 1609545
* Interface Structure and Dynamics in Multiferroic Phase Transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Paul Evans, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 552,786.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The functional properties of emerging electronic
ceramics based on structurally and chemically complex metal oxides depend very
strongly on the crystal structures of these compounds. A series of recently
discovered materials have competing stable phases with different
crystallographic structures and can be reproducibly and rapidly transformed
between phases. These structural phases differ significantly in their
properties; new functionality in electronic and optical devices is enabled by
switching between phases. At present, the detailed structural mechanism of these
phase transformations, including the motion of the boundaries between phases, is
not clear. This project comprises a series of experimental studies designed to
probe the dynamics of this phase transformation, to answer key questions about
the physical mechanism involved, and ultimately to provide feedback to the
design of improved electroceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
single-phase complex oxide bismuth ferrite, a prototypical multiferroic complex
oxide, can be reproducibly transformed between structural phases with different
symmetries, optical properties, and magnetic structures. Prof. Evans focuses on
this model system because bismuth ferrite can be reliably synthesized using
epitaxial growth techniques (e.g., ion sputtering, pulsed laser deposition, and
chemical vapor deposition) such that it is near a phase boundary where phase
transitions can be utilized in electromechanical, optoelectronic, and magnetic
devices. Evans's initial results show that bismuth ferrite can be reproducibly
transformed between structural phases on timescales as short as tens of
nanoseconds, but these studies do not have sufficient time resolution to probe
the fundamental timescale of the transformation. Through this project, Evans
will (1) determine the short-time dynamics of rhombohedral behaviour (R-like)
and tetragonal behaviour (T-like) phase populations in bismuth ferrite using
picosecond-scale optical excitation and few-nanosecond-resolution electric field
pulses, (2) probe the strain distribution and structure of individual
R-like/T-like phase interfaces using X-ray nanobeam diffraction, (3) study the
structure and dynamics of individual R-like/T-like interfaces in applied
electric fields to determine the difference in dynamics arising from differing
interface structures, and (4) explore the extension of these concepts to the
interface dynamics in related phase-transforming complex oxides. Evans's work
uses emerging synchrotron X-ray nanodiffraction methods, including recent
advances in the analysis of diffraction patterns acquired with highly convergent
coherent X-ray beams. This project supports the professional preparation of
graduate students, participation of undergraduate students in research, targeted
outreach through the development and demonstration of educational activities,
and the dissemination of materials characterization and X-ray nanobeam
diffraction methods to the broader research community.