* 1609525
* Energy Landscape Approaches to Understanding Soft Glassy Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,09/30/2021
* John Crocker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computer simulation and
associated education aimed to help understand the mechanical properties of a
class of materials that are viscoelastic, being neither entirely solid nor
liquid, and which include soap foams, toothpaste, mayonnaise and living cells.
Remarkably, these seemingly very different materials respond very similarly to
being pulled or squeezed, and have largely defied deep understanding. This
project builds upon a recent breakthrough that stems from thinking of the system
as analogous to a particle rolling downhill on an abstract energy landscape.
That is, the seemingly complicated motion of the individual bubbles in a foam,
when projected into this abstract space, resembles the twists and turns of a
river canyon. The PIs will seek to better understand the shape of the landscape
that causes the 'river' to twist and turn as it does, to make new versions of
the model that give rise to 'rivers' having different shapes and to add real-
world detail to the model. Similar 'landscape' approaches have also been found
to be useful in machine learning algorithms with many applications, suggesting
that the algorithms we develop and our findings may find useful application
outside the field of Materials Research. This project will train both graduate
and undergraduate students in this important state of the art research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and simulation research and education to understand soft
glassy materials, a broad class of materials including foams, emulsions, pastes,
slurries and even living cells, that share a common set of unusual viscoelastic
properties whose physical origins remain deeply mysterious. It will build upon
recent studies using a foam model that show that the unusual mechanics of soft
glassy materials - power-law rheology, super-diffusive particle motion and
avalanches - are due to fractal properties of the system?s path in configuration
space. Specifically, it will extend the model to capture the effects of viscous
damping and applied shear, produce models having configuration paths with
different fractal dimensions as well as probe the fractal geometry of the energy
landscape itself. The net result is the development of a suite of tools for the
actuation of non-equilibrium systems to probe and understand the geometry of
energy landscapes and its relation to material properties. More broadly, it
appears that the behavior of many complex adaptive systems, including the cells
in our bodies, may be determined by the minimization of some very complex energy
or fitness landscape embedded in a high-dimensional space, whose in-depth study
is only now becoming practical due to advances in computation. This
interdisciplinary project will provide ample opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate student training in the development of state of the art tools for
studying such high-dimensional energy and fitness landscapes. The tools
developed in this proposal will be disseminated openly, and we anticipate them
finding utility outside of material science.