* 1609447
* Investigating the Structural Coupling of Main chain and Sidechain Packing in the Solution Structures of Amphiphilic Coil-Comb Block Copolymers with Crystallizable Sidechains
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Donghui Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 647,642.00

Synthetic polymers (commonly known as plastics) have a wide range of important
applications in our daily life. The properties of polymers are governed by their
chemical structures and can be tailored through chemical synthesis. With the
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Donghui Zhang of the Louisiana State
University designs and synthesizes a type of polymer called polypeptoids.
Polypeptoids are structurally very similar to polypeptides of proteins. Her
research group seeks to understand how polypeptoids organize themselves to form
very small objects of certain shapes and sizes in solution. This knowledge can
inform further development of functional materials that are useful for
biomedical applications (e.g., drug delivery carriers). This project provides an
interdisciplinary training environment for graduate and undergraduate student
researchers at all levels. Development of new course materials and outreach
activities that are connected to the research topic serve to modernize the
scientific curriculum, stimulate interest in chemistry, and enhance public
awareness of scientific discoveries and impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on studying amphiphilic, coil-comb shaped block copolymers (BCP)
of polypeptoids that have crystallizable sidechains. The goal is to understand
the fundamental relationship between the molecular structures and the
supramolecular assemblies of these copolymers in dilute solution. It is
hypothesized that a highly polar backbone and hydrophobic crystallizing
sidechains can lead to hierarchical ordering of the polypeptoid block copolymers
at small length scales (in the sub-nanometer range) that are difficult to access
by conventional means. BCPs based on polypeptoids are uniquely suited as models
for this study due to the strong structural coupling of the main chain and
sidechain crystalline packing, the strong tendency of the polar main chains and
non-polar sidechains to undergo microphase segregation and the synthetic
versatility in tuning the sidechain and main chain structures. Considering the
wide range of polymers that have or can be readily modified with n-alkyl
sidechains to undergo sidechain crystallization, this study is expected to have
broad implications on the design of BCP nanostructures with hierarchical
ordering and reversible thermo-responsive characteristics.