* 1609817
* Understanding and Controlling Subcritical Crack Growth in Large Freestanding Metallic Nanosheets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Christopher Muhlstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 402,439.00

Non-technical Abstract

Thin metallic films have become a critical feature of many residential and
industrial applications. They coat windows to keep our homes cool and energy
efficient, enable the integrated circuits in electronic devices and appliances,
allow for turbine engines to run more fuel efficiently, and are the basis of
countless other products. However, their use is limited by the fact that the
processing conditions for creating one film are often incompatible with those
needed to make others, or even to deposit them on certain types of materials.
This issue is problematic because thin films are extremely fragile, and thus far
it has generally not been possible to remove them from one substrate and
transfer them to another without tearing them apart. This research program will
establish how to control crack growth in ultrathin films, so that they can be
adhered to other materials after their production. This work will enable new
materials to be fabricated and existing ones to be integrated to create a new
generation of products and devices. These new scientific insights will be
developed in concert with the education of graduate students, who will be
prepared to use them to solve critical industrial and societal problems.

Technical Abstract

Ultrathin (< 100 nm) metal films have a variety of applications, but their use
is limited by the fact that freestanding metallic films are prone to crack and
tear. As a result, they generally cannot survive handling and assembly unless
they are on substrates. However, if freestanding, ultrathin metal films could be
fabricated and handled without damaging them, their nanoenabled optical,
mechanical, and electrical properties could be integrated with materials that
are usually considered incompatible. This new capability would lead to a richer
use of the special properties of these films. This research program will enable
the integration of these ultrathin metal films by using laser micromachining,
small-scale mechanical testing systems, electron microscopy, and finite element
modeling to establish the subcritical crack growth mechanisms of freestanding
ultrathin Au films. A unique feature of this program is that large sheets (> 5
mm in-plane extent) are used to evaluate the anomalously large process zones
that micrometer-scale specimens cannot capture. Experiments will be conducted on
low force mechanical testing systems equipped with in situ optical systems to
quantify deformation and damage accumulation. The relevant damage accumulation
mechanisms will be identified using optical, scanning electron, and transmission
electron microscopy. Guided by these insights, heat treatments and near-
monolayer thickness metal layers will be used to engineer the tearing resistance
of the ultrathin films. Furthermore, the development of thin sheet tearing crack
tip parameters will enable fracture mechanics-based durability and life
calculations. The resulting ability to engineer damage-tolerant freestanding
metal films will allow engineers to create devices from virtually any metallic
thin film material.