* 1609694
* Reactive Fiber Spinning: Developing Fundamental Predictive Process Capabilities and Process-Structure-Property Relationships
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Chris Ellison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 10/31/2016
* USD 368,376.00

1609694 PI: Ellison&lt;br/&gt;Title: Reactive Fiber Spinning: Developing
Fundamental Predictive Process Capabilities and Process-Structure-Property
Relationships&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonwoven fiber industry is a multi-
billion dollar global industry that produces fibers for a broad spectrum of
applications, such as filtration, personal hygiene and disposable medical
apparel. Recent advancements in fiber production techniques have facilitated new
applications for advanced fibrous materials in diverse fields, such as
optoelectronics, regenerative medicine, piezoelectrics, ceramics, etc. With
these advanced applications, a need exists to develop techniques to produce a
wider range of fibrous materials with high performance and multifunctional
capabilities. Reactive fiber spinning is a solvent-free, low-energy technique
that presents an attractive alternative to melt-blowing and electrospinning for
large-scale production of polymer fibers. The proposed research aims to develop
a fundamental understanding of the reactive fiber spinning process by studying
the interactions between various process parameters and the fundamental
mechanisms that control fiber formation and
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing inspiration from nature, the Ellison
group recently developed a method for making fibers that uses light to trigger a
photopolymerization reaction in nonvolatile liquid monomer mixtures that are
already prevalent and commercially available in industry. Extrusion of the
nonvolatile liquid monomer mixtures through a capillary at high speed is
followed by the application of a drawing force and simultaneous photocuring in
flight, producing solid smooth fibers with average diameters as small as 1
micron. These fibers are competitive with the smallest fibers produced by almost
all commercial melt blowing lines, the most popular commercial process for
manufacturing thermoplastic nonwoven fibers. The proposed research will
investigate the interactions between various process and monomer mixture
parameters to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that give rise to fiber
formation, and control morphological variations and properties (thermal,
mechanical, and structural), during reactive fiber spinning of polymer fibers.
The ultimate objective is to develop a predictive and universal process
operating diagram that relates curing kinetics, monomer mixture characteristics,
and process related parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed reactive
fiber spinning technique has significant potential impact related to green
chemistry and sustainable manufacturing of polymer fibers. The PI proposes a
strong outreach program that pairs graduate students with high-school teachers
(Teaching Fellows) to jointly conduct research and develop high-school
curricula. The proposed research will benefit from the teacher participants,
while the teachers will become advocates of science and engineering program to
K-12 students. The development of interactive modules and participation in
programs, such as Explore UT and Introduce a Girl to Engineering, will enable
the PI and his graduate students to engage and educate a broad cross-section of
K-12 students and the general public about modern polymeric materials.