* 1609131
* Distributed Control for Demand Dispatch: The Creation of Virtual Energy Storage from Flexible Loads
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Sean Meyn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

Ostensibly free energy from the wind and the sun comes with unwanted volatility,
such as ramps with the setting sun or with gusts of wind. Controllable
generators have managed supply-demand balance of power in the past, but this is
becoming increasingly costly with increasing penetration of renewable energy. It
has been argued since the 1980s that consumers should be put in the loop, with
the idea that "demand response" can be managed to help to create the needed
supply-demand balance. However, consumers use power for a reason, and expect
some guarantees on the quality of service (QoS) they receive. For example, the
temperature in a building or refrigerator must remain within strict bounds.
Moreover, the behavior of some consumers is unpredictable, while the grid
operator requires predictable controllable resources to maintain reliability.
The goal of this project is to create a science for "demand dispatch," which is
virtual energy storage using flexible loads. A major outcome will be the
creation of resources for grid regulation that are as reliable and responsive as
giant fleets of batteries. By design, the impact to consumers of electricity
will be undetectable in many cases; strict bounds on QoS will be maintained in
all cases. The potential economic impact of these new resources is enormous.
California plans to spend billions of dollars on batteries that will provide
only a small fraction of the balancing services that can be obtained using
demand dispatch. The potential impact of developing this methodology and
associated technology is no less than a sustainable energy future becoming
possible with the right mix of infrastructure and control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create virtual
energy storage resources via demand dispatch to be used for grid-level
regulation, ramping, peak smoothing, and even recovery from contingencies such
as generation faults, while ensuring that QoS to consumers obeys strict
constraints. Demand dispatch can only be realized by devising distributed
control algorithms that meet multiple, potentially conflicting objectives: the
grid needs high quality resources for regulation; the consumer expects that
water supply is not interrupted, fish in the refrigerator stays fresh, and the
climate within a building remains within desired bounds. The project aims to
create a science for demand dispatch based on these essential
ingredients:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) "Local intelligence" is required to ensure
local QoS constraints are met, while simultaneously providing reliable service
to the grid. This is realized through local stochastic control at each load as
part of an overall distributed control architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Capacity of service to the grid is a function of QoS constraints. The nature of
these relationships will be investigated in part through the creation of
prototype hardware. One outcome of these experiments will be the creation of
load simulation code that will be used as part of the project, and shared with
others working in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Insight from cost/QoS
tradeoff curves will be applied in the creation of market incentives for
consumer engagement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Topic (i) presents significant
scientific challenges. This will require the development of stochastic control /
Markov Decision Process techniques that will be a focus of the project. Analysis
is based on related ideas from information theory and extensions of concepts
from the theory of general state space Markov models. Grid-level analysis
requires concepts from deterministic control theory such as passivity, along
with traditional power systems technology. The scientific foundations to be
developed have applications beyond power. The proposed computational tools for
constructing local optimal policies are novel, and applicable to general classes
of stochastic control models. The distributed control architecture is also
likely to find applications in many fields.