* 1609371
* Miniaturized Reconfigurable Wearable Antenna for Dynamic On-Body Wireless Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Brian Garner, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2022
* USD 426,714.00

The emerging technology of wireless body-area networks promises to transform
health care for millions of people whose daily lives are severely restricted by
chronic conditions such as heart disease, stroke, cancer, and diabetes. Advances
in miniature sensors and wireless communications have opened the possibility for
wearable, on-body sensors that remotely and continuously monitor physiological
vital signs and transmit alerts to medical caregivers who can intervene in case
of impending emergencies. A major hurdle is that the sensors' antennas require
relatively large amounts of electrical power to reliably transmit data over
extended periods of time during regular daily life. More efficient, optimized
antenna designs are needed so that sensor batteries can be small and long-
lasting, thereby allowing sensors to be convenient and unobtrusive. To
facilitate efficient on-body antenna designs, this project combines experimental
and computer modeling methods to study and characterize how electromagnetic
waves transmit over and around the moving human body. Insights from analysis of
measurement and simulation data guide the design of reconfigurable, wearable
antennas that facilitate efficient, on-body wireless communication for
continuous, remote health monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to study on-body electromagnetic wave propagations during human daily
activities in order to guide the design of 3-D printed, reconfigurable, wearable
antennas for unobtrusive, power-efficient, on-body wireless communications. Both
measurement and simulation approaches are utilized in this project: i) three-
dimensional body motions and complex electromagnetic transmission
characteristics are simultaneously measured during common human activities for
various on-body antenna configurations and in various environments; and ii) a
three-dimensional modeling framework that reproduces experimental results and
predicts wave transmission characteristics is established in electromagnetic
simulation software. One key intellectual merit of this approach is relating on-
body electromagnetic characteristics to body postures and antenna kinematics.
Another key intellectual merit of the proposed work is designing and creating
3-D printed, electrically-small, reconfigurable, wearable antennas that couple
radiation power into the dominant propagation mechanism. These advances will
transform life-saving on-body communication technologies with applications that
benefit patients, public safety officers, soldiers, and astronauts.