* 1609299
* Printed Plastic Low-Power NDR Electronics for the Internet of Everything
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Charles Winter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 506,400.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The team at Ohio State
University, through an accidental discovery under NSF, is undergraduate research
funding, developed and advanced a new organic tunnel diode using a hybrid
junction incorporating a thin metal oxide and a solution-based organic
semiconductor atop. This patented device is the first such structure to
genuinely exhibit selective tunneling at room temperature using a scalable
printable process. The current versus voltage characteristics are unique amongst
semiconductor devices, looking like a capital letter (N). So, unlike most
devices, a line drawn through this (N) provides three intersections. The middle
is unstable and unusable, but the first and third provide for a simple way to
store 1-bit, a (0) or a (1), using a single tunnel diode with another circuit
element, such as a second tunnel diode or transistor, as the load. This project
builds upon previous advances by building a multi-institutional team (Wayne
State University, Tampere University of Technology, Aalto University and
Picosun) spanning two countries (USA and Finland). The properties of this thin
metal oxide tunneling barrier are key to the discovered operation. This project
seeks a new way to deposit this layer that would permit large area deposition
across flexible substrates, reaching a meter wide. Through collaborations with
Finnish industry, we will increase the competitiveness and position of US
industry and advance the intelligence and functionality of organic electronics,
solar cells, electronic printing and atomic layer deposition technology.
Participation of industry and international collaborators will broaden the
culture of innovation and focus the research output towards strategic
commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Ohio State University (OSU)
proposes a 3-year bi-national (USA, Finland) project to advance printed organic
electronics, particularly using organic tunnel diodes (OTD) and circuits
integrated with organic field effect transistors (OFET). Their unique negative
differential resistance (NDR) will reduce OFET device count, while concurrently
reducing power consumption. Energy thrifty circuits will be key for autonomously
powered sensor nodes for a dense network of trillions of objects for the
Internet of Things (IoT). International teaming with Tampere Univ. of Technology
(TUT-Finland) and Picosun (Finland), an atomic layer deposition (ALD) tool
manufacturer, will provide collaborative opportunities for large-area rapid
roll-to-roll (R2R) technologies to prototypical scale-up of the existing
fundamental studies while enhancing materials discovery and understanding. A key
aim of this project is working with Wayne State University (WSU) for novel ALD
precursor and oxidizer discovery and process development to explore non-
stoichiometric ALD for metal oxide tunnel barriers with engineering oxygen
vacancies (energy level of defects, density-of-states, etc.) that critically
control OTD defect related tunneling processes and therefore device performance
based on NDR. Advances by this team for the first conjugated polymer based
tunnel diode circuitry using room temperature NDR enable new opportunities for
low-power consumption portable circuitry (logic, memory and mixed-signal). NDR
circuitry can provide (i) component count reduction (more computational power
per unit area), (ii) lower power consumption (fewer devices per logic function).
Tremendous benefits to society and humankind: 1) Low-cost, ultra-low power
autonomous plastic electronic memory, logic and wireless systems; 2) Advanced
high-K dielectrics compatible with the limited thermal budget of organics; 3)
Understanding of defects and their role in tunneling transport through thin
high-K dielectrics; 4) Large-area, R2R electronic printing for high volume
production. Students and international exchange: A full-time graduate student
will be directly supported here. REU supplements will supplement this team with
1-2 undergraduates, along with international scientific visitations.