* 1609249
* Support for the 11th International Conference on Bulk Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 04/30/2017
* USD 12,476.00

Nontechnical Abstract

Metallic glasses were discovered over one-half of a century ago. It was
immediately clear that these are fascinating novel materials. They have led to
new insights into the reasons for glass formation and the processes by which a
liquid turns into a glass upon cooling. Additionally, sustained research has
shown that they have superior properties that make them of potential
technological interest. These include strengths greater than those of steels,
high hardness and good corrosion resistance. However, the first glasses required
that the liquid be cooled at rates approaching one million degrees per second,
limiting their practical applications. About 20 years ago new families of
metallic glasses (?Bulk Metallic Glasses,? or BMGs) were discovered, which could
be formed and processed in ways similar to those used for more common glasses.
This caused an intense resurgence of research that now appears to be moving
metallic glasses from the laboratory into the market place. To sustain this fast
paced fundamental and technological research, frequent conferences and workshops
are needed for scientists and engineers to present new results and exchange
ideas. Because of the intense activity of this field in Asia, almost all of the
meetings of the BMG conference series, the central conference for bulk metallic
glasses, have taken place there. The only one held outside of Asia was BMG IV,
held in 2005 in the United States. Travel expenses and limited research funds
has limited the participation of US scientists, post-docs and students in these
conferences. The support provided for BMG XI, which is to be held from June 5 ?
9, 2016 on the campus of Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, will
enable broader participation of US students and young researchers.

&#8195; Technical Abstract

Metallic glasses, first discovered in 1960, remained primarily a laboratory
curiosity for most of the time between 1960 and 1990. The extremely high cooling
rates required for the liquid to form a glass (105 oC to 106 oC) limited their
usefulness. In spite of this, a few applications did emerge during this time.
Their combination of high electrical resistivity, low susceptibility and low
magnetic coercivity, for example, led to their use as core materials for high-
quality electrical transformers. In the 1990s, new families of metallic glasses
(?Bulk Metallic Glasses,? or BMGs) were discovered that formed at much lower
cooling rates and could be processed under conditions similar to those used for
silicate glasses. This led to an intense research activity, now resulting in the
emergence of metallic glasses as potentially very important new technological
materials. Because the research activity is particularly intense in Asia, almost
all of the meetings in the BMG conference series (the central conference for
bulk metallic glasses) have taken place there. The last BMG meeting outside of
Asia was held in the US in 2005 (BMG IV). The increasingly limited research
funding and significant travel expenses have resulted in small US participation
in these conferences, particularly among young US researchers and students. To
maintain a vibrant research activity, it is critical that researchers meet
frequently to exchange ideas and present new results. The lack of significant US
participation in this series, particularly among our future scientific
leadership, hampers US advancements in this important field. To address this,
BMG XI will be held from June 5 ? 9, 2016 on the campus of Washington University
in St. Louis, Missouri. Many outstanding issues of basic and practical
importance will be discussed, including glass design, stability and relaxation,
structure, dynamics, properties, and applications. For the first time, panels
will discuss establishing testing standards and explore new manufacturing
possibilities that take full advantage of the unique properties of metallic
glasses. Two keynote, 10 plenary, 22 invited and 58 contributed oral
presentations are scheduled, along with 28 poster presentations. To encourage
greater participation among US graduate student and young faculty, funds will be
used to provide travel and/or registration assistance. By hosting BMG XI in the
US, we are increasing the US participation, which will allow US researchers to
be exposed to cutting edge ideas and results, and provide new opportunities for
interaction and collaborations.