* 1609394
* RET Site:  Physically and Biologically Inspired Computational Models and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2021
* USD 597,047.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at
Notre Dame University. The site focuses on engaging local high school teachers
in summer research projects that explore computational models inspired by
physical and biological systems. The RET Site will develop a strong partnership
between Notre Dame and schools in the greater South Bend area, including public,
private, and parochial schools. The site will recruit cohorts of high school
teachers in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
who will work on compelling research projects with faculty mentors and research
teams in the summer and then will implement related inquiry-based learning
modules and activities in their classrooms during the academic year. The
interdisciplinary nature of the research theme will provide a fertile ground for
developing creative and appealing high school lessons and teaching activities in
biology, physics, math, and other engineering disciplines that align with state
and national curricular standards.

RET Site teachers will attend a 7-week summer institute to participate in
cutting-edge research projects with mentoring from engineering faculty who lead
current research programs in the three areas of emphasis. The first area
includes deep learning algorithms that solve problems such as language
understanding and a behavior prediction most commonly using deep convolutional
neural networks. These data-hungry and computationally intensive methods tend to
produce models that are far more accurate than their conventional counterparts.
The second thread involves non-Boolean/non-von Neumann neuromorphic hardware
that processes data in an analog fashion. Systems that function like this could
be inspired by the human retina which operates in a continuous fashion and
processes continuous input flows with real spatial-temporal dynamics. The third
thread encompasses computation models that are directly inspired by physics.
This includes areas such as optically inspired computing models involving
elements such as spin waves, magnetic lenses, and coupled oscillators to process
information. These projects will provide true in-depth learning about
computation, waves, and optics which are fundamental to the high school physics
curriculum. Working with PIs and faculty mentors, teachers will develop
innovative, standards-compliant curriculum modules and participate in a number
of professional development activities. The teacher-created modules and lessons
will be disseminated local through a RET handbook and on the Notre Dame RET
website as well as at the annual workshop and disseminated through
TeachEngineering.org, a nationally recognized repository for searchable,
standards-based engineering curricula. Extensive follow-up activities are
planned throughout the academic year to ensure the translation of lab
experiences into classroom practice, and to foster and strengthen long-term
partnership between engineering faculty and the local school districts. A third-
party professional program evaluator will track and evaluate the program and
provide feedback for improvement.