* 1609912
* Collaborative Research: Development of Optoelectronic Devices for the Far-Infrared
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Daniel Wasserman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2020
* USD 231,500.00

Title: Development of Optoelectronic Devices for the Far-
Infrared&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General Abstract: The objective of this research
effort is to develop optical materials and devices that control and emit far-
infrared (far-IR) light with wavelengths between 20-60microns. There are a
number of important applications for light in this wavelength range, ranging
from imaging for astronomy and cosmology efforts and sensing of aromatic
hydrocarbons, asphaltenes, and biological materials. However, the far-IR is an
extremely challenging wavelength range to work in, with little to no optical
infrastructure for either conducting fundamental research or developing optical
devices and systems, making the far-IR arguably one of the few remaining
frontiers of the electromagnetic spectrum. The challenges of the far-IR largely
stem from the lattice vibrations (phonons) of most of the semiconductors used
for optoelectronic devices across the electromagnetic spectrum. In the far-IR,
phonons strongly absorb light and conventional device designs are no longer
appropriate. In this program we will look to harness these lattice vibrations
and utilize them to generate electromagnetic radiation, or light. In doing so,
we will develop an architecture for engineering designer far-IR materials and
emitters that incorporate unique light-matter interactions in an oft-neglected
portion of the optical spectrum, resulting in an optical toolkit for the far-IR
and a new generation of optical devices. At the same time, we will undertake
both educational and outreach efforts, as well as a coherent effort to grow the
visibility and impact of far-IR optoelectronics research, which has no agreed-
upon dissemination systems (journals, conferences, workshops), commercial
vendors, or even nomenclature. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: Technological developments over the past several decades have
significantly increased our ability to generate, control, and detect
electromagnetic (EM) radiation across an ever-increasing range of wavelengths.
Much of this progress has been spurred by the rapid growth of semiconductor
optoelectronic technologies. Yet the far-infrared (far-IR, 20-60 Ã¬m) wavelength
range has not shared in this explosive growth. Ironically, a primary reason for
the lack of progress in the far-IR lies in the semiconductor crystal lattice
itself: characteristic vibrations of the lattice, known as phonons, interact
strongly with far-IR light and result in strong optical absorption. This program
aims to explore and develop a set of technologies, materials, and phenomena
which will serve as the technical foundation of an optical infrastructure for
the largely undeveloped far-IR wavelength range. In particular, we propose to
develop optical materials and opto-phononic-electronic (OPE) devices that
control and emit far-IR light by engineering electronic transport, surface
waves, and the interaction of these surface waves with bulk optical phonons. In
doing so, we will develop an architecture for engineering designer far-IR
materials and OPE emitters that incorporate unique light-matter interactions in
an oft-neglected portion of the optical spectrum, resulting in an optical
toolkit for the far-IR and a new generation of optical devices. Concurrent with
the technical thrusts of the proposed effort, we will: i) bring STEM-based
activities into K12 classrooms and after-school programs and ii) work to
cultivate an intellectual community with a shared interest in the far-IR by
means of virtual communities and special issues in peer-reviewed publications.