* 1609973
* GOALI: Fundamental Approaches to Atomic Layer Etching
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* S. Ismat Shah, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the
science and technology for etching metallic films one atomic later at a time.
This know-how is most important in the field of memory devices, specifically
based on magnetic principles used in computers, digital cameras, mobile phones
and other similar devices. These devices based on the technology developed
should demonstrate lower power consumption, smaller sizes, and lower cost of
production compared to the other modern alternatives. However, to achieve this
goal, very high level of control over making very thin metallic layers is
necessary. The thickness of these layers must be highly reproducible to ensure
reliable memory performance. For the metal components required, it is difficult
to deposit them by traditional methods; however, it is possible to deposit
relatively thick layers of these materials and then partially etch them away
with the atomic layer precision. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the obvious
advantages of capabilities to make simpler, cheaper, faster, and more reliable
memory devices this work can affect a wide variety of the systems that are at
the core of national interests, including aerospace and military systems, image
storage and analysis, data logging and many other applications. The combination
of university and industrial research in this grant will offer special
educational and training opportunities to the students and facilitate this
development to reach the marketplace more
quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project will target new approaches for
removal of deposited metals in a layer-by-layer manner through atomic layer
etching (ALEt). One of the prime targets for potential application of ALEt is in
the field of Magnetic Random Access Memory (MRAM). Atomic Layer Etching (ALEt)
requires reacting a metallic surface with a precursor molecule that saturates
the surface and reduces the binding of the first layer of atoms to the bulk. A
second input, be it chemical, energetic, or some combination of the two, will
cause the first layer of metal atoms (with their associated ligands) to desorb.
The second layer of atoms will now be exposed to the saturating precursor,
followed by the desorption steps. As the process proceeds, the atoms will be
removed from the surface layer by layer. Fe, Co, Ni, and Pt thin films deposited
on a Si substrate will be used as the initial targets. The experimental approach
will take two tracks. First, model systems will be designed, modeled, and
tested. This approach will build on the understanding obtained through studying
atomic layer deposition (ALD). A suite of surface characterization techniques
will be coupled with high-resolution microscopies to understand these processes
at the atomic level. In the second approach, work with American Air Liquide will
study the ALEt process in manufacturing systems including temperature controlled
wafer chucks, mass flow controllers for the reactants, and plasma sources. These
systems will also be equipped so that the ALEt process can be monitored in
operando. A model processing system will be constructed at the University of
Delaware so that the composition and chemistry of the surface can be studied at
any point in the process, in-situ studies. At the end of the proposal, working
processes for various materials, including those of importance in MRAM
application, will be developed. A deeper understanding of the physical
components of the ALEt process will also be achieved.