* 1609076
* Development and Study of Structurally-Dynamic Covalent Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Stuart Rowan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 738,441.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional polymers or
plastics have been designed to minimize degradation (e.g. by breaking of
covalent bonds) and as such maintain their mechanical properties over their
lifetime. This has led to a wide range of very useful materials (such as fibers,
plastics and adhesives) that are ubiquitous in our daily lives. One issue with
such materials is that when they break or degrade it can be difficult and/or not
cost effective to repair or recycle them. What if plastics could be accessed
that would allow them to either heal scratches or deformations or to be more
efficiently recycled. One way to achieve this is to design into the polymer
structure reversible bonds that can be broken and remade upon application of a
relatively small amount of heat or light. With this NSF funding the Rowan group
is working on a range of different stimuli-responsive reversible bonds that will
be incorporated into polymers and used to access new classes of
responsive/adaptive materials. A key component of these systems is the ability
to systematically control the stimulus required to access the reversible
character of the bond which in turn allows them to be tailored for different
applications. With these materials the Rowan group will focus on the development
of (1) new soft actuators that act like 'polymeric muscles' and offer
applications to (soft) robotics, (2) materials that exhibit both scratch-healing
characteristics as well as enhanced toughness to extend their useful operational
lifetime, and (3) on-demand reversible glues and adhesives. This project
involves graduate and undergraduate students, students from local high schools,
including students from underserved and predominately minority neighborhoods of
Chicago. The integrated approach of this project provides students at all levels
with an exciting learning environment and broad research experiences. In
addition, Prof. Rowan and his research group will design new hands-on
demonstrations for a Museum outreach program entitled "Nature's Materials",
which is part of the Cleveland Museum of Natural History's "Winter Discovery
Day" on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day. This program aims (i) to expose the
local community to polymers and how Nature's materials can help us create a
sustainable planet, and (ii) to train current graduate students on how to
communicate to and educate the general public and younger students about science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of dynamic bonds (that can undergo
reversible exchange) into a polymer network imparts new adaptive properties onto
the materials. The adaptive properties come from the network's ability to alter
its architecture (and/or composition) through dynamic bond exchange and as such
have been termed structurally-dynamic polymers. Depending on the specific type,
placement and amount of the dynamic bond incorporated into the network the
resulting films will have the ability to be re-processable/re-moldable, exhibit
healing and/or shape-memory properties, and even open the door to materials that
have enhanced toughness, stress relaxation, and/or adaptive adhesion
capabilities. This proposal outlines the synthetic as well as structural (via
NMR, MALDI-MS, FT-IR, UV, POM and WAXS/SAXS) and mechanical (rheology, tensile
testing, and dynamic mechanical thermal analysis) studies on three different
classes of structurally-dynamic polymers, focusing not only on investigating the
basic science of these systems but also on targeting specific applications that
suit the specific dynamic behavior of the film's chemistry. Specifically, the
Rowan group will focus on the synthesis, characterization, and investigation of
(1) poly(disulfides), (2) thia-Michael adduct-containing polymers and (3)
poly(alkylureas). While poly(disulfides) networks are known and have been
investigated as healable materials, their use to access photo-adaptive liquid
crystalline elastomers is new. Specific interest is in accessing 3D actuating
films with this class of material. The thia-Michael reaction can be dynamic at
room temperature, but to date, this class of dynamic bond has received little
attention in the polymer field. The advantage of this bond is that both its
exchange thermodynamics and kinetics can be systematically altered by changing
the electronics of the alkene (Michael acceptor). The final class of dynamic
bond the PI will investigate is the most commercially relevant and is based on
bulky alkylureas. Alkylureas are used as blocked (protected) isocyanates in the
polyurethane industry that deblock at temperatures &gt;100Â°C. The PI will
target/develop alkylureas and derivatives that can deblock at lower
temperatures. The goal for these last two classes of materials is to develop
structure/property relationships focusing on their solid state mechanical and
adaptive properties.