* 1609521
* OP: A new THz technology: artificial dielectrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/29/2020
* USD 314,453.00

Terahertz waves, spanning frequencies ranging from about 0.1 THz to about 5 THz
(wavelengths from 3 mm to 0.06 mm), are ideal for a wide variety of applications
in communications, homeland security, medical diagnosis, non-destructive
evaluation, quality control, and environmental monitoring. In fact, the
terahertz field has become one of the most exciting research frontiers in recent
years, stimulating a great deal of interest even in the popular culture. The
above potential benefits to society have fueled the need for more versatile and
energy efficient technologies to control and manipulate terahertz waves,
compared to what is currently available. Therefore, this research aims to
develop a new terahertz technology based on what are known as artificial
dielectrics. Artificial dielectrics are man-made media that mimic the properties
of naturally occurring dielectric media, or even manifest properties that cannot
generally occur in nature. For example, the well-known dielectric property, the
refractive index, which usually has a value greater than unity, can have a value
less than unity in an artificial dielectric. This new technology will be
analogous to the emerging technology of metamaterials that is revolutionizing
the field of optics. Metamaterials are also man-made media that can control the
flow of light even in counter-intuitive ways. In fact, the proposed technology
offers many of the same intriguing possibilities as that of metamaterials. A key
advantage of the technology is the ability to engineer the refractive index
continuously, thereby being able to realize inhomogeneous media. In contrast,
continuous variation of the electromagnetic properties is more challenging to
achieve in metamaterials. Therefore, if one considers the impact metamaterials
has had on the field of optics, the proposed research is bound to have an
enormous impact in advancing the field of terahertz-wave sciences. This proposal
will also promote educational outreach in terms of training and educating
graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students. This artificial dielectric
concept provides an intriguing engineering platform to introduce budding
scientists to fundamental physical
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research
program is to develop a new technology for the control and manipulation of
terahertz waves utilizing artificial dielectrics. During the course of this
project, several key terahertz-wave devices will be developed via this new
technology. These artificial- dielectric devices will have far better
performance than existing similar functional devices, and will enable
capabilities that are currently not available in the terahertz-wave regime. The
scope of the research can be divided into two main thrusts. In one thrust,
devices will be developed utilizing the homogenous version of the artificial
dielectric. These devices will include wave- plates and polarizing beam-
splitters. In the other thrust, devices will be developed utilizing the
inhomogeneous version of the artificial dielectric. These will include gradient-
index (GRIN) devices, such as the Maxwell' fish-eye lens and the Luneburg lens.
The experimental work will be carried out using time-domain terahertz systems
that are capable of generating and detecting picosecond pulses comprising of a
baseband terahertz spectrum. In these systems, the transmitter and receiver
modules are fiber coupled to provide the necessary degrees of freedom since beam
paths are not always in line-of-sight. Importantly, this artificial-dielectric
technology will resolve the long-standing problem of realizing high-index
gradients, which has hampered the practical use of powerful GRIN devices. This
work will also shed more light into the predicted super-resolution (perfect
imaging that is not limited by the wavelength) phenomenon associated with the
Maxwell' fish-eye lens. These research developments will have an enormous impact
on the terahertz field by providing many new components and capabilities for the
control and manipulation of terahertz waves.