* 1609434
* Rethinking the Reactivity of Nanoscale Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Mayer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 483,425.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor James Mayer of Yale University
is developing new fundamental understanding of chemical reactions of a variety
of metal oxide nanocrystals. Nanocrystals are tiny particles that contain
thousands of atoms. While they are much larger than chemical molecules, which
contain only a few atoms, they are still much smaller than solid materials that
are large enough to see with the naked eye, containing trillions of atoms.
Nanoscale materials are unique because they have sizes intermediate between
molecules and solids, but sometimes have properties not easily predicted by
averaging the two size extremes. Nanocrystals are also unusual in that a large
fraction of the atoms are at or very near the surface, so rearrangement,
exchange and addition of atoms in the particle with the atmosphere or a
surrounding liquid is much easier for a nanocrystal than for a bulk solid in
contact with the same gas or liquid, where the atoms are typically inside the
solid and not accessible. Professor Mayer is studying particular metal oxide
nanocrystals, including titanium dioxide (the pigment in white paint and a
primary component of dye-sensitized solar cells), zinc oxide (a UV protectant in
some sunscreens), and cerium oxide (a key part of automobile catalytic
converters). The PI and his team are performing experiments that elucidate a new
way of thinking about chemical processes at the surfaces of these materials. The
results from these studies should have broad impact in many fields, since metal
oxides are extremely common materials. The broad and fundamental approach
provides an excellent training environment for graduate students. The Mayer lab
is also sharing with middle and high school students the excitement of
developing a new way of thinking about an important area of science, through
open houses and hands-on summer programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation and
reduction reactions at semiconducting metal oxide/solution interfaces are
pervasive, from catalysis to the environment. Work in the Mayer laboratory at
Yale University, supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program at NSF, is developing a new paradigm for such
chemical processes at oxide surfaces. Mayer and co-workers are studying the
kinetics and thermodynamics of stoichiometric transfers of electrons, protons,
and hydrogen atoms to colloidal nanocrystals of ZnO, TiO2, CeO2 and other
materials, suspended in organic solvents. Their studies show that current focus
on transferring electrons needs to be broadened to include the cations that
balance the electron charge. Thus the reaction chemistry is in many cases better
described as inner-sphere processes, in which electron transfer is coupled to
the making and breaking of chemical bonds. Reactions such as hydrogen atom
transfers and multi-electron processes are being examined. Part of this new
approach is a rethinking of the thermodynamics of interfacial reactions,
building a new thermochemical scale for oxide materials based on their
affinities for hydrogen, rather than using electronic band energies. The
ubiquity of interfacial redox reactions makes this work of substantial potential
broader impact, from energy conversions to corrosion. The broad approach is
providing a challenging and stimulating interdisciplinary environment for the
scientific growth of a diverse group of graduate students. The excitement of
developing a new way of thinking is the basis of the Mayer lab's outreach to
middle and high school students, both via open houses and hands-on summer
programs.