* 1609245
* RUI:   Exploring the Transport Properties of Topological Insulators using Spectroscopic Ellipsometry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Frank Peiris, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;There has been a considerable interest in a
novel material called Topological Insulators (TIs) where seemingly two distinct
properties of materials, namely conducting and insulating phases, are interwoven
into a single material. While these materials provide a platform to address a
myriad of theoretical problems in physics, because of their unique properties
TIs can be exploited to produce interesting devices as well. The main focus of
the project is to investigate the unique properties of TIs, paying close
attention to uncovering the interplay between their surface and bulk states.
Specifically, one of the main objectives is to establish a fundamental
understanding of how to separate the contributions from surface and bulk states
to the overall conductivity of the material. Additionally, magnetically doped TI
samples are analyzed to interrogate the interplay between magnetism and various
properties TIs. This project primarily uses an optical investigation technique
known as spectroscopic ellipsometry to determine the contributions from the
surface and the bulk states of TI samples. Additionally, temperature dependent
experiments are conducted in order to uncover the intricate details that govern
the physics of TIs. The work is performed exclusively by undergraduate students
in a liberal arts setting. These students receive training in materials
characterization, optics, and cryogenics, preparing them for graduate studies or
careers in science and technology. To further educational goals, this project
incorporates several high-impact experimental activities into existing courses
in the physics curriculum. Furthermore, several outreach activities for high
school students are conducted in order to foster a wider interest in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Because of strong
spin-orbit coupling and time reversal invariant symmetry, a new class of
materials, called topological insulators (TIs), are embedded with unique
characteristics; it has an energy gap in the bulk but has metallic surface
states that are robust against disorder-scattering. Although there has been a
concerted effort made towards understanding the physics of TIs in the past few
years, there are several key aspects that are still unknown; a) the interplay
between the bulk and the surface states in dictating the conductivity of TIs, b)
the impact of impurity bands on TIs, c) interplay between topologically
protected states and magnetism, and d) the significance of electron-phonon
coupling on topologically protected surface states. Insights gained about any of
these aspects will enable a deeper understanding of the fundamental physics of
TIs, which is the ultimate goal of the project. Spectroscopic ellipsometry is
used to determine the complex conductivity in a wide spectra range (i.e.,
between 30 meV to 6.2 eV), which enables one to decipher the contributions from
free carriers and band electrons to conductivity. Temperature dependent
measurements are conducted to probe the electron-phonon coupling in TIs, which
plays a vital role in influencing the surface states. Since TIs are plagued by
defects, which unfortunately mask the exciting and intriguing surface phenomena,
the details of defect-states are obtained by evaluating the higher-order
transitions (i.e., critical points). The magnetically-doped TIs are probed to
determine the origin of their magnetism and to study the breaking of time-
reversal symmetry. Finally, the spin texture of TIs are probed via their
circular dichroism, obtained by Mueller-Matrix based spectroscopic ellipsometry.
This project incorporates several activities to enhance educational goals in the
sciences. As the work is performed exclusively by undergraduate students in a
liberal arts setting, they receive training in materials characterization,
optics, and cryogenics, preparing them for graduate studies or careers in STEM-
based fields. In addition, this project injects several high-impact experimental
activities into existing courses in the physics curriculum. Also, several
outreach activities for high school students are conducted in order to foster a
wider interest in the sciences.