* 1609696
* Water, Salt, and Temperature Effects in Polyelectrolyte Complexes and Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research concerns
ultra-thin films of polymers containing electrical charges, which are known as
"polyelectrolytes". They can be formed in multilayers and molecular complexes
and are of interest in applications ranging from biomedical to temperature-
responsive materials. Such polyelectrolytes undergo an unusual "glass-melt" or
softening transition whose nature and time-dependence are not well understood.
Here the PI proposes to evaluate the direct origin of this transition using
experimental techniques that will probe it on a molecular level. This will
provide a firm view of how the transition and its dynamics interrelate with
regard to temperature, water, and charges arising from different salts. This
project places a unique emphasis on salt type, where a broad range of salts with
varying size, charge, and water interactions are examined. One possible outcome
is a unified relationship among temperature, water, and salt as it governs the
transition. This will be of significant importance because this new knowledge
will allow fine-tuning of the transition temperature and the physical properties
associated with these materials, ultimately leading to possible new advanced
applications. A major element of the proposed research is to educate, mentor,
and train a future generation of diverse workers skilled in science as well as
to offer science outreach to the general public both locally and
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Experiments are proposed to investigate the nature of the thermal
transition observed in hydrated polyelectrolyte complexes and multilayers. If
successful, this project will shed new light on water's role in the thermal
transition. Possible outcomes include the experimental verification of the role
of polyanion-water interactions in the thermal transition, water and salt
relationships with the thermal transition, and evidence of time-temperature-
salt-water superpositioning. The proposed approach centers on quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation, differential scanning calorimetry, and
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, temperature-controlled Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy and dynamic mechanical analysis. The proposed project is
comprised of four activities: (1) investigate water-poly(styrene sulfonate)
interactions within polyelectrolyte multilayers as a function of temperature,
(2) explore and determine the role of water and other solvents, (3) examine and
understand the role of salt on the transition, and (4) determine possible water-
salt connections and effects on dynamics associated with the transition.
Educational components of the proposed work include training and mentoring of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as outreach locally and through the
NAE EngineerGirl website.