* 1609411
* Integrated Terahertz Measurement Systems based on Heterogeneously Integrated Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Robert Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 05/31/2020
* USD 405,995.00

The terahertz (or submillimeter-wave) region of the electromagnetic spectrum has
long been understood as crucial to fundamental scientific inquiry and progress
in fields such as radio astronomy, atmospheric physics, and remote sensing.
Moreover, new and emerging device concepts promise to open this largely-
inaccessible spectrum to further scientific study as well as important
applications in imaging, non-destructive test and evaluation, and high-bandwidth
communications. Unfortunately, the infrastructure and measurement tools needed
to develop these new technologies remain severely limited. Current approaches to
realizing measurement instrumentation at submillimeter wavelengths are based
largely on a modular approach using waveguide interfaces. This results in fully-
assembled measurement apparatus with considerable geometric footprint that can
prove unwieldy or unsuitable for many important scenarios, for example in
situations when the device or system to test must be maintained within a
shielded enclosure such as a vacuum chamber or cryostat. This project is focused
on addressing this critical issue through the development of compact and low-
profile measurement instruments that are based on high-performance terahertz
sensors heterogeneously integrated with micromachined support membranes that
allow direct-contact in situ characterization of planar devices and systems at
terahertz frequencies. As a consequence, this work will have broad impact on the
growing terahertz research community through the availability of new and
advanced metrological instrumentation that permit measurements that presently
are not possible or feasible. The creation of new measurement techniques and
capabilities is fundamental to the advancement of science; scientific discovery
and progress in engineering are predicated on the creation of instruments that
open new physical domains for experimentation and inquiry. This work represents
an initial, critical, and necessary step towards developing instruments that
overcome the inherent drawbacks limiting current approaches to terahertz
metrology.

The goal and scope of this project is to advance the infrastructure for
measurement and characterization of terahertz devices, components, and systems
through the development of instrumentation technologies that are based on
heterogeneous integration. The research pursued focuses on heterogeneous
integration across materials systems (e.g., III-V semiconductors and silicon)
and across physical domains (e.g., electronics and mechanics). Towards this end,
the specific approach to be undertaken includes three primary thrusts: (1)
development of processing technologies for low-parasitic terahertz Schottky
diode sensors heterogeneously integrated onto thin silicon membranes, (2)
investigation and implementation of silicon membrane-based micromachined on-
wafer probes incorporating integrated Schottky sensors, and (3) research and
prototyping of compact, high-order terahertz frequency multiplier sources for
integration with test and measurement instrumentation based on heterogeneous
integration. There is inherent intellectual merit in researching processes that
enable such integration and a significant effort of this proposal is dedicated
to investigating methods that permit fabrication of high-performance terahertz
electronic sensors with mechanically-robust host substrates amenable to direct,
physical contact interfaces without need for fixturing. Fundamental issues of
terahertz device design, fabrication technology, and metrology will be addressed
during this work with the aim of realizing new and advanced instrumentation that
permit measurements that presently are not possible or feasible.