* 1609495
* Emerging Complexity and Hierarchical Order in Precipitation Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Oliver Steinbock, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 467,283.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems produce materials
and device-like structures in ways that differ profoundly from most existing
engineering strategies. They are capable of growing high-performance materials
(e.g. bone and tooth enamel) with intricate micro-to-macro architectures by
tightly regulating the process conditions. In addition, life accomplishes these
feats from inexpensive and abundant starting materials. With the support of the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the overarching goal of this
project is to find and develop examples that use similar strategies in the realm
of non-biological, inorganic chemistry. If successful this research could form
an important stepping stone towards an entirely new engineering paradigm under
which materials are produced by externally controlling chemical self-
organization and other complexity-generating mechanisms. This research effort is
integrated with educational and outreach activities that include the training of
undergraduate and graduate students and the dissemination of research videos via
social media. The principal investigator also plans to develop a website
dedicated to "chemical gardens" which are the most iconic example of self-
organizing inorganic reactions. The website aims to provide information for high
school teachers and invites photo competitions documenting these chemical
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores pattern-forming,
nonequilibrium processes in the context of inorganic precipitates with the aim
to advance the understanding of macroscopic tube structures and micro-scale
nanorod assemblies called biomorphs. Some of these studies are inspired by
origins-of-life hypotheses under which prebiotic chemistry developed in the
microporous and catalytically active precipitates of off-axis alkaline
hydrothermal vents. Specific goals include the prediction of tube formation from
simple chemical and physical parameters and the use of related materials for the
study of transmembrane transport, thermophoretic effects, and specific aspects
of the formose reaction. This calcium-hydroxide-catalyzed reaction generates
numerous products including ribose from formaldehyde and has been discussed in
the context of RNA world theories. The second research thrust focuses on
biomorphs that form in silicate-barium solutions under the influx of carbon
dioxide. These 10-100 micrometer large structures have life-like morphologies
such as cardioidal sheets and helices and consist of highly ordered aggregates
of barium carbonate nanorods. To elucidate their growth mechanism and nano-to-
macro architecture, the research team develops mean-field reaction-transport
models. The modeling and simulation efforts are based on experiments aiming to
identify mechanistic details from flow and electric-field induced perturbations.