* 1609763
* Using the emulsion glass transition to test the universality of jamming
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 378,513.00

Non-technical Abstract Many common materials are soft jammed solids. Examples
include colloidal pastes (such as toothpaste), gels (such as gelatin), foams
(such as shaving cream), and emulsions (such as mayonnaise). These materials are
soft: for example, toothpaste squirts out of the tube without much effort.
However, they are jammed solids: you can make a pile of toothpaste, rather than
having it turn into a puddle. For nearly two decades, scientists have
conjectured that the solid-like properties of these soft materials are similar
to the solid-like properties of window glass. Very recently, computer
simulations suggested the solid-like properties of soft materials are
fundamentally different than the solid-like properties of a glass. The key
difference is thought to be the vibrational motions due to temperature, which
are important for molecules in a glass and unimportant for the constituents of
soft materials. This project uses emulsions (oil droplets in soapy water) to
address these questions. Some samples are made using very tiny droplets, for
which temperature-induced vibrations are crucial; and other samples are made
using large droplets, for which temperature-induced vibrations are negligible.
The goal is to directly compare behavior of the two types of samples with all
other details held constant, thus directly testing the simulation predictions.

Technical Abstract The PI and his lab group use concentrated emulsions as an
experimental test of the universality of the jamming transition. Emulsions are
liquid droplets in an immiscible liquid, where a surfactant has been added to
prevent the droplets from coalescing. At low droplet concentration, emulsions
flow easily. At higher droplet concentration, the droplets contact one another
and the sample becomes "jammed." As a jammed material, it remains
microscopically disordered but macroscopically has a yield stress and appears
solid-like, albeit a quite soft solid. Over the past 20 years there have been
many statements that this transition to an amorphous solid in emulsions (or
other soft materials) is the same as the regular glass transition. However,
recent simulations suggest that the glass transition and jamming transition are
distinct, with the former occurring for thermal materials and the latter for
athermal materials. The PI and his lab group use emulsions to tune from the
thermal to athermal limit by varying the droplet sizes. Rheology is used to
measure the relationship between stress and strain rate in the samples. The
change of rheological behavior is investigated as the droplet concentration is
varied, obtaining data directly testing if the glass and jamming transitions are
distinct. Additionally, microscopy is used to view sheared samples to show what
microscopic behaviors give rise to the rheological behavior. The lab group also
hosts field trips for primary school students, giving the visiting students
hands-on laboratory experiences with the squishy materials such as the dense
emulsions used in the experiments. Such materials challenge ideas that materials
only come as solids, liquids, or gases.