* 1609225
* Collaborative Research: Operando Three-dimensional Super-resolution Imaging of Catalytic Events in Porous Nanocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ning Fang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and the Catalysis
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ning Fang of Georgia State
University and Professor Wenyu Huang of Iowa State University are developing a
three dimensional super-resolution imaging technique for understanding molecular
movement and reactivity in nanopores at the single-molecule level. Highly
tunable core-shell structures with well-defined geometry and manageable
complexity are designed and synthesized, and then visualized under the optical
imaging systems. The in situ 3D imaging capability of the proposed microscopes
makes them valuable characterization techniques complementary to other
conventional methods, such as electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy.
Both teams are also designing single molecule imaging experiments to study
multi-step catalytic reactions, in which two or more chemical transformations
are catalyzed with a nanoscale-engineered multifunctional catalyst to avoid the
need for separation, purification, and transfer of intermediates produced in
each step. Graduate and undergraduate students in these two institutions acquire
valuable skills in building catalytic nanostructures and in developing new
instrumental capabilities to understand molecular transport and catalysis at the
single-molecule level. High school students in the Atlanta and Ames area are
exposed to the concepts of imaging, nanoscience, and catalysis to enhance STEM
education in high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work well-defined
heterogeneous catalytic systems, whereby colloidal nanoparticles are embedded
within core-shell mesoporous silica materials of aligned channels, are
developed. Single molecule trajectories with nanometer resolution are acquired
to elucidate the effects of pore size, length, orientation, and surface ligands
on molecular transport and conversion. New experimental insights on transport in
nanoscale confinement acquired with the model core-shell porous structures can
be generalized to guide the development of porous materials for separation and
catalysis. The long-term objective for this research is to use the knowledge
acquired using the imaging technique on the platform catalysis system to guide
our future catalyst design for a wide range of chemical transformations.