* 1609585
* Creation, Detection, and Manipulation of Isolated Magnetic Skyrmions in  Nanowires for Magnetic Storage Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

This project seeks to study isolated magnetic skyrmions in nanowires of non-
centrosymmetric metal silicides and germanides for magnetic data storage
applications. Skyrmions are a novel magnetic ordering configuration in which
electron's spins are arranged in whirlpool-like structures. They hold promise
for next-generation magnetic information storage because of their nanoscale
dimensions that can enable high information storage density and ability for
ultralow energy consumption. Nanowires are ideal hosts for skyrmions since they
not only serve as a natural platform for magnetic devices but can also
potentially stabilize skyrmions. In preliminary results, the PI's group has
shown enhanced stability, electrical detection, and current-driven dynamics of
skyrmions in silicides and germanides nanowires, and proposes to fabricate novel
device to create, manipulate, and detect isolated magnetic skyrmions in
nanowires. The success of these studies will demonstrate the feasibility for
skyrmion-based magnetic memory devices and open up new design concepts for
developing novel spintronic devices with low-power consumption and enhanced
performance, and therefore bring broad technological impacts. Underrepresented
undergraduate students will be recruited to participate in nanotechnology
research. Exhibit and hands-on activities on nanotechnology will be developed
and conducted at the annual Wisconsin Engineering Expo and at the Madison
Science Museum to stimulate public's curiosity and interest in science and
engineering.

This project seeks to utilize isolated magnetic skyrmions in nanowires of non-
centrosymmetric B20 silicides and germanides for magnetic data storage
applications. Skyrmions are a novel type of exotic magnetic ordering in which
electron's spins are arranged in whirlpool-like structures. Due to the
topologically non-trivial spin vortex arrangement, skyrmions can be thought as
free particle-like isolated magnetic domains (i.e. skyrmions outside of the
skyrmion lattice) that are stable against small perturbations in magnetic field
and temperature and do not pin strongly to the crystal lattice or impurities. A
much lower critical current density is needed to drive the motion of skyrmions,
therefore, they hold promise for next-generation magnetic storage, such as
magnetic racetrack memory devices, because their nanoscale dimensions can enable
high information storage density and their low threshold for current-driven
motion can enable ultralow energy consumption. Skyrmions are superior over
ferromagnetic domains for magnetic racetrack memory devices due to their
stability and ease of manipulation with electrical current. Nanowires are ideal
hosts for skyrmions since they not only serve as a natural platform for magnetic
racetrack memory devices but can also potentially stabilize skyrmions. Based on
the preliminary results on single-crystal nanowires of MnSi and other B20
silicides PI proposes novel device experiments to create, manipulate, and detect
isolated magnetic skyrmions in nanowires by using Lorentz transmission
microscopy, cantilever magnetometry, and Hall effect measurements to map the
skyrmion phase diagrams in nanowires; using new magnetoresistance measurements
to electrically detect confined skyrmions; nucleating isolated skyrmions using
completely electrical means; and ultimately a potential demonstration of
prototype skyrmion racetrack memory devices. This innovative and
interdisciplinary project integrates the already developed nanowire materials
with careful device studies to enable the first experimental demonstration of
nucleation of skyrmions in nanowires and possible proof-of-concept magnetic
racetrack memory devices based on skyrmions.