* 1610691
* Exploring RNA conformational transitions using high pressure
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Catherine Royer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 351,956.00

With this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division Dr. Catherine Royer from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) is
characterizing RNA. RNA is thought to be the original central molecule of early
life forms. Understanding what controls the structure and dynamics, and thus
function, of RNA molecules is key to piecing together how life began and evolved
on earth. Pressure changes are used to induce changes in RNA structure, opening
an entirely new avenue of biochemical research. Pressure is particularly
appropriate because life is thought to have evolved in the oceans, and thus
under pressure. The research involves promotion of scientific fields to high
school students via participation in the high school student mentoring program
at RPI's Center for Biotechnology. Graduate and undergraduate students are being
trained in state-of-the-art biophysical chemistry. Women and underrepresented
minorities are being promoted in STEM research, through the undergraduate Summer
Research Program in biochemistry and biophysics at RPI. This program hosts
undergraduates from primarily minority-serving colleges. International
internship opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students are being
provided through strong international network of collaborators in France,
Germany and Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global objective of the research is
to structurally and energetically characterize tertiary conformational
transitions of structured RNA molecules using high hydrostatic pressure.
Pressure effects on biopolymer conformational equilibria are due to differences
in molar volume between states, which for RNA, arise from differences in voids
and hydration effects. Pressure perturbation of RNA allows quantitative
assessment of the changes in hydration and ion condensation implicated in RNA
structural dynamics. Two well-characterized model RNA systems are investigated;
tRNALys3 and the Azoarcus group I ribozyme, using a combination of NMR,
fluorescence, FTIR and SAXS. Research is aimed specifically at determining the
structural and dynamic effects of pressure on these model RNA molecules, the
quantitative contributions of hydration and ion interactions to the structural
transitions and the role of conserved nucleotides in controlling RNA
conformational transitions.