* 1610806
* Collaborative Research: Electrochemically driven Mechanical Energy Harvesting
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 03/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Energy harvesting, which is any technology that converts otherwise wasted energy
of various forms into electricity, represents a key component in energy
sustainability for modern society. In mechanical energy harvesting alone,
several types of electric power generators have been demonstrated, including
piezoelectric, electrokinetic and triboelectric generators. These devices have
enabled a wide range of applications, from small self-powered devices to
auxiliary power units for wearable electronics. However, due to the short-lived
electric current, these power generators are most efficient for vibrational
energy harvesting at a relatively high frequency and inherently limited in the
low frequency regime where every-day human activities such as walking take
place. This research project aims to develop a unique type of mechanical energy
harvester that exploits the typical configuration of the electrochemical cells
in batteries and specifically targets harvesting low frequency motions. Such
energy harvesters may work as auxiliary generators, powering ubiquitous
computing, communications and wearable electronics. The project will also offer
interdisciplinary research experience in experimental design, computational
materials science and mechanics to both undergraduates and graduates at MIT and
Penn State, as well as enhance minority involvement and participation in science
and engineering, and stimulate the interests of students in the research field
of innovative energy-storage materials and energy
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to uncover the
underlying mechanisms of electrochemically driven mechanical energy harvesting
so as to control and optimize power and energy generation at targeted low
frequency through an integrated experimental-modeling approach. To fulfill this
goal, the team will adopt a multiscale method to model the stress-voltage
coupling and to predict current and power output of mechanical energy
harvesters. Guided by the modeling results, mechanical energy harvester
prototypes will be fabricated, tested and diagnosed. The integrated
experimental-modeling approach enables a fundamental understanding of the key
design parameters that govern the performance of mechanical energy harvesters in
particular, and helps foster transformative progress for understanding a broad
range of stress-mediated electrochemical processes in general.