* 1610783
* Photochromic Switching for Nanostructured Polymer Gels
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chaitanya Ullal, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 381,617.00

Controlling the shape and arrangement of materials at sizes roughly a thousandth
of the thickness of a human hair is a much sought after capability in advanced
manufacturing. The only commercial instrument capable of controlling the shape
and arrangement of these nanometer-sized materials is both expensive (~$50
million) and prohibitively slow due to their requirement for use on flat
surfaces. A potentially transformative alternate method that is not subject to
these severe constraints is hampered by a lack of understanding of the chemistry
involved in the synthesis of the materials. The paucity of knowledge on these
syntheses is targeted by studying and controlling the speeds at which the
relevant chemical reactions occur. Additionally, this project educates
participating graduate and undergraduate students in state of the art chemistry
techniques. K-8 students are inspired to consider careers in science and
engineering while working with their families on research-themed. household
material-based activities that are available through a widely accessible online
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the underlying chemical kinetics needed to enable
3-dimensional interference lithography with a resolution beyond the diffraction
barrier. The key requirement is a reversible and saturable reaction accompanied
by a material-writing step. Reaction rates are controlled by manipulating the
steric and electronic nature of substituents on the monomer, and tailoring the
chemical structures of the other key active components (e.g., polymers and
crosslinking agents). The objectives of this research include the synthesis of a
combinatorial library of monomer derivatives with systematically varied steric
and electronic properties; quantification of the kinetics of nanometer-sized
material growth, with the goal of obtaining rapid and saturable equilibrium
under low laser intensities; and polymerization of diffraction unlimited
features over large areas.