* 1610089
* RET Site: Innovative Transportation Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jerry Stephens, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 594,426.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers in Innovative Transportation Systems
(ITS-RET) at the Western Transportation Institute (WTI) at Montana State
University (MSU) will engage secondary school and tribal and community college
STEM faculty in interdisciplinary summer research focused on the unique
challenges of rural transportation systems. Research topics will cover
sustainable infrastructure materials; transportation design and operations for
safe and livable communities; and advanced transportation technologies. Projects
will explore the development and testing of new technologies, infrastructure
materials, simulation or spatial models, and algorithms designed to improve
rural transportation systems. The research experience will build core
engineering and computational skills. Experienced research mentors will guide
RET participants to use set processes to define problems, evaluate data, and
develop optimal solutions to real world transportation problems that will be
familiar to both the RET participants and the rural students they serve. The
project is expected to have a high impact on students in rural and tribal
communities by expanding professional development opportunities to strengthen
the capacity of STEM faculty from rural and underserved areas in Montana and
Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITS-RET Site will offer an intensive six week
research program each summer to a cohort of 12 STEM instructors over the three-
year grant period. Summer research will be complimented by extensive academic
year follow-up activities to ensure that RET participants have the necessary
support to achieve research-related accomplishments and to ensure the successful
translation of their research experience into classroom practice. Curriculum
development activities are expected to lead to new secondary school and
community college course content that integrates tools and processes from
multiple STEM disciplines to mimic how innovative solutions are developed to
complex challenges in the real world. The delivery of the new curricular
materials will spark the interest and enthusiasm of rural and tribal students in
STEM subjects by demonstrating real world applications and benefits. In addition
to conference presentations, project outcomes and lesson plans developed through
the ITS-RET program will be widely disseminated through the West Region
Transportation Workforce Center's online clearinghouse of education resources as
well as other digital libraries.