* 1610048
* OP: High Power Widely Tunable Fiber Lasers for Nonlinear Optical Microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Khanh Kieu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2020
* USD 320,000.00

Development of high power widely tunable fiber lasers for nonlinear optical
microscopy of cancer and brain tissues&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
description&lt;br/&gt;This research program will seek to improve the performance
of ultrafast laser sources based on fiber format by extending the operating
wavelength to new regions. A successful outcome of this program will allow the
development of useful instruments with new capabilities through the use of
widely tunable wavelengths, energetic, and ultrashort optical pulses. These
instruments will have transformative impact on the biomedical imaging and
research community by providing advanced capabilities such as on-demand
wavelength tuning, access to difficult spectral regions, synchronized ultrafast
laser pulses for pump/probe spectroscopy. From an educational perspective, this
research will allow the PI to educate PhD graduates in the fields of Ultrafast
Lasers and Fiber Lasers through the established educational programs at the
College of Optical Sciences, The University of Arizona. Graduate education will
be further improved by incorporating the research results into two graduate
courses. In future as in previous summer months, undergraduate students will be
involved in research on ultrafast fiber lasers and their applications. The PI
will involve students from underrepresented groups (Native Americans, women) in
his research through year round mentoring and internships, and by participating
in various NSF funded outreach programs such as "Optical Sciences summer Camp",
"Hooked on Photonics", "Integrated Optics for Undergraduates", and "Research
Experience for Teachers"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to investigate high
performance widely tunable synchronously pumped ultrafast fiber optical
parametric oscillators exhibiting new pulse evolutions in the cavity. The
combination of standard optical gain and parametric interaction in a single
laser cavity not only opens route to high output power operation but also gives
rise to new dynamics never studied before. The project will address a number of
key issues that currently prevent this laser platform from becoming suitable for
nonlinear microscopy application. The specific goals of this proposal are: 1)
Develop compact and robust ultrafast fiber lasers that can replace expensive and
bulky Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser; 2) Generate ultrafast laser wavelengths not
currently available commercially (in fiber format) such as 1300 nm and 1700 nm
which are important for deep tissue multiphoton imaging; 3) Characterize and
test the developed laser sources on real applications including cancer and brain
imaging. This project will provide the first systematic study of ultrafast fiber
optical parametric oscillators both experimentally and theoretically. The
research will enable new high power fiber lasers working at important wavelength
gaps that current state-of-the-art fiber laser technology cannot provide.
Recently, fiber lasers based on traditional gain media operating in normal
dispersion regime with self-similar pulse-shaping have been introduced. This has
enabled fiber lasers to achieve high energy, high power, and low noise
performance surpassing that of other solid-state lasers based on crystals and
free-space optics. We have shown that fiber optical parametric oscillators can
be designed to work in self-similar regime. The self-similar evolution opens new
routes to create compact and robust optical parametric oscillators with very
broad wavelength tuning and high output power level suitable for nonlinear
optical microscopy and a range of other applications such as 3D writing,
pump/probe spectroscopy, frequency comb metrology.