* 1610507
* Atomic-level structural characterization of metal/gamma-alumina interfaces combining theory and experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Liney Arnadottir, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metal nanoparticles on gamma-alumina (a phase of
aluminum oxide) are important in chemical catalysis because of their role in
reducing harmful by-products of fossil fuel combustion and energy consumption
during industrial chemical processes. The functionality of such material systems
depends partly on the interactions between the metal with the oxide support,
down to the atomic bonding at the interface. Atomic-level characterization of
interfaces is challenging because interfaces are complex structures buried
within the bulk. Characterization is especially difficult in a system involving
gamma-alumina, which is an excellent carrier for catalytic metal nanoparticles
because of its extremely high surface area, but it is also structurally fragile
and thermally sensitive. Novel processing methods are combined with highly
advanced electron microscopy techniques to reveal the atomic structure at the
interface between this metastable phase of aluminum oxide and widely used metal
catalysts such as platinum and palladium. Experimental characterization is
paired with computational models that are based on the fundamental relationships
describing bonding between materials to further elucidate the relationship
between the structure and properties. This project provides training and
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and engages high
school students from underrepresented groups in the exploration of science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Gamma-alumina is a
widely used support for metal nanoparticles in industrial chemical production
and catalytic converters. Although it is known that the catalyst activity is
affected by metal-support interactions, the understanding of the atomic-level
structure and thermodynamic properties of the metal/gamma-alumina interfaces is
incomplete. The goal of this research is to examine the extent to which the
local atomic structure of gamma-alumina is affected by the structure and the
chemistry of the metal species at the interface. This work assesses if dense
nanostructured material with a high gamma-alumina/metal interfacial area can
stabilize the system enough to enable atomic-level characterization. The
microstructural complexity of metal/alumina systems, the metastability of the
alumina phase, and the susceptibility of alumina to damage during transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) have limited atomic-level structural characterization
of the interfaces in these complex systems. In this project innovative
processing paths are used to create stabilized nanostructured materials that may
be characterized with aberration-corrected TEM. Qualitative atomic-level
structural characterization of the interfaces between the alumina and select
metals (e.g., Pt, Pd) is achieved using aberration-corrected TEM. Density
functional theory (DFT) is used to calculate the optimal configuration and
interfacial energy of candidate structural models of the interfaces. The
research objective is to use the overlap between the experimental
characterization and the structural calculations to validate the interfacial
structures and thermodynamic stability ranges calculated with DFT methods in
these complex, metastable systems, and to connect the structural information to
the thermodynamic properties of the interface, including the interfacial free
energy. Graduate students involved in the project are trained in advanced TEM,
data analysis techniques and in computational methods of DFT for calculating the
atomic structure of the interfaces. Undergraduate students are also involved in
these main research activities. Outreach activities for high school students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering introduce them to
experimental methods for materials characterization and to how computational
techniques are used to study atomic bonding.