* 1610287
* Modeling and mitigation of acoustic noise in switched reluctance motor drives using mechanical impulse response
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Babak Fahimi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 328,085.00

Electric motors consume nearly fifty percent of the electricity that is
generated worldwide. Integration of adjustable speed motor drives plays a
pivotal role in increasing efficiency, reliability and performance in these
energy converters and is considered a necessary step in the future energy
systems across the globe. Electrified transportation, home appliances and
industrial drives are among the primary candidates for this transformation.
Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives can provide a low cost, robust and fault
tolerant solution for these applications. However, high levels of acoustic noise
and vibration in this family of drives has limited their use in many
applications. This project addresses this shortcoming by introducing a new
computational tool that will allow for optimal tuning of the design and control
to minimize this undesirable feature of SRM drives. It is hoped that effective
use of the proposed method will open new horizons for integration of this
technology in various sectors of the industry, thereby providing a low cost and
highly efficient alternative for use in affordable and energy saving
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed method is based on the
use of the electromechanical impulse response for machine modeling and analysis.
This innovative tool provides an experimentally measurable link between the
terminals of the power electronic converter and acceleration of the stator
frame. This, in turn, will allow for online tuning of the vibration and acoustic
noise that is generated by virtue of the radial and tangential vibrations in the
stator frame of SRM drives. Furthermore, the proposed method substantially
reduces the computational efforts in optimal design of the electromechanical
features of SRM drives. In addition, cross coupling between the rotor and stator
and nonlinear dynamics of the SRM drive will be taken into account in the work.
Furthermore, the impact of wide-bandgap devices on structural response of SRM
drives will be investigated. The proposed method will be investigated through
detailed multi-physics finite element analysis and experiments. Successful
completion of this project will (a) create new opportunities in applying the
proposed method to other electric motors, inductors, transformers and
generators; (b) educate a new generation of motor experts with insightful
understanding of electromechanical energy conversion, vibration and power
electronics; and (c) provide a better understanding of magneto-structural
phenomena in electric machines and adjustable speed drives.