* 1610703
* Collaborative Research: Robust Asset-and-User-Aware Dispatch of the Power Distribution Grid during Extreme Temperatures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mina Sartipi, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,829.00

Extreme temperatures can push various power grid components to their operational
limits. The available capacity of most generation resources and power system
components becomes negatively affected as the temperature increases beyond
certain thresholds. Not surprisingly, this temperature-induced reduction in
available power generation and transmission capacities generally coincides with
increased electricity demand on the system, mostly attributed to the increased
utilization of air-conditioning (A/C) systems. Ignoring the effects of
temperature on various grid assets could lead to overloading these assets,
resulting in reduced lifetime and premature component failure. It is therefore
crucial to incorporate the effects of ambient temperature into power grid
operation in order to prevent stress on components and avoid blackouts that
could result from failure to meet demand during periods of extreme temperature.
This issue is becoming more important since climate models project an increase
in the duration and frequency of heat waves. Loss of power during extreme
temperature conditions is not merely an inconvenience, as it may also impact the
availability of other critical infrastructures such as water sanitation plants,
transportation systems, and hospitals and other urgent care units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will pursue a possible
solution that involves design of a methodology for proactive dispatch of the
energy resources in a distribution system exposed to extreme ambient
temperatures. Electric utilities have traditionally addressed the issue at hand
through two means: defining dynamic thermal ratings (DTR) for various components
to adjust their available capacity based on ambient temperature and, more
recently, offering incentivized demand response (DR) programs for remotely
shutting down A/C units under stressed conditions. Although effective in many
instances, are vulnerable to significant weaknesses. First, DTR are often
assigned heuristically or experimentally, and are not usually amenable to closed
form mathematical calculation. Also, A/C-based DR is usually implemented based
on the contractual agreements between the utility and the users, and does
incorporate users' well-being (i.e., the indoor temperature users will
experience due to A/C shutdown). This, under severe heat wave events, can
potentially lead to negative health impacts especially on infants and the
elderly. The goal of this proposal is to improve the effectiveness of both these
tools. The proposed solution models the effects of excess temperatures on
available generation/transmission capacity of components, as well as on expected
reduction in component lifespan due to overloading or operating under harsh
conditions. Indoor temperatures at residential homes are incorporated into the
DR dispatch by developing thermal models for houses, which can determine the
indoor temperature based on internal and external gains. This creates a multi-
objective design problem in which the aim is to optimize cost in conjunction
with asset lifetime and user comfort. To address the inherent uncertainties in
the model, a robust optimization approach is adopted. To ensure tractability of
the optimization problem and the scalability of the proposed solution, standard
restructuring techniques will be used to transform the nonlinear formulation
into a convex, mixed-integer quadratically constrained programming problem.
Furthermore, to enable awareness on user conditions, algorithms will be built
based on non-invasive monitoring to detect human occupancy and status of A/C
units using the aggregate measurements available from smart meters.