* 1610025
* A Semi-Analytical Framework for Faster Deterministic and Stochastic Power System Simulations
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Kai Sun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2020
* USD 303,863.00

With the increasing penetration of intermittent and renewable resources,
electric utilities are facing new challenges in computer simulation of
interconnected power systems. These challenges include (1) how to handle the
fast growing dimensionality and nonlinearity in mathematical models of power
grids, and (2) how to deal with increasing uncertainties in daily grid
operations. The increasing uncertainties stem from the varying and unpredictable
nature of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind, and even from
inaccuracy in the mathematical models of renewable sources. The so-called
"faster-than-real-time simulation" of a power grid is expected to start as soon
as a disturbance is detected and to conclude even before the impact ends so as
to improve real-time situational awareness and decision support capability of
the grid operator against major power outages and enable real-time stability
assessment and control. However, the traditional numerical integration based
simulation approach has little power to improve time performance for real-time
implementation due to its mechanism of iterative computations. Stochastic
simulations are becoming more important for power grids with a high penetration
of renewables but have not been executed well using the traditional simulation
approach. This project will explore a completely new direction to achieve faster
power grid simulation in both deterministic and stochastic approaches. The
proposed semi-analytical framework is a better fit for faster-than-real-time
simulation on parallel computers and also for stochastic power system
simulations involving renewable sources. Success of the project may inspire
software vendors to apply this new semi-analytical methodology leading to faster
power grid simulation tools to help reduce the risk of the power grid to
blackouts. This new methodology for power grid simulation can be generalized for
fast simulation of other large-scale nonlinear dynamic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the traditional simulation approach solving power
grid nonlinear differential-algebraic equations by numerical integration and
iteration, this new approach decomposes the solution process into tasks in two
basic stages: the offline stage uses the Adomian decomposition method to derive
an approximate, analytical solution called a "semi-analytical solution" (SAS)
for each state variable, which is valid for a certain time interval and has
symbolic variables such as the time, other state variables and parameters on the
system condition; the online stage evaluates the analytical expression of each
SAS by plugging in values of its symbolic variables for consecutive intervals
until achieving the desired period of simulation, so the simulation result can
be given in an extremely fast manner without any numerical integration or
iteration. The project will take four steps to establish this semi-analytical
methodology and its theoretical framework: (1) developing a systematic procedure
to derive SASs for realistic power grid models; (2) studying the maximum
potential of this new approach in fast deterministic and stochastic simulations;
(3) implementing and testing this approach on a high-performance supercomputer;
and (4) incorporating the approach with the traditional numerical approach into
a hybrid approach under the recently studied "Parareal in Time" framework to
explore the biggest potential in faster-than-real-time simulation for
interconnected power systems.