* 1610350
* Student Research Within Communities of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* John Kenney, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,949.00

Opportunities to conduct authentic research not only improve students'
understanding of science but also promote their self-identification as
scientists. This project will explore the potential to positively transform
undergraduate science education through student research seminars that are
specifically structured to produce peer-reviewed journal articles based on
students' research within the confines of a single semester. At the outset of
their college careers, students participating in this model will form student-
managed teams within a supportive scientific "community of practice." The
seminars will teach the students how science really works through projects that
they themselves plan and manage. By conducting and publishing scientific
research, the students will become -- both technically and sociologically --
real scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the past decade, Cuesta College, a
community college in San Luis Obispo, California, has offered an astronomy
research seminar with the format described above. Over 150 students have
completed the seminar as coauthors of published papers, primarily reporting
observations of visual double stars. Recently, the seminar has also been offered
by nearby California Polytechnic State University, a public institution, as well
as by Concordia University, a private institution in Irvine, California. This
project will expand the seminar model to other areas of observational astronomy
beyond double stars (but still within the small-telescope community of
practice), such as observations of exoplanet transits, binary star eclipses, and
pulsating stars. The investigators will also expand the model into environmental
science, featuring three types of atmospheric measurement: (1) the size,
distribution, and morphology of small atmospheric particles; (2) infrared and
Raman spectroscopy of particulate matter that settles from the atmosphere; and
(3) atmospheric gas samples analyzed with infrared spectroscopy, gas
chromatography, and mass spectrometry. Results will be correlated with local
weather conditions, road traffic data, sample location, and special climatic
events such as forest fires and Santa Ana winds. Through the Council on
Undergraduate Research (a partner in the project), the investigators will assess
opportunities for applying the seminar's community-of-practice approach to other
sciences beyond astronomy and environmental science and will organize a focus
group of national education and policy experts, who will consider how to expand
nationally and scaffold the research seminar's paradigm of students as
scientists within a community of practice. One of the project's contributions to
STEM education research will be to examine the impact of the seminar's malleable
factors, moderators, and mediators on such student outcomes as motivation to
become a scientist, critical thinking (enhanced by having research papers
reviewed by other students, instructors, and external experts), improved project
planning and management skills, writing skills, and preparing and giving
presentations on research projects.