* 1610482
* Assessing the Impact of the Emporium Model on Student Persistence and Dispositional Learning by Transforming Faculty Culture
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Dominic Clemence, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

In this project a team at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University (NCA&amp;T) - an Historically Black College and University (HBCU) -
will address the established and growing national need to provide strong STEM
preparation for a diverse set of students to enter the domestic workforce. The
investigators will employ, study, and assess an instructional and student
learning model, called the Mathematics Emporium Model (MEM), to improve
students' performance in introductory mathematics courses. These gatekeeper
courses are normally taken during an intense and often difficult transition for
students, from high school to college. The MEM eliminates lecture and uses
commercially available interactive computer software combined with personalized
on-demand assistance and mandatory student participation. The underlying
principle of the Emporium Model is that students learn by doing. Research
reveals that the shift to student-centered instructional practices enhances
students' attitudes and beliefs about learning in mathematics courses and
increases student-learning gains. In addition to student learning gains, project
activities will lead to faculty and graduate teaching assistants (GTAs) who can
use MEM to implement active learning pedagogies and be more engaged and
effective in promoting and assessing student learning. The project will directly
reach a combined annual enrollment in traditionally low-pass-rate courses of
more than 4,000 students, who will be mostly from underrepresented groups. In
addition, the project will have a long-term impact in that the participating
GTAs represent future college faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project include: generating a transformative change in teaching practices;
measuring the value-added of learning in the MEM environment versus a
traditional classroom; generating a committed team of trained faculty members
who are skilled in the use of the MEM for mathematics instruction and engaged in
the national Emporium community; conducting research on the impact of the MEM
model, especially on broadening participation for underrepresented groups of
students; and disseminating research and implementation findings to other
institutions of higher education. Data will be systematically collected and
analyzed to provide formative feedback for project improvement as well as to
study overall project impact. Student learning and instructor professional
development will be investigated using mixed methods, repeated measures, and
hierarchical models. Outcomes of the project will include additions to the body
of research on (1) the impact of an a MEM approach on learning gains, especially
for minority students, and (2) the professional development needs of faculty to
implement active-learning experiences in MEM and other undergraduate classrooms
successfully. As a result, the project will (a) enhance national broadening
participation efforts in STEM, especially related to emporium-type approaches,
and (b) inform other institutions in this realm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded through the Division of Undergraduate Education with co-
funding from the Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP) in the Division of Human Resource Development (HRD). Both
divisions are in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR).