* 1610675
* Living Growth Synthesis of Metal Oxide Nanocrystals: Toward Enhanced Control of Composition, Size and Uniformity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* James Hutchison, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Nanocrystals, very small crystals with sizes on the order of 0.000001
millimeters (equal in size to 5-10 atoms), have interesting properties that can
lead to novel chemistry. Metal oxide nanocrystals, the subject of this study,
are promising next-generation materials for use as catalysts, energy storage
materials, electronic device components, sensors, and diagnostic probes.
Chemists need better ways to control the composition and structure of the
nanocrystals at the atomic level in order to be able to harness the properties
of these new materials. Dr. Hutchison is developing a new synthesis approach
that grows nanocrystals in a highly controlled manner by the continuous,
sequential addition of metal and oxygen atoms to the surface of a nanocrystal.
Such a continuous growth process, referred to as "living growth", attaches atoms
to the nanocrystals with high precision, permitting simultaneous control of
size, uniformity, and composition. All of these properties are important for
specific potential applications. The researchers are developing general
approaches to the production of new nanomaterials to be used in industry as thin
film, magnetic materials, and catalysts. Dr. Hutchison's research attracts a
diverse, interdisciplinary group of undergraduate and graduate students,
including underrepresented minorities. In addition to their scientific training,
students develop and implement written professional development plans and
receive training on innovation and entrepreneurship so that they can enhance the
societal impact of their research. The results of the research are shared with
the general public through the regional meetings. The students interact with
scientists from industry at nanomaterial workshops offered at the University of
Oregon's Center for Advanced Materials Characterization.

In this research program, Dr. Hutchison of the University of Oregon is supported
by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to
investigate "living growth" syntheses of inorganic nanocrystals with the aim of
gaining simultaneous control of core diameter and uniformity, core composition,
doping levels and core-shell structures. Living growth synthesis works in much
the same way that living polymerization yields polymers with controlled
molecular weight, copolymer composition and block copolymer structures. Dr.
Hutchison produces mixed metal oxide nanocrystals that have been difficult to
synthesize by thermal decomposition or other high temperature methods. The
research has established a general approach to producing new metal oxides with
controlled atomic-level composition and size. The project builds fundamental
understanding of the reactions producing these nanocrystals and supports new
applications in thin film, magnetic and catalysis research. Dr. Hutchison
actively engages a diverse team of undergraduate and graduate students in his
research and augments their research training with targeted professional
development activities such as training on innovation and entrepreneurship. The
results of the research are disseminated through scientific publication, the
regional meetings, graduate courses, and industry workshops.