* 1610344
* Synthesis and Photophysics of Silsequioxane Macromonomers and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Richard Laine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 04/30/2020
* USD 280,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Richard M. Laine and Theodore
Goodson III of the Macromolecular Science and Engineering Program at the
University of Michigan are exploring the synthesis and properties of three-
dimensional, structurally precise cages based on silicon and oxygen. These cages
offer unique optical properties, and the team is studying methods to
functionalize them asymmetrically. The results of this project could be used to
develop new materials for applications ranging from components for organic
light-emitting diodes, organic solar cells, and hybrid laser materials to novel
semiconducting thin films. Professors Laine and Goodson are providing an
educational environment targeting the training of under-represented minorities
as well as outreach activities for K-12 students
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structurally precise silsequioxanes (SQs) of the types
[(RSiO1.5)8], [(RSiO1.5)10] and [(RSiO1.5)12] are being investigated to prepare
asymmetric molecules. On linking SQ cages via conjugated organic tethers, these
systems also exhibit three-dimensional excited state conjugation through the
cages as witnessed by delocalization leading to emission red-shifts normally
associated with extended conjugation. Furthermore, these same macromolecules
exhibit large and unexpected two-photon absorption (TPA) cross-sections that are
associated with both three-dimensional delocalization and charge transfer from
peripheral organic functionality to the cage cores. Professors Laine and Goodson
are mapping the effects of asymmetry and RR'SiO introduction on the photophysics
and chemical properties of new families of SQ macromonomers. Two approaches
being studied include "sequential assembly" wherein two RR'SiO groups are added
as simply units in "double decker" formulations that will be followed by
functionalization, as well as the fluoride anion catalyzed incorporation of
preformed RR'SiO and R'SiO1.5 units to existing SQs. Collaborations with both
groups at the University of Michigan and abroad are being used to assess the
utility of these compounds for various photonic applications including lasing
and photo-magnetism applications and to map their photophysical and electronic
properties as individual compounds and after assembly. Annually, both groups are
hosting and training 4-8 undergraduates and 2-4 high school summer student
researchers from local high schools including under-represented minorities, with
approximately half of these being women scholars.