* 1610612
* Mapping Small-scale Mantle Heterogeneities Using USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 259,869.00

Mapping small-scale mantle heterogeneities using
USArray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep currents within the rocky portion of the
Earth?s interior are called mantle convection, and this is the engine for almost
all kinds of geological processes on the Earth, not only generating earthquakes,
volcanoes, and continental drift, but also modulating the evolution of the
geomagnetic field and even the atmospheric composition. At the same time,
understanding how this mantle convection is actually operating is difficult and
subject to large uncertainty, because it is mostly hidden from our eyes, except
for its surface manifestation known as plate tectonics. One of the fundamental
questions regarding mantle convection is how efficiently it can mix things up,
and the efficiency of convective mixing has a number of important bearings on
how mantle convection has shaped the history of the Earth and its surface
environment. In this project, we will apply a state-of-the-art seismic imaging
technique to the USArray data, to detect small-scale heterogeneities in the
mantle surrounding the North American continent. The distribution of small-scale
heterogeneities, when interpreted in the context of the tectonic history of a
relevant mantle section, has a potential to elucidate the long-term mixing
efficiency of mantle convection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years,
the PI has been developing new data processing tools to overcome various
difficulties associated with the detection of small-scale mantle
heterogeneities, including a powerful signal detection technique called dual
bootstrap stacking (DBS) and a teleseismic migration method based on DBS.
Seismic migration is an imaging technique in which seismic energy recorded at
surface receivers is projected back to its origin in the subsurface. As it
directly uses the entire waveform of seismic data, migration has a potential to
achieve the highest spatial resolution allowed by the given data. The
Transportable Array of USArray finished its eastward migration in 2013, and the
time is ripe to explore the vast wealth of USArray data by DBS-based teleseismic
migration in a systematic manner. Given a large number of possible source-
receiver combinations and a variety of scattering mechanisms to be exploited,
this project focuses on the following two objectives as the top priorities: (1)
parallelization of DBS-based migration, and (2) searching for small-scale
heterogeneities in the mantle around the North American continent with P-to-P
scattering. The DBS-based migration is a very time-consuming processing, but
with the planned code parallelization, it will become possible to process a
large volume of data. The P-coda part of seismograms, bounded by the direct P
arrival and the PP phase, is suitable to be searched for potential scattered
phases generated by S-to-P and P-to-P scattering. Because of travel times
involved, S-to-P scattering can illuminate only the vicinity of earthquakes, but
P-to-P scattering can probe all along the ray path of the direct P. The use of
differential travel times with respect to the direct P limits the source-
receiver distance to be shorter than &amp;#8764;100Â°, but a number of good
seismic sources (i.e., deeper than 100 km and Mw &amp;#8805;5.0) around the
Pacific will allow us to image scatterers in the mantle beneath the Northern
Pacific, Central America, and possibly the Northern Atlantic.