* 1610229
* Towards an Infrared Nanophotonic Nose: Ultracompact Spectroscopic Photodetection based on Plasmonic Nanoantenna-diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Naomi Halas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2019
* USD 340,001.00

The identification of small molecules in our atmosphere, water supply, and
exhaled breath or body fluids, is an extremely important capability with
applications ranging from identification of dangerous environmental toxins to
early-stage disease detection. The methods that are currently available to
perform this type of chemical identification, however, require large, expensive
and sensitive instruments, are available only in laboratory settings, and are
based on decades-old technologies. The work enabled by this research grant aims
to combine two recent research advances to develop a new approach for
identifying small molecules. This work could ultimately provide chemical
identification capabilities in ultracompact geometries that could be used in a
variety of non-laboratory settings. The ability to rapidly detect and accurately
identify molecules in the clinic or in the field has wide-ranging has
applications in areas ranging from agriculture, pharmaceuticals, food quality
control, and medical screening, including brain function. This approach could
ultimately be used for identifying a plurality of molecules at a fully
integrated, chip-based level of detection compatible, ultimately, with cloud-
based processing and smart-phone-based data acquisition. The cross-cutting,
multidisciplinary concepts central to this proposal provide a broad opportunity
for student education at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate student
level. Technical Description: The goal of this proposal is to develop highly
compact infrared spectroscopic capabilities based on narrowband nanoantenna-
diodes for near-infrared molecular spectroscopy. Two independent research
advances in nanophotonics were recently pioneered which, when combined, are
ideally suited to address this goal. They are: (1) the demonstration of
optically active nanoantenna-diodes, where carriers are generated by the decay
of photoexcited surface plasmons in resonant metallic nanoantennas, then
injected into the conduction band of the adjacent semiconductor, and (2) the
development of infrared nanoantennas tuned to the resonant vibration frequencies
of specific chemical functional groups. By merging these two concepts,
narrowband, infrared active nanoantenna-diodes for the spectroscopic
identification of small molecules with direct electrical readout will be
created. Efforts will focus on the development of nanoantenna-diodes with
enhanced responsivities and quantum efficiencies, through the implementation of
gain, and on lineshape control of the nanoantenna-diode spectral response, to
ultimately resolve molecular spectral lines in the near-infrared region of the
spectrum. This approach would ultimately eliminate the need for near-infrared
photodetectors based on costly materials, along with the bulky dispersive optics
and large optical path lengths required in conventional infrared spectroscopy
for wavelength discrimination.