* 1610540
* Microlasers as a platform to study fluctuations in non-Hermitian dynamical systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Hakan Tureci, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Electrical, Communications, and Cyber Systems contribute funds
to this award, which supports theoretical research and education towards
advancing the understanding of the properties and the design of novel laser
systems that are key components of communication and sensing systems. Enormous
progress in nanofabrication technologies has allowed the fabrication of compact
chip-based structures that enable confinement of light and tunable laser
emission. However, and while allowing the design of complex laser systems with
improved functionality, the high level of control over fabrication and the many
available design parameters present a substantial challenge for laser theory.
The objective of the research is to develop conceptual foundations and
computational tools to investigate the properties of complex on-chip laser
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concepts, methods, and computational tools
developed in the course of the proposed research will be instrumental in the
design of novel applications such as on-chip coherent light sources for
spectroscopy and electrically controllable optical switches. In addition to
mentoring and training graduate students on modern analytical and computational
techniques of laser physics, the proposed research will forge interdisciplinary
collaborations between engineers and physicists, and has the potential to
accelerate the translation of basic science to applications such as optical
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Electrical, Communications,
and Cyber Systems contribute funds to this award, which supports theoretical
research and education towards advancing the understanding of the dynamics and
noise properties of novel laser systems that feature complex resonator
geometries and spatially modulated gain and loss. The manipulation of the real
part of the index of refraction of optical systems is the cornerstone of modern
photonics and quantum optics. Selective pumping of complex laser systems, which
is at the core of this project, represents a new design space that relates to
the simultaneous electrical tuning of the imaginary along with the real part of
the index of refraction (non-Hermitian engineering), with potentially
transformative implications for laser physics. A key property of these laser
systems is that their fluctuations are governed by non-Hermitian evolution
operators, which are of current interest across several fields ranging from
mathematics to biology, chemistry, and physics. One objective of the research is
to theoretically investigate fluctuation properties and dynamics governed by
non-Hermitian operators using microlasers as a physical system, where the
parameters of such operators can be continuously tuned. The PI's earlier work
has demonstrated that judicious spatial modulation of gain and loss through
spatially tailored pump injection can provide novel functionalities and
significantly boost the out-coupled optical power of microlasers. Instrumental
in that earlier work was the Steady-state Ab Initio Laser Theory (SALT) that the
PI had developed to access laser characteristics in the presence of optical
leakage and spatial hole-burning interactions. These earlier studies have
exclusively addressed steady-state operation. One of the primary goals of the
proposed research is to develop a theoretical and computational framework to
study the nonequilibrium dynamics and noise properties of complex laser systems
beyond their steady state behavior, which is not accessible by SALT. The
research will focus on interesting dynamical regimes where the fluctuation
dynamics display spectral degeneracies or instabilities towards self-pulsing.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will integrate state-of-the-art
techniques and concepts from a multitude of fields, such as stochastic evolution
techniques of quantum optics, spectral theory of non-Hermitian operators, and
laser theory. Close contact to experiments will be maintained through existing
collaborations of the PI. The concepts, methods, and computational tools
developed for the research will be instrumental in the design of novel coherent
light sources for optical sensing and frequency-comb-based spectroscopy. In
addition to mentoring and training graduate students on modern analytical and
computational techniques of laser physics, the proposed research will forge
interdisciplinary collaborations between engineers and physicists, and has the
potential to accelerate the translation of basic science to applications such as
optical spectroscopy.