* 1610728
* SusChEM: Photochemically-Induced Nucleation and Growth of Manganese Oxides at Environmental Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Young-Shin Jun, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 402,900.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Science Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Young-Shin Jun
of Washington University in St. Louis examines changes in manganese compounds on
exposure to the environment. The natural abundance of manganese is a primary
motivation for studying its roles in natural and man-made environmental
processes. Many manganese-contaminated lands result from human activities (e.
g., acid mine drainage and contamination from urban atmospheres). Understanding
the changes in various manganese-containing species on exposure to the
environment is crucial to controlling manganese concentrations in drinking
water. With support from Washington University's Institute for School
Partnership (ISP), Professor Jun develops an "Environmental Chemistry and
Energy" themed lecture series, with experimental chemistry and computer modeling
experiments. Professor Jun's research findings are incorporated into university
courses in Environmental Nanochemistry and Aquatic Chemistry. These educational
activities provide development opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. The educational activities are evaluated periodically by faculty from
the ISP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rich redox reactivity of manganese is of
interest in engineered systems, such as in batteries and catalyzed water
oxidation. This project provides fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic
information about manganese (Mn) oxidation and subsequent manganese oxide
(delta-MnO2) nanosheet nucleation and growth. The research project utilizes
multidisciplinary tools to investigate the early stages of delta MnO2 nanosheet
nucleation and in situ growth at the molecular scale. Small angle x-ray
scattering (SAXS) / grazing incidence SAXS provides real-time information.
Changes in mineral phases and mineral morphologies are studied with various
X-ray techniques and electron microscopies. Fluid chemistry and electrochemical
measurements are also be made. Furthermore, the synthesized delta-MnO2 is tested
for its applications as an effective, environmentally-abundant cathode in a
lithium-ion battery. This project provides useful information for developing
sustainable energy materials.