* 1610861
* Layered Electrostatic Heterostructures for Electronics and Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Scott Warren, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 456,386.00

Non-technical Description: When a material's size is reduced to atomic
dimensions, material properties become profoundly altered, and new opportunities
emerge for discovering useful phenomena. An important example of this occurs in
two dimensional materials, which are sheet-like objects that are just a few
atoms thick. This project addresses fundamental challenges in understanding the
behavior of these materials when the two dimensional materials are stacked on
top of each other to build a multi-layered composite. The materials synthesized
in this project are useful for information technology and energy conversion and
storage. The research in this project is integrated into many aspects of
outreach and education. The students who work on this project are exposed to
advanced challenges in materials synthesis and characterization. This project
also engages the broader public through several activities, including outreach
to high-school students through demonstrations that use art supplies such as
graphite, clay, and mica - all of which are built from two dimensional materials
- to engage students in scientific inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Recent observations of emergent properties in few-flake stacks of
graphene, boron nitride, and dichalcogenides, termed van der Waals
heterostructures, have generated immense interest because of their remarkable
electronic, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties. All of the studied van
der Waals heterostructures are held together primarily by weak van der Waals
interactions, highlighting an opportunity to design and understand multilayered
materials that are held together by stronger forces, especially electrostatic
forces. The primary research goal is to build model heterostructures and
understand the principles that relate their structure to their electronic and
photonic properties. This project combines experimental and theoretical
approaches, including microspectroscopy to assess the optical properties,
conductivity measurements to assess electronic coupling and charge transfer, and
photoemission spectroscopy coupled with density functional theory calculations
to assess band structure. Ultimately, an understanding of the structure-property
relationships in these heterostructures can provide an important framework for
designing the optoelectronic properties of these new materials.