* 1610676
* Structures and Mechanisms of Two Enzymes that Produce Hydrocarbon Fuels from Abundant Metabolites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Joseph Bollinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this award the "Chemistry of Life Processes" program of the "Division of
Chemistry" is supporting work at the Pennsylvania State University to study two
enzymes that catalyze key steps in the conversion of fatty acids (abundant and
common cellular metabolites) to hydrocarbons (alkanes and alkenes). These can
then be used as drop-in biofuels for combustion engines. The research supported
is impacting development of renewable energy, because the use of microorganisms
is a promising strategy for biofuel production. This process is particularly
environmentally friendly, because it is ultimately carbon neutral and driven by
solar energy. The project is studying how the enzymes described above function
with an eye to importing them into genetically engineered microorganisms which
can produce biofuels. Work supported by this award is also offering students and
postdoctoral scholars opportunities to be broadly trained in biophysical
methods. It also supports a biennial workshop, led by Penn State
metallobiochemists and supported by colleagues from other institutions, that
trains students and postdoctoral scholars in unique methods used in this
research field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetically manipulable microorganisms
that could (i) produce fatty acids from sunlight and carbon dioxide (either
directly by using photosynthetic cyanobacteria, or indirectly by feeding the
engineered microorganisms sugars obtained from fast-growing and high-yielding
plants such as sugar cane) and (ii) convert the fatty acids into "drop-in"
biofuels are actively pursued as vehicles for biogenesis of renewable fuels. Two
recently discovered enzyme pathways for the conversion of fatty acids into
linear alkane or alkene hydrocarbons involve enzymes that harbor iron-containing
cofactors at their active site. The first example involves the two-step alkane
biosynthesis pathway in cyanobacteria that converts fatty acids via fatty
aldehydes to alk(a/e)nes. The second step in this pathway is catalyzed by the
enzyme aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (ADO), a member of the ferritin-like
diiron-carboxylate oxidases and oxygenases. In the previous funding cycle we
studied the ADO reaction as a novel, cryptically redox oxygenation reaction.
Further mechanistic studies revealed potential inefficiencies and
vulnerabilities that could limit the usefulness of this pathway for biofuel
production. We propose to study the reaction of ADO in greater depth, with the
expectation that further mechanistic insight will guide the rational design of
biofuel-producing microorganisms. The second example involves a recently
discovered iron-enzyme, UndA, that utilizes O2 to decarboxylate fatty acids to
carbon dioxide and terminal alkenes. Our preliminary work suggests that UndA is
also a diiron enzyme, contrary to the published assumption that it is a
mononuclear iron enzyme. We propose to identify the correct cofactor and
determine the molecular mechanism in detail. These studies will be an important
contribution to ongoing research efforts that aim at utilizing this metabolic
pathway for biofuel production.