* 1610420
* Controlling Heterogeneous Stress Relaxation in Tin Films: Whiskers, Grain Boundary Sliding, and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Carol Handwerker, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 487,569.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In microelectronics some of the
materials are inherently unstable because they are being used at temperatures
close to their melting temperatures. One such material is tin in solder joints:
Tin atoms are able to move around (diffuse) relatively quickly at room
temperature in response to changes in their environment. Of particular concern
is the formation of long Tin whiskers in response to stresses normally occuring
in microelectronics. Long Tin filaments can grow spontaneously from surfaces of
thin Sn films and can reach lengths of several millimeters. Such whiskers can
bridge adjacent contacts and cause short circuits leading to electronic system
failures. The question is how to stop them from forming. A new strategy is
needed to better understand and specifically to mitigate failure due to whisker
growth in Sn films. In particular, forming whiskers is only one of the ways in
which the atoms in thin Sn films can respond to stresses. This new strategy
needs to take into account the contributions of other processes to relaxing
stresses in thin films and to learn how to manipulate them to keep whiskers from
forming. The goal of this project is to develop models, numerical simulations
and critical experiments at the microscopic scale to quantify the different
contributions of these processes in these films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed computational effort is a step forward in reducing the reliance on
experimentation to develop new materials or to improve reliability in existing
ones. Achieving this goal for materials design requires the development of new
predictive simulation tools and training the next generation work force on the
use of these advanced tools. The data and simulation tools developed in this
project will be broadly available through the NSF supported nanoHUB.org with
open access to the materials community including researchers in industry and
academy and educators. Demonstration tools for education will be deployed in
nanoHUB.org and integrated in the Engineering curriculum at Purdue and will be
accessible for universities and industry everywhere. The work proposed provides
an excellent opportunity to train graduate students and undergraduates in the
integration of materials science and engineering experimental and computational
techniques, in developing cross-disciplinary approaches, and in working as
members of a multi-disciplinary international research team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous
microstructure-induced stresses that drive stress relaxation are linked to a
wide range of failure mechanisms in thin metal films. Whisker and hillock
formation are known responses of thin metal films to residual stresses but
others include yielding, diffusional and dislocation-mediated creep, grain
boundary sliding, cracking, delamination, surface roughening, extrusion-
intrusion formation, recrystallization and grain growth. The relative
contributions of these multiple operations to stress relaxation frequently
switch as stress distributions and microstructures evolve in a dynamic and
complex process. &lt;br/&gt;A strategy to better understand their changing
contributions and specifically to mitigate failure due to whisker growth in Sn
films needs to take into account the contributions of these mechanisms to
identify: i) the local conditions under which surface grains form whiskers and
influence their rate of growth, and ii) what other mechanisms compete with or
accelerate whisker formation and growth. The goal of this project is to develop
models, numerical simulations and experiments at the microscopic scale to study
deformation-microstructure relationships to relax residual stresses in thin Sn
films during cyclic bending and thermal cycling, two configurations where
multiple processes operate. We propose to develop a framework with simulations
of these simultaneous processes with experiments designed to explore the
different contributions of these mechanisms. While the proposed framework could
be applied to a variety of thin film systems, Sn films not only display a wide
range of phenomena that will demonstrate its capabilities, but will also provide
the opportunity to test its usefulness in developing mitigation strategies to
inhibit tin whisker formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the understanding of
local stress relaxation processes in thin films and small-scale structures has
grown significantly over the past decade, a strategy to examine multiple
simultaneous processes, such as dislocation generation, recrystallization,
creep, and whisker formation, is still developing. The recent observation that,
in Sn films, whiskers nucleate and grow along some grain boundaries during
thermal cycling and cyclic bending with other dislocation and diffusion
processes being evident offers the opportunity to explore this stress-
microstructure-deformation space. The numerical simulations and experiments
proposed in this effort are a step forward in answering questions, such as where
and how do grains nucleate to form whiskers and hillocks, what local conditions
affect their rates of growth and how does whisker growth competes or
collaborates with other stress relaxation mechanisms.