* 1610892
* Active THz polarization laser imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Tatsuo Itoh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 01/31/2020
* USD 337,998.00

Light is an electromagnetic wave whose properties are described not only by the
amplitude of the wave (i.e. its intensity) and its wavelength (i.e. its color),
but also its polarization (i.e. direction of the electric field). Where most
types of imaging use the intensity and/or wavelength as contrast mechanisms and
ignore the polarization, there is often much information to be obtained by
examining the polarization state of the light reflected or transmitted from a
scene. Compared to other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, in the
terahertz frequency range (300 GHz-10 THz), polarization has been underutilized
as a contrast mechanism for imaging. A major application of terahertz radiation
is for non-destructive evaluation due its ability to penetrate many visibly
opaque materials for example pharmaceutical tablet coatings, foams, paints,
covered art and antiquities. Polarization can potentially provide significant
improvement in the utility of terahertz imaging for non-destructive evaluation
due to its ability provide information about material birefringence, surface
features, shape, roughness, edge detail, and chirality. The theme of this
research is the development of a new type of terahertz laser in which the
polarization of the emitted light can be chosen and switched rapidly, by
electronic control, without moving parts. The approach is based upon the
adaptation of antenna design concepts from the microwave frequency range, and
combining them with terahertz laser design. The developed lasers will then be
used as illumination sources for polarization-based imaging, with a particular
emphasis on evaluating their suitability for non-destructive evaluation
applications. As a part of the project, the research will train graduate and
undergraduate students, and will support recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minorities to engineering through the PI's participation in a
targeted research project course.

The objective of this research is the development of terahertz active
polarization imaging based upon THz quantum-cascade lasers (QCLs) as an
illumination source. First, an innovative scheme is proposed where the output
polarization of QCLs can be modulated electronically. This scheme is based upon
terahertz metamaterial antennas or phased arrays of lasers that are designed to
radiate with overlapping beams, but with orthogonal polarization. By controlling
the relative phase of the laser radiation, the output polarization can be
dynamically switched between various linear and circular polarization states.
This will allow more rapid and stable modulation of the output polarization
compared to current schemes based upon rotating polarizers and waveplates, which
in turn will allow faster data collection with reduced noise and a more compact
and lightweight system. Second, the developed QCLs will be applied to
polarimetric imaging in several schemes, and their performance will be
quantified versus conventional techniques. The developed technology has the
potential to impact many nondestructive evaluation applications including
corrosion detection and monitoring, bioimaging, security screening and illicit
material detection, and manufacturing process quality control.