* 1610134
* GOALI: Directed Self-Assembly of Linear and Star Block Copolymer Thin Films - Oriented Nanostructures with Reduced Feature Sizes via Raster Annealing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 374,576.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to address the
challenge of manufacturing lower cost, more efficient, lighter weight, and
smaller scale systems for applications ranging from information or data storage
devices for digital media to portable biosensing arrays that could potentially
screen and treat a myriad of diseases. The project integrates fundamental
research with collaborative assistance from an industrial partner to generate
nanoscale features (of order 1/1000th the width of a human hair) that have
potential to be translated from the laboratory-scale to a widely available and
useable platform. In undertaking this collaborative approach, the research team
will use commercially-relevant polymers that are created to spontaneously form
ultra-small features, whose shape and function can be dictated through
processing conditions. By linking aspects of materials chemistry, materials
properties, and processing, this project will aid in the cost-effective
evaluation of polymer systems to generated efficient electronic devices. This
project provides research opportunities to students (including underrepresented
undergraduate and economically-disadvantaged high school students) in a vibrant
and collaborative laboratory setting and exposes students of all levels to
cutting-edge concepts for making new nanometer scale materials that could lead
to lower cost and more energy-efficient fabrication of computer-related
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his industrial partner at DuPont
collaborate to develop new nanotemplates from self-assembling macromolecules
using commercially-relevant block copolymers. A particular goal of this work is
to investigate star architectures (and variable block chemistries) in block
copolymers as a viable means for generating "writeable" and oriented
nanostructures with reduced feature sizes for nanotemplating applications. By
accomplishing this goal, the University of Delaware and DuPont team will address
key needs in the arena of nanotemplating and bit-patterned media, including the
ability to rapidly generate thin film templates with well-defined features at
low cost, with appropriate and addressable orientations and domains, with
minimal defects, and approaching smaller feature sizes (&lt; 5 nm). To
facilitate general understanding, the proposed activities combine 1) the
examination of various block copolymer architectures and chemistries, 2) the
development of a unique solvent vapor annealing approach (raster solvent vapor
annealing with soft shear), and 3) the macromolecular design, synthesis, self-
assembly, and characterization expertise of the University of Delaware and the
nanoprocessing and materials expertise of DuPont. Specific research themes
include: (1) investigating the differences between star and linear block
copolymer directed self-assembly using both moderately-repulsive and highly-
repulsive polymer-polymer interactions to reduce feature sizes, improve
nanostructure ordering, and control nanostructure orientation; (2) utilizing a
newly-developed directed and programmable solvent annealing process to
directionally align nanostructures with minimal defects; (3) probing solvent
partitioning between domains via neutron scattering techniques; (4)
incorporating newly-proposed "flexible-blade" flow coating to simultaneously
cast and align nanostructures.