* 1610621
* Cultivating active learners by enabling instructors to monitor and enhance student buy-in and utilization of research-based instructional strategies
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chad Brassil, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,920.00

This project will explore ways to improve student buy-in and utilization of
research-based instructional strategies (RBIS) that have been demonstrated to
improve student learning and persistence across science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Over the past decades, the
federal government has made substantial investments in the design, development,
implementation, and evaluation of RBIS. These investments have resulted in
increasingly greater implementation in classrooms across the country. However,
many faculty have noted that they encounter student resistance when using RBIS.
The PI team from UNL is developing a means by which instructors can monitor and
improve student engagement in and use of RBIS. Because of the widespread appeal
and demonstrated impact on student learning of RBIS that serve in particular as
formative assessments (FAs) (e.g., Just-in-Time Teaching, Peer Instruction), the
PI team is focusing on this subset of RBIS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goals reflect a comprehensive set of development, research, and dissemination
efforts designed to provide instructors with a customizable instrument and
support model to optimize student engagement with FAs. To achieve these goals,
the PI team is developing a closed-ended Formative Assessment Buy-in and
Utilization Survey (FABUS) to gauge how students perceive and interact with
particular FA activities. To broaden the impact of the project, they also are
administering the FABUS at multiple institutions and conducting research to
determine the relationships between buy-in, utilization, and learning related to
various FA methods. Finally, they are creating a model for how a local community
of instructors can use FABUS to identify issues, guide changes, and assess
whether course alterations improve student learning through engagement in and
utilization of FAs. The instruments developed and the knowledge gained through
this project have the potential to improve student STEM learning in classrooms
across the nation, as instructors use these tools to promote student use of
RBIS.