* 1610867
* The Tuskegee Partnership for Personal Authenticity in College Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,986.00

Each year, a large number of students take pre-calculus in college, many of whom
struggle to see the relevance of the content. Toward making mathematics learning
more motivating and personally meaningful to students, this project will engage
undergraduates in directly connecting pre-calculus to their personal lives
through topics that they choose to examine. Project implementation and research
activities will take place in sections of pre-calculus taught at Tuskegee
University, Southern Union State Community College, and Chattahoochee Valley
Community College, under the leadership of a multi-disciplinary team comprised
of an education researcher, mathematicians, mathematics instructors, and a
college statistics faculty member. Sections of pre-calculus at all three
institutions will serve as implementation and comparison groups. Students in the
implementation sections will use technology to investigate complex, realistic
data and focus on the connection of key mathematical ideas to those data. The
project team will study the implementation activities as a way to immerse
students more fully in the mathematics, to strengthen the relevance of the
mathematics to their lives, and to improve their views of mathematics, their
mathematical understanding, and their achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
quasi-experimental design with pre- and post-assessments, the project will
address the following research questions: (1) Do students using mathematics
tasks situated in personally authentic contexts exhibit more positive attitudes
towards and beliefs about mathematics than students using teacher-selected
contextual units and those not using unit projects? If so, to what extent? (2)
Do students using mathematics tasks situated in personally authentic contexts
exhibit greater intrinsic motivation to learn mathematics than students using
teacher-selected contextual units and those not using unit projects? If so, to
what extent? (3) Do students using mathematics tasks situated in personally
authentic contexts perform better on standardized course final exams than
students using teacher-selected contextual units and those not using unit
projects? If so, to what extent? Are the course pass rates (% of students who
complete the course that achieve an A, B, or C) in those courses higher? If so,
to what extent? (4) Does the project work of students using mathematics tasks
situated in personally authentic contexts show greater mathematical
understanding in the form of valid connections made between mathematical and
real-world representations compared to the project work of students using
teacher-selected contextual units? If so, to what extent? This study will
contribute to the knowledge base about ways to enhance students' understanding
and appreciation of content connections within mathematics, across disciplines,
and to life outside of formal schooling.