* 1610193
* From Symbol Manipulation to Meaning Making: a Cross-disciplinary Video Development Project to Promote Fluency with Mathematics in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Adam Burgasser, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

In this project the University of California-San Diego seeks to promote fluency
with mathematics in science. A significant aspect of this project is the
interdisciplinary team of mathematicians with expertise in statistics and
science faculty who are functioning as a Community of Practice to develop, test,
and refine videos focusing on rates of change and probability. The new videos
will be unique as the development is informed by the research base. This
important use of videos in teaching and learning is expected to move students
from fragmented, procedural, and context dependent knowledge to a stage of
having more integrated, conceptual and transferable
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project will be to
produce 40 short instructional videos with compelling visuals and clear
explanations. The videos will address eight inter-disciplinary sub-topics within
the two fundamental topic areas: rates of change and probability. The full scope
of the project will include producing individual videos exploring the sub-topics
of rates of change and probability across physics, chemistry, biology, and
mathematics. A fifth video will provide an example of their relevance in
research. The external evaluator will collect qualitative and quantitative data
testing the impact of the use of videos the team makes across four different
disciplines. A report from the Pew Research Center indicates that broadband
access among disadvantaged and rural populations while not ubiquitous provides
by far the best tool for making education materials available. African American
and Hispanic learners are more apt to have a handheld device. Cultural and
pedagogical inclusivity will be achieved by adapting materials developed for the
web to function on hand held devices.