* 1610430
* Understanding the Degradation Mechanisms in Phosphorous-Carbon Hybrid Anodes for Sodium-Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Sulin Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 445,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electrical energy storage is a key component of
the renewables-friendly future power grid with high-energy efficiency,
stability, and resilience. Sodium ion batteries have a significant advantage
over widely used Lithium ion batteries, owing to the low cost and abundance of
sodium precursor. Phosphorus-based materials are promising as anodes for sodium
ion batteries due to their high capacity and low cost. However, similar to alloy
anodes in lithium ion batteries, phosphorus undergoes ~300% volume change during
charge/discharge, leading to pulverization of the active materials, unstable
growth of the solid electrolyte interphase, and poor cyclability. With the
support of the Solid State nad Materials Chemistry program, this research
project strives to bring low-cost, high-performance, long-cycling sodium ion
batteries closer to real-world applications by understaning the degradation
mechanisms of phosphorus-based anode materials. Such batteries would enable
greater integration of intermittent renewable power sources such as wind and
solar, decrease dependence on fossil fuels, and improve the overall efficiency,
stability, and resilience of the power grid. The research project also enhances
involvement of women and minorities in science and engineering, and stimulates
the interests of students at Penn State in the fast-evolving research field of
nanostructured energy storage materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to uncover the
underlying mechanisms of electro-chemically driven mechanical degradation in
phosphorus-carbon hybrids as anode materials for sodium ion batteries through an
integrated experimental-modeling approach. Experimentally, in situ TEM studies
allow atomic-scale observation of phase transformation and failure mechanisms.
Combined with the low-cost, scalable synthesis methods and advanced full-cell
battery testing and characterization, the experimental studies enable the
research team to build an atomic-scale picture of microstructure, morphology,
and composition evolution of the hybrids during electrochemical cycling. The
proposed multiscale models seamlessly integrate with the experimental
characterizations to identify the leading degradation mechanisms and accordingly
optimize the material designs. The integrated experimental-modeling approach
helps foster transformative progress for developing high-performance energy
storage materials.