* 1610125
* Exploiting the Bifunctional Properties of Zinc Oxide as a Smart Biomimetic Material
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Boris Khusid, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the New Jersey Institute of Technology is to investigate a
smart material for tissue engineering applications. This award is co-funded by
BioMaPS funds in the Division of Materials Research, and the Biomedical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems. Zinc oxide, which has electromechanical properties and is
a growth factor mimetic, will be fabricated into a mechanically flexible,
polymer composite scaffold to promote stem cell differentiation and tissue
growth for cartilage repair. Osteoarthritis is a debilitating, degenerative
joint disease where cartilage and the underlying bone tissue becomes damaged and
can worsen with time. No technology exists that can restore fully functional
cartilage tissue. Zinc oxide scaffolds will be fabricated and fully
characterized for their bifunctional properties. Mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into cartilage and bone cells will be evaluated on the scaffolds
in vitro. The proposed work would have a significant impact on the fields of
smart materials for possible tissue regeneration and repair. The research
efforts here also will be disseminated in teaching, training, and education. The
principal investigator's laboratory is actively involved in the training,
mentoring and recruitment of underrepresented minority and female students
starting at the junior high school level through various community and
university programs, and these activities are enhanced and strengthened with
this award.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project will investigate a
bifunctional smart material for tissue engineering strategies. Zinc oxide (ZnO),
which is piezoelectric and a growth factor mimetic, will be utilized, for the
first time, for its functional properties in tissue engineering applications.
ZnO will be used in composite form with polycaprolactone (PCL) as a scaffold to
promote stem cell differentiation. Two specific aims will be addressed. Aim 1 of
this award is to fabricate and fully characterize the piezoelectric properties
of ZnO-polymer composite scaffolds. Nanoparticles of ZnO will be combined with
PCL, a slow-degrading biomaterial, to form composite fibrous scaffolds, and
controlled release/dissolution of zinc oxide will be determined. Composites will
also be characterized for electrical output in conditions that more closely
mimic a biological setting. The piezoelectric scaffolds will then be
characterized for localized nanoscale electromechanical behavior as well as bulk
properties in order to correlate biological response with electromechanical
activity. The second aim of this award is to investigate the osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells on the ZnO-PCL composite
scaffold in vitro. This study is based on the hypothesis that the use of a
fibrous scaffold having similar physicochemical properties as the native
extracellular matrix will stimulate the differentiation of msenchymal stem
cells. Therefore, in addition to developing a novel combination therapy for the
repair of cartilage defects, this study will enhance the scientific
understanding of the role of piezoelectric or electromechanical effects on cell
differentiation, and potential applications in cartilage repair and
regeneration. With respect to teaching, training and outreach activities, the
researchers will recruit and mentor underrepresented minorities and women in the
research activities supported by this award.