* 1610594
* Low Noise, Tunable Non-Reciprocal RF Front-Ends Based on Time-Varying Transmission Lines (TVTL)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Yuanxun Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 310,000.00

A transmission line structure with its effective dielectric property modulated
in space and time is proposed. Such a transmission line supports two-way
propagation of electromagnetic waves on the same structure while keeping the
electromagnetic waves propagating toward different directions separatable by
shifting only the frequency of the wave that aligns with the direction of the
space-time modulation. Leveraging both on the fundamental science of radio
frequency circuits and the modern semiconductor technology, the proposed concept
will find a broad range of applications in modern wireless systems by creating
novel radio frequency devices and functional blocks that enables sensitive and
interference resilient wireless front-ends. The proposed work fosters
interactions among multiple engineering research fields. If successful, it will
revolutionize the current way of transmitting and receiving electromagnetic
waves in a challenging environment and lead to next generation communication or
sensor electronics that are of low power consumption, high performance, compact
and affordable. As the advancement of mobile communication technology is
changing human lifestyle, a high performance wireless radio frequency front-end
will provide a great thrust to this change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
is to attack the noise and interference issues in the radio frequency front-end
that fundamentally limits of the performance of a wireless system, by developing
tunable, non-reciprocal front-ends with broad frequency tunability yet low
noise. Such a front-end is only enabled through exploiting the unique property
of Time-Varying Transmission Line. Time-varying transmission line consists of
passive transmission lines whose inductance or capacitance is space-time
modulated by another electromagnetic wave. It possesses a mixture of passive and
active circuit characteristics. First, it is a transmission line that can be
engineered and designed to have accurate impedance, phase and delay
characteristics in both directions. Furthermore, it offers functions of active
circuits such as amplifications and frequency conversions. Devices created out
of this novel concept include resonators with accurately controlled resonating
frequency yet allowing resonances across different frequencies to couple. This
property can be utilized to create low noise, high-quality factor, tunable
filtering capability even within miniaturized dimensions. The proposed effort
will first establish a systematic theory of Time-Varying Transmission Line being
used as a key building block to achieve superior performance in radio frequency
front-ends. This includes various novel developments of functional blocks such
as circulators, tunable filters with parametrically enhanced quality factors,
low noise amplifiers, active frequency conversion and phase shifting circuits.
Modern semiconductor technology will then be utilized for on-chip integration of
the proposed devices. The performance bound on practical implementations of the
radio frequency front-end will be derived based on these integrated circuit
prototypes. Ultimately, new wireless system architectures and applications that
fully leverage on the unique features of these devices will be explored for the
purpose of meeting the need of emerging wireless communications.