* 1610604
* Heterogeneous III-V CMOS on Si via Direct Growth
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Rehan Kapadia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

III-V semiconductors hold performance records for a vast majority of electronic
and photonic device categories, from transistor speed to photovoltaic conversion
efficiency. However, the inability to cost-effectively integrate high material
quality III-V's with substrates amenable to volume manufacturing, such as Si
wafers has limited the adoption of III-V materials to applications that can
absorb the high costs of III-V growth. This limitation arises from the
fundamental lattice mismatch between the III-V semiconductors of interest and
the underlying Si substrate. While a variety of approaches have been developed
to address this challenge, they often rely on complex buffer layers and face
challenges when tightly integrating different materials on the same layer. Here,
a recently developed growth technique that enables growth of crystalline III-V's
on non-lattice matched substrates will be utilized to demonstrate heterogeneous
III-V CMOS logic circuits on Si. Importantly, the technique used here will
potentially dramatically reduce the cost of III-V integration. In addition to
the specific demonstration of logic circuits, the integration of III-Vs with Si
can potentially impact a wide ranges of areas such as photonics, sensing, and
photovoltaics. To advance STEM education and diversity as part of this project,
a joint effort with a local high school is being undertaken to build integrated
physics and math lesson plans that aid students in seeing how complex math
concepts are utilized to build models for the physical world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to demonstrate
indium phosphide, indium arsenide, and gallium antimonide based III-V CMOS logic
circuits directly grown on Si substrates. Critically, the growth studied here
involves precipitation of the desired III-V crystal out of a liquid phase metal
solvent, in contrast to the vapor-solid growth phases used for traditional MOCVD
growth. This work will be carried out by first performing detailed structural
and electronic material characterization of III-Vs grown on Si, using techniques
such as x-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, electron
backscatter diffraction, Hall measurements, photoluminescence yield, and time
resolved photoluminescence measurements. Utilizing these techniques, we will
establish how growth parameters affect the formation of defects in the III-Vs,
and how those defects impact the optoelectronic characteristics of the
materials. Finally, III-V n-channel and p-channel FinFETs and circuits will be
fabricated and characterized focusing on both individual devices and materials
co-integration issues. Furthermore, the materials and processes developed here
will be of importance for a wide range of fields including electronics,
photonics, imaging, and photovoltaics.