* 1610992
* A Path Towards III-Nitrides-Based Superjunction Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

The demand for high power switches for various classical and renewable energy
applications is increasing exponentially. The proposed research will provide for
a transformative and disruptive technology for power electronics that will go
well beyond classical semiconductor materials limits and lead to unprecedented
switching power densities and reliability beyond the Si-based technology. The
successful demonstration of such disruptive technology would revolutionize
energy switching and transmission, energy storage, and related applications in
electrical motor drives and other power-intensive applications. This research
will have a direct impact on the materials and devices that will be used for
applications that deal with the preservation and extension of natural resources
by allowing for an efficient use and transmission of electrical energy,
availability of clean potable water through disinfection by the use of UV, and
the detection of pollutants and other effluents. This program will provide the
opportunity to educate the next generation of engineers capable of out-of-the-
box thinking and will support one PhD student, and a part-time undergraduate
assistant and post-doctoral researcher. The novel concepts developed within this
project will be implemented in the educational and outreach efforts, especially
integrating characterization and process control schemes to applications dealing
with materials needed for sustainability, preservation and extension of our
natural resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current GaN-based power device designs
focus on simple Schottky and p-i-n diodes. New technological breakthroughs are
needed that are not limited by the classical materials figure of merit.
Superjunctions are lateral devices that surpass the materials figure of merit
limit by attaining full compensation under the reverse bias and very low on-
resistance under the forward bias, i.e., they behave as dielectrics in one
direction and as conductors in the other. Although Si-based superjunctions are a
mature technology, known as CoolMos, no superjunctions have been attempted in
wide bandgap materials because of the exceptional technological challenges.
Recent technological advances in the growth of lateral polar structures and
newly developed doping control schemes bridge the missing technological gap and
provide a new path for GaN-based superjunction technology that does not rely on
re-growth and ion implantation technologies, which have been unsuccessful in
III-nitrides although they are routinely used in the Si technology. These
devices will eventually allow for significant breakdown voltages exceeding 5 kV
and low on-resistance. This research will establish growth technology for both,
vertical n-type and p-type thick drift region junctions based on controllable,
simultaneous growth of N-polar and Ga-polar GaN domains, with the associated low
doping levels in the range of 10'16 to 10'17 cm-3 for complete depletion. The
ability to grow and to control doping in p- and n-doped domains side-by-side
will establish a pathway for the design of superjunction device structures and
demonstrate superjunctions with breakdown voltages exceeding 1200 V and 500%
better performance than predicted by the Baliga's figure of merit. Furthermore,
this research will provide a transformative and disruptive technology for a new
generation of devices whose architecture is not limited by the classical growth
and processing approaches.