* 1610833
* Nanoscale spectroscopy of hybrid perovskite solar cells: resolving the role of humidity on device stability through in situ microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Marina Leite, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;An effective high-efficiency and
low-cost photovoltaic technology is still required to successfully replace
fossil fuel-based technologies in the US. Currently, only 1% of the total US
electricity is generated by solar power. The main challenge for the widespread
implementation of solar cells as a source of electricity is the current high
cost/Watt. Hybrid perovskites are a very promising new material for
manufacturing low-cost photovoltaic modules, but improvement in device stability
is essential so that this emerging material can be effectively employed as a
photovoltaic technology. In particular, it is unknown how the device performance
changes when the perovskite, composed by micron-scale grains, is exposed to
humidity. To advance the understanding of how the grains' electrical properties
are changing while the solar cells are under operation (and exposed to
humidity), this project will implement a novel microscopy technique to resolve,
in real-time, the changes that take place within the grains forming the
perovskites. These "nanoscale photographs" of the electrical response of the
perovskites will be used to determine which physical and chemical processes
should be avoided for the realization of stable devices. The integrated
educational component of this project focuses on incorporating the research
findings into two existing courses in Materials Science and Engineering at the
University of Maryland, mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, and
broadcasting the scientific results through the LeiteLab YouTube Channel in
different languages for worldwide dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description of the project: &lt;br/&gt;Hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites
based on methyl-ammonium lead iodide are an emerging material with true
potential for being a high performance and low cost photovoltaic technology.
However, despite the remarkable progress over the last few years, there is still
a lack in understanding of why and how the material is changing/degrading when
exposed to humidity. The goal of this research is to elucidate the role of
humidity in perovskite solar cells by measuring in real-time, with nanoscale
resolution, the changes that take place when the perovskite material degrades.
By implementing fast illuminated-Kelvin probe force microscopy the Leite group
will map the photo-generated voltage in 16 seconds; thus, capturing in real-time
the material changes while the device is in operando. This project builds upon
the PI's expertise in nanoscale metrologies to image the functionality of
devices for energy harvesting and storage. Controlling the negative effect of
humidity on perovskites will enable the wide implementation of this material as
a reliable and low cost photovoltaic technology.