* 1610904
* Thermal gradient engineering for spin injection and transport in metallic nanomagnetic switches and sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 310,000.00

The electronic and magnetic devices that currently enable rapid information
processing and massive data storage are formed in part using metallic structures
with dimensions approaching 100 nanometers. Often these devices function due to
an applied flow of electrons, and this charge flow generates heat. In many cases
this heat limits the performance of these tiny devices and prevents gains in
technology. This project aims to explore ways to simultaneously avoid or exploit
this heating by study of thermal effects in a particular nanoscale metallic
magnetic device known as a non-local spin valve. These devices are already known
to allow generation of flows of angular momentum, or spin, in a metallic
nanowire with no associated charge flow. However, their operation usually
requires large applied electron flows in other elements of the device. The main
motivation of this work is to provide the transformative knowledge of thermal
effects in these devices that could eventually allow operation with only applied
heat, eliminating the charge flow altogether. This will enable simplification
and further size reduction in future devices that could significantly advance
data storage and other technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The metallic non-local
spin valve is an invaluable, though still not thoroughly understood, device for
producing and studying pure spin currents. The use of charge currents to produce
spin currents in the NLSV was achieved ~15 years ago, and these sensors are
poised to play an important role in near-term magnetic recording. However, the
electrical injection of spin causes significant heating and thermoelectric
effects that strongly affect the performance of the sensors are not yet well
characterized and understood. The demonstration of spin injection in the non-
local spin valve via purely thermal effects is of even greater interest. These
very recent and novel measurements point the way toward implementation of such
sensors without the large charge current, which offer many advantages for the
ever smaller and more sensitive sensors or more efficient sources demanded by
the information technology community. This project takes advantage of unique
expertise in creating and measuring thermal gradients and in measuring Seebeck
and Peltier effects in nanoscale systems to understand and control heat and spin
flow in metallic nanomagnetic devices. The unique ability to directly measure
the thermal properties (thermal conductivity, Seebeck, and Peltier coefficients)
of the thin film constituents of nanoscale devices using micromachined thermal
isolation platforms is a central focus of the project. By removing the bulk
substrate from beneath a nanoscale device or thin film, the uncertainty in the
direction of heat flow is dramatically reduced, modeling the structure via
finite element methods becomes much simpler, and engineering the thermal
gradients applied to the nanoscale structures is possible. Specific tasks
include: 1) Understanding interface and materials dependence of the spin-
dependent Seebeck effect and the absolute Seebeck effect, 2) the Search for
magnon-drag contributions, 3) Studies of thermoelectric effects and the spin
injection in "zero substrate" devices, and 4) Thermally engineering response of
sensors via external thermal gradients.