* 1610362
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Self-Assembled Superlattice Nanowires: A Pathway to High Efficiency Thermoelectrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Rachel Goldman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: As developing countries continue to
industrialize, energy demands are rapidly increasing; thus, there is an
increasing need for sustainable clean energy sources driven by scientific
research. Typically, the efficiency of energy-production and utilization systems
is limited by heat loss; conversion of the wasted heat into usable energy may be
accomplished using solid-state devices that convert heat to electricity, i.e.
thermoelectrics. Thermoelectric generators are used to power satellites, probes,
and rovers, but their widespread terrestrial use would require increased device
efficiencies. This project explores a pathway towards high efficiency
thermoelectrics using a naturally occurring phenomenon, spontaneous vertical
phase separation, to achieve nanowire superlattices that extend over macroscopic
lengths. The ultimate goal is to understand heat propagation across the
superlattices in order to optimize the performance of several advanced
nanotechnologies. The project consists of a collaboration between the University
of Michigan and Ben-Gurion University, integrating the expertise of the U.S.
investigators (theory and thermoelectric characterization) with that of the
Israeli investigators (nanowire fabrication and characterization). The new
knowledge gained will be broadly disseminated through publications and
presentations, and curriculum development. Outreach activities emphasize the
mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Nanometer-scale heterostructured materials have been identified as
promising candidates for high efficiency thermoelectric devices. In the
framework of the phonon-glass-electron crystal concept, the thermoelectric
efficiency can be enhanced by reducing dimensionality, through the formation of
two-dimensional thin films or superlattices, one-dimensional nanowires, or zero-
dimensional quantum dots. Indeed, one-dimensional conductors, in which electrons
are restricted to a narrow energy range, are predicted to enable conversion
efficiencies approaching the Carnot limit. A primary goal of the project is to
explore eutectic alloy catalyst-induced vertical phase separation during vapor-
liquid-solid growth of nanowires. In addition to developing predictive
understanding of these mechanisms, nanowire superlattices extending over
macroscopic length-scales will be fabricated, and spatially-resolved Seebeck
measurements will be demonstrated using scanning thermoelectric microscopy.
Finally, new understanding of the mechanisms for enhanced thermoelectric figure
of merit in nanowires will be developed. In particular, correlations between van
Hove singularities in the density of states and enhancements of the Seebeck
coefficient will be investigated using both doping and electrostatic gating to
tune the Fermi level of the nanowires. The combined expertise of the team in
nanowire growth, structural and thermoelectric characterization, and device
simulation and fabrication will be used to develop a pathway to superlattice
nanowires for thermoelectric generators.