* 1610213
* Collaborative Research: Photonic and Electronic Devices Based on Self-Assembling DNA Templates
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Gleb Finkelstein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

Collaborative Research: Photonic and Electronic Device Fabrication by Templating
on Self-Assembled DNA Origami
Nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
major goal of this project is the development of reliable, bioinspired,
molecular assembly protocols and materials for fabricating functional photonic
(light-active) and electronic (electron-active) devices. Biological structures
with nanometer-scale dimensions are able to self assemble using principles of
molecular recognition, principles that can now be harnessed for production of
technologically useful materials, objects, and devices. Fabrication techniques
that mimic biological nanometer scale assembly strategies promise to transform
modern electronics manufacturing by reducing the need for increasingly expensive
lithographic fabrication equipment and facilities, decreasing reliance on toxic,
rare earth elements, and increasing the energy efficiency of producing and
operating computational and communications devices. Besides advancing science
and engineering issues critical to future device manufacturing processes, this
project will provide educational and research training opportunities for
students at the undergraduate, post-graduate and high school levels. This
project will train students in the unique combination of biochemical and
physical methods of modern nanotechnology that are relevant for industrial and
academic careers. Through Project SEED (Summer Educational Experience for the
Disadvantaged), high school students from disadvantaged economic backgrounds
will participate in laboratory research during the summer months to become
acquainted with the emerging field of nanoscience. The project coordinators will
continue to actively recruit participants from demographic groups typically
under-represented in the science-technology-engineering-mathematical (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of
this three year project include: 1) development of metallic clusters for
significant enhancement of Raman scattering signals by templating metal
nanoparticles on DNA origami, then using these Raman-bright clusters as photonic
devices for tagging and tracking specific cell-types during cell-sorting; 2)
application of newly prototyped tetrahedral origami for functional 3D metal
cluster assemblies including single electron transistors and chiral plasmonic
devices; and 3) fabrication and testing of a 51 kilobase DNA origami for larger,
oriented helical structures for photonic devices. Development of self-assembling
systems for bottom-up fabrication has been a long sought after goal of
nanotechnology. The particular merit of this project stems from the convergence
of recent advances in DNA-based self-assembly methods with new understanding of
plasmonically coupled metal nanoparticle clusters for a wide range of
optoelectronic applications. Intellectual merit of the project also derives from
the interdisciplinary collaboration that couples a biochemist and a physicist on
a productive team with a history of successful scientific research and
educational activities. The project will lead to development of alternative,
cheaper (most steps are in aqueous solution) and more versatile fabrication
methods for composite bio-nano-devices. These nanostructures may be useful in
the development of naturally biocompatible devices with strong potential for use
in biomedical applications. Results from this study may provide major impacts to
a range of applications, including electronic devices with decreased size,
weight, power consumption, and heat generation for mobile sensing and