* 1610797
* Creating optical polarimetry on a silicon chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ronald Reano, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 256,479.00

Abstract title: Creating optical polarimetry in miniature photonic integrated
circuits for point-of-need materials identification, chemical and biological
analysis, and environmental sensing

Abstract: Non-technical description: Optical polarimetry provides a unique lens
for achieving contrast in sensing systems, conveying information that generally
cannot be acquired by any other means. The uniqueness of polarization signatures
yields applications that span virtually all areas of science and technology,
including materials characterization, chemical and biological analysis, remote
sensing of the environment, and measurements of astronomical objects. The state-
of-the-art in optical polarimetry involves, however, relatively large and bulky
instrumentation that lacks portability and requires extensive alignment,
restricting measurements to the laboratory. Miniaturization of optical
polarimeters to the scale of a microelectronic circuit would transform
polarimeters from large-scale laboratory instrumentation to portable point-of-
need platforms. Unique sensing modalities become possible for applications
spanning real time monitoring of hyperglycemic swings, analysis of trace
chemical compounds, and development of biotechnology relevant to food
industries. The societal importance of miniaturized sensor systems drives the
focus of the integrated educational plan. The plan responds to the challenge of
linking science and engineering to increasingly global societal problems by
developing a global scientist and engineer conduit, creating new modules for
integrated optics curriculum that engenders integrative research thinking, and
involving graduate and undergraduate students, underrepresented groups, and
minorities in the research program.

Technical description: To date, virtually all sensing modalities based on
spectral and intensity information of a sample have been miniaturized from
laboratory scale instrumentation to the scale of a microelectronic circuit,
except for optical polarimetry. Optical polarimetry has not been accessible on
the chip-scale because the sensing modality requires polarization controlling
components such as retarders and polarizers that are implemented in bulk
crystals or optical fiber. Manipulating the state of polarization on a photonic
integrated circuit has proven to be elusive. To overcome this obstacle, a
comprehensive research program is proposed involving theory, design, analysis,
fabrication, and test to realize optical polarimetry on a silicon chip for the
first time. The objectives are to experimentally demonstrate an on-chip
arbitrary polarization state generator and an on-chip arbitrary polarization
state analyzer that are interconnected by a region that overlaps the optical
wave with a sample of interest. The approach harnesses the polarization rotating
properties of Berry's phase in three-dimensional silicon optical waveguides.
Photonic integrated circuits will be created that are capable of generating and
determining arbitrary states of polarization. Polarimetric measurements of
dichroism, diattenuation, optical activity, birefringence, and depolarization
are brought to the chip-scale. The design and modeling approach is based on
polarization dependent coupled mode theory and numerical solutions of Maxwell's
equations. The chip will be fabricated at Ohio State University using nano-scale
fabrication techniques. A host of samples in the solid and liquid phases will be
measured for the purposes of test, measurement, and validation. Measurements
will be compared with current laboratory scale optical polarimeters.
Transformational point-of-need polarimetric sensor system architectures in
integrated circuits are envisioned.