* 1610618
* Two-Dimensional Synthetic Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Hari Manoharan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 434,447.00

Non-technical abstract. &lt;br/&gt;The ways in which electrons move through
different types of materials provide the foundations for nearly all modern
electronic technology. For example, the electron flow through the semiconductor
silicon can be turned on or off, or modulated like a valve, and these behaviors
are the basis behind transistors, computer processors, and all electronic
communication. To maintain continued progress in electronics technology, the
underlying components and materials must be continuously scaled down in size.
However, this progress is now stymied by the fact that critical dimensions are
approaching "quantum" sizes where the position of even a single stray atom or
molecule plays a measurable role in performance, and the flow of electrons is
impeded by atom-size impurities and even by their own tiny weight. New materials
hold the key to circumventing many of these problems, but new materials are
often difficult to understand and therefore apply, due to their complex nature.
This project synthesizes new electronic materials using one of the most advanced
laboratory technologies available-the controlled manipulation of single atoms
and molecules to build up from scratch entirely new materials that can guide
electrons in ways not possible with existing materials. These new materials are
built one atom at a time as a means to test how new fundamental physics can be
applied to electronic technologies, such as making electrons move as if they
have no weight, and making electron avoid obstacles so that their flow through
electronic devices is unimpeded. The information learned from these studies
feeds back into synthesizing larger versions of the same materials in bulk. In
the process of conducting the calculations and experiments of this project,
Ph.D. students receive education and training in the critical fields of
nanotechnology and nanomaterials, and undergraduate students receive exposure to
state-of-the-art research. The research team teaches courses into which current
research in nanoscale science and technology is interwoven, manages a program
that hosts and mentors visiting students from underrepresented-minority-serving
community colleges in 10-week lab research internships, and actively makes
available nanoscience educational tools and multimedia for the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract. &lt;br/&gt;This project applies atomic
and molecular manipulation to the nanoscale assembly of novel quantum materials-
materials whose structural and electronic properties are dominated by quantum
mechanics and give rise to either novel behavior or promising technologies. The
primary experimental apparatus for these investigations are custom-built low-
temperature scanning probe microscopes capable of both studying and controlling
matter at atomic length scales. Beyond these tools, methods and approaches also
involve tools of theoretical quantum design, developed synergistically with
experiments. The overall project goal is to create synthetic two-dimensional
nanomaterials exhibiting new properties and states of matter not possible in
their natural-materials counterparts. The scope of this project targets
exquisite control of internal quantum degrees of freedom-such as electron
amplitude and phase engineering through local bond-length manipulation-to enable
new electronic behavior sought in modern science and technology. Work focuses on
two-dimensional materials and strain-engineered phases, involving variants of
Dirac materials such as graphene and the related dichalcogenide honeycomb
structure molybdenum disulfide. Local probes and application of these materials
are at the forefront of experimental studies and are relevant to a burgeoning
class of new designer materials. Specific experiments include: using atomic-
scale strain texturing to embed pseudoelectric and pseudomagnetic gauge fields
into artificial molecular graphene, and pseudoelectric fields within "artificial
atoms" of other strained two-dimensional monolayers; structure and atomic
manipulation of boundary states and topological confinement within the same
materials; assembly of electron quasicrystals and non-periodic matter.