* 1610984
* On-surface Redox Assembly of Metal-organic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2021
* USD 544,931.00

The ability to control the transformation of one molecule into another is an
overarching objective in chemical research. There are many challenging, but
highly relevant, chemical reactions that we do not yet know how to control and
design. Many of these transformations occur at surfaces that facilitate the
reactions and transformations of gas phase molecules. This research program is a
joint effort between Dr. Steven Tait and Dr. Kenneth Caulton at Indiana
University to develop control of surface reaction chemistry using metal-organic
complexes. Dr. Tait's research group has expertise in the chemistry of surfaces
and the characterization of those chemistries using spectroscopy and microscopy.
Dr. Caulton's research group has expertise in the design of metal-organic
complexes for chemical reactions. Together, this collaborative team is advancing
our ability to control and design surface chemistries, such as the conversion of
the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide to products that could be used to make
plastics and other useful materials. There are many broader impacts of this
project. The program offers an excellent educational opportunity for student
researchers to work in an interdisciplinary science program. This research will
train students for productive careers in science and technology. The project
also involves efforts to increase diversity in chemical science research and to
make the results from the research accessible to the public through programs at
science museums and high schools. The latter programs involve discussion of how
molecules interact and assemble. The science museum and high school program also
provides hands-on activities illustrating how scientists characterize molecules,
including about how they create images of the chemical structures at the
molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Drs. Steven Tait
and Kenneth Caulton and their research groups at Indiana University are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
to study the on-surface chemistry and assembly between tailored, redox-active
ligands and single-site transition metals. The long-range goal of this work is
to develop the ability to program chemical selectivity in functionalized
surfaces, guided by both the chosen metal and active electron storage at the
ligand. The team integrates the skills of a surface physical chemistry group
with an organometallic chemistry group to develop an understanding of on-surface
redox chemistry to produce well-defined surface reaction sites. These sites are
designed to be uniform due to stoichiometric control and to create a repetitive
nanoscale structure of the same reactive site in an arrayed metal-organic
surface structure. Applying these strategies of ligand design and metal-complex
formation to surface functionalization offers potentially transformative impacts
in the fields of catalysis, sensing, and carbon recycling technologies. This
interdisciplinary project allows new advances in the science of surface
functionalization and new insights into redox chemistry processes. It also
provides an outstanding training environment for the young scientists on the
project to participate actively in an interdisciplinary research effort. This
team is actively engaged in activities to increase diversity in
interdisciplinary chemistry research and in outreach programs for the public,
capitalizing on the highly visual nature (scanning probe microscopy) of the
work.