* 1610875
* Colloidal Dynamics in Fluids with Spatiotemporally Modulated Nematic Order
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Daniel Reich, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 488,826.00

Non-technical abstract Liquid crystals are fluids composed of rod-shaped
molecules. The molecules arrange themselves to be more ordered than in an
ordinary liquid but less so than in a crystalline solid. Nematic liquid crystal
are an important example of this. The molecules in nematics all orient along a
common direction. Impurities, like small particles, can disrupt this order and
introduce important new effects. These can include important new optical and
magnetic properties that potentially enable new technologies. The behavior
becomes even richer when the order in the fluid is spatially patterned or
changes with time. This project will investigate experimentally several classes
of spatially or temporally varying nematic liquid crystals. They include
'active' nematics that undergo internally driven perpetual flow and that are
seeded with magnetic particles and nematics with a striped pattern of ordering
that should cause particles to sort themselves spontaneously by size. Among the
broader impacts of the project will be research training and education for
graduate and undergraduate students. The project will also enable a partnership
with a local majority-minority magnet science high school to provide talented
Baltimore City students with opportunities for research internships.

Technical Abstract The study of inclusions suspended in liquid crystals can lead
to important new insight about the viscoelastic and interfacial properties of
these materials and can further create novel platforms for manipulation of
colloids through unique anisotropic interactions engendered by the fluids.
Further, particle-dispersed liquid crystals hold technological promise as
composite materials with enhanced properties deriving from coupling of the
particles to the liquid crystalline order. This work will seek to advance
substantially the understanding of the nature of dynamics in liquid crystalline
materials and how the dynamics relates to colloidal transport. The particular
goal will be to interrogate fluids with nematic order that are driven from
equilibrium, either by internally generated flows in the case of active nematics
or by externally imposed electric or stress fields, and to investigate how the
spatiotemporal response to this driving couples to the particle motion. The
research will focus on three thematically linked projects: (i) active nematic
films containing magnetically actuated nano- and micro-particles that will
provide new insights into the viscoelastic and hydrodynamic properties of active
matter on key intrinsic lengthscales and timescales; (ii) colloidal dynamics in
patterned and dynamically modulated liquid crystals configured to test striking
predictions for colloidal transport in such environments; and (iii) nanoparticle
dynamics in fluids with shear-induced nematic order, where new x-ray scattering
techniques can enable novel microscopic perspectives on the structural dynamics
of such out-of-equilibrium, driven systems. Broader impacts of the work will
include research training for graduate and undergraduate students in physics
that will prepare them for careers in academia and industry. The project will
also enable a partnership with a local majority-minority magnet science high
school to provide talented Baltimore City students with opportunities for
research internships.