* 1610742
* Comparative Evaluation of Ionic Transport Mechanisms in Solid-State Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2022
* John Kieffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 665,635.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRPTION: A key aspect towards achieving batteries with energy
and power densities that are competitive with fossil fuel is to develop solid-
state electrolytes for use as the membrane that separates the anode and cathode.
The most important property of this membrane, which facilitates the
electrochemical process associated with energy conversion, is to exhibit high
ionic conductivity. This issue is why current battery technologies rely on
liquid electrolytes. Solid-state electrolytes allow for a more compact form
factor, safer operation, and better longevity of batteries, but their ionic
conductivity must be improved. To accomplish this goal, various schools of
thought and types of materials, including inorganic glasses, fine-grained
ceramics, and composites containing an organic plasticizer are being pursued. To
date, much of this work has been done by trial and error. In the present
project, the optimal materials design criteria for solid-state electrolytes are
identified through a comparative study that involves a series of carefully
conceived experiments and atomistic computer simulations. This research reveals
the underlying fundamental relationships between materials structure, their
mechanical properties, and ionic conductivities, including the development of
improved theoretical models for the interpretation of experimental findings,
which are capable of predicting the optimal materials design for desired
performance characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Solid-
state battery electrolytes are key to the advancement of green renewable energy
storage technologies. In this research, the materials design criteria are being
developed for solid-state electrolytes that exhibit the required high transport
rates and transference numbers for small charge carrier cations. Additionally,
these electrolytes must maintain a mechanical rigidity sufficient to suppress
lithium dendrite growth and safely separate electrodes in self-supporting device
structures, and possess an electrochemical stability range wide enough to
accommodate large electrode potential differences. The current scope of
materials design concepts encompasses materials from crystalline to amorphous,
and from inorganic to organic, and with this research the most effective
approach is being identified. To this end, the decisive ionic transport
mechanisms are systematically isolated by formulating a series of prototype
materials systems, each one selectively exposing the influence on the cation
mobility that specific structural features within the major materials types
have, including interfacial structures in polycrystalline ceramics, plasticizer
phases in hybrid organic-inorganic composites, and engineered defects in ion-
exchanged oxide glasses. These experiments are coupled with extensive atomistic
simulations to interpret experimental findings and to develop theoretical models
that facilitate a reliable and transferrable design strategy for solid-state
electrolytes. Undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral
fellows are engaged in research that provides training in both computational and
experimental methods of investigation, and that advances the National Materials
Genome Initiative mandate through the development of computational tools for
predictive materials design. The PI is establishing a bridge program to attract
students graduating with a Masters degree from Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs) with terminal programs, into Doctoral programs at the University of
Michigan. He also helps organize the High School Teachers Materials Camp
sponsored by ASM International and hosted by his department since 2002.