* 1610453
* OP: Compressive Nonlinear Optical Microscopy for Dynamic Chemical Imaging of Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven Baldelli, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 471,400.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Baldelli at the University of Houston and Professor
Kelly at Rice University are developing a new type of microscope that is able to
see molecules on surfaces faster and with higher sensitivity than regular
microscopes. With cameras, pictures can be taken that show colors to help
identify objects; for example, grass is green and sky is blue. However, to look
at molecules, more specific information is needed about the "colors" that
molecules absorb. For many molecules, this absorption occurs in the infrared
region of light. To look at these infrared colors, traditional cameras are not
very good so methods that can obtain pictures without cameras are necessary.
Professor Baldelli and Professor Kelly are developing a new type of microscope
to figure out the surface image of surface molecules. The results of this new
microscope are useful to all researchers interested in surfaces related to
biomaterials, energy, and environmental topics. For example, it can be used to
study the distribution of lipid molecules on cell membranes that controls
proteins moving in and out of cells, which in turn regulate cell growth and
signaling. It can also be used to look at chemical dopants on a thin film that
accelerate the oxygen reduction reaction in fuel cells, an important step in
efficient energy conversion. The research project also presents a valuable
opportunity to learn and experience collaborative multidisciplinary research --
a current emphasis of science and engineering education. The topics and research
project have many components to encourage undergraduate and high school students
into the research, including instrument building, data analysis and
interpretation, and research presentations. This later point is an important
aspect since it builds much confidence in the younger students and
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Baldelli and Kelly are developing a
new state-of-the-art surface spectroscopic imaging microscope to study the
molecular, spatial, and temporal evolution of patterns and chemical
heterogeneity present in many fundamental and technologically important systems.
This new CS-SFG (compressive sensing-sum frequency generation vibrational
spectroscopy) imaging technique utilizes a digital mirror device (DMD). The DMD
is the heart of the DLP projector and flat screen displays. It is a 2-D array of
mirrors that reflects the SFG image onto a detector. Using computer control and
a random pattern generator, the signal intensity changes depending on which
mirrors are reflecting toward the detector. Each pattern results from 50% of the
randomly chosen mirrors being turned on for each measurement. After many such
measurements, the image is reconstructed based on the signal and the known
mirror pattern. CS allows for efficient image acquisition where only a few
percent of the total information is necessary to faithfully reconstruct the
surface features. Two configurations broad-band and narrow-band IR are set up to
evaluate the effect on the image reconstruction. In addition the detection
system incorporates heterodyne detection to extract phase information forth
monolayer signal. This new capability allows for alternate imaging schemes and
orientation analysis. The effect of compression algorithms and quantitative
analysis ultimately aid in the interpretation of heterogeneous monolayer films
on surfaces. The CS-SFG microscope will be a significant improvement over
current approaches that either use probe areas on the order of a millimeter or
acquire the full hyperspectral data cube but at considerable expense in sample
throughput. Once demonstrated, Professors Baldelli and Kelly are to employ this
microscope to investigate the molecular-level static and dynamic details of
chemical patterns (such as lipid domains) formed under the control condition of
lithography and the transfer of films to solid substrates via the Langmuir-
Blodgett technique. The research project provides both graduate students and
local high school students with highly interdisciplinary training in chemistry,
physics, engineering, and computer science.