* 1610483
* Interaction of Water with Polymer Surfaces: Consequence on Wetting, Adhesion, and Friction
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2022
* USD 698,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of water with
polymer surfaces has significant implications in diverse technological areas.
The impacts are far-reaching: from energy-harvesting devices, biomedical
implants, corrosion-resistant coatings, and extending to any innovation with
surfaces that is influenced by wettability in aqueous environments. The goal of
this project is to understand how polymer surfaces restructure themselves on a
molecular level after coming in contact with water. Polymers are widely used as
adhesives and lubricants and the knowledge of how these materials interact with
water is of great importance. This understanding will be obtained using advanced
specialized surface and spectroscopic techniques, some developed in the PI's
laboratory. The fundamental understanding developed by the planned research will
help in designing better materials that either adapt or resist changes upon
contact with water. The PI will be training two graduate students in the area of
surface science, which is a key requirement of industries developing or
manufacturing adhesives or coatings. In addition to these directly integrated
educational aspects, the PI will also be involved in broader outreach activities
to middle and high school students as well as to community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
well accepted that when we bring water in contact with surfaces, polar groups
can migrate or reorient at the contact interface and reduce the interfacial
energy. This surface rearrangement results in contact angle hysteresis. For
example, when two solid surfaces come in contact, this interfacial rearrangement
leads to adhesion hysteresis and higher friction. But the direct observations of
these structural rearrangements are elusive. Surface-sensitive sum frequency
generation spectroscopy (SFG) has been used to study surface rearrangements upon
contact with water, changes during solid-solid contact, and during sliding
contact. However, the kinetics of the surface rearrangements in contact with
water are not well understood, particularly how dynamical effects are related to
the Tg of the polymer or even surface Tg. The PI will conduct SFG experiments to
study the kinetics of surface rearrangements for poly(alkyl methacrylates) and
poly(alpha-hydroxymethyl substituted acrylate) as a function of time and
temperature after bringing the surfaces in contact with water, humidity, and
steam. This will allow the PI to relate these surface changes with contact-angle
hysteresis and adhesion hysteresis underwater, and to study the differences
between wet and dry friction coefficients. Recently, the PI and his
collaborators have shown that molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are able to
reproduce the SFG spectra of the poly(methyl methacrylate) surface. Here, the PI
will complement the SFG experiments with MD simulations for polymer-water
interfaces. The proposed research will be a concerted effort at the molecular-
level to understand the interaction of water with polymer surfaces.