* 1610031
* First-Principles Investigation of Energy Transport within Highly Ordered Organic Molecular Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sahar Sharifzadeh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2019
* USD 283,819.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The CMMT Program of the Division of Materials Research, and the CTMC Program of
Division of Chemistry jointly fund this award on research and education in
energy transport in organic molecular arrays based on first-principles
calculations. Solar energy conversion, i.e. harnessing solar energy and
converting it to electricity or chemical energy, is a promising technology for
addressing the challenges associated with the projected future growth in energy
needs. This technology requires new materials, designed specifically to create
more efficient and inexpensive devices for solar energy conversion. This project
focuses on organic materials, composed of assemblies of carbon-based molecules,
a particularly promising class of materials for such applications. In contrast
to the traditional inorganic materials used in solar energy conversion devices,
organic materials are low in cost, abundant, and extensively tunable by virtue
of the mature field of synthetic organic chemistry. To utilize and improve these
materials for solar energy conversion, it is necessary to understand their
fundamental properties; however, this understanding is hindered by the
challenges in characterizing the behavior of electrons, both experimentally and
theoretically, at nanometer length scales. By utilizing and developing state-of-
the-art simulation methods, the PI and her research team will investigate the
fundamental properties that govern the interaction of light with assemblies of
organic molecules, and elucidate the factors critical to the design of advanced
solar energy conversion materials.

This project will disseminate the knowledge gained through numerous channels: i)
The developments made to the simulation methods will be made publicly available
through the computational tool BerkeleyGW on nanoHub.org. Nanohub is a website
created by the National Science Foundation Network for Computational
Nanotechnology, that allows experts in nanotechnology-related fields to share
knowledge and simulation tools. ii) In collaboration with the Boston University
(BU) Technology Innovation Scholars Program, where undergraduate students
interested in becoming teachers will contribute to teaching at diverse high
schools throughout the Boston area, lesson plans will be developed that
incorporate the applicability of the research to solar energy conversion. iii)
In collaboration with the BU Outreach and Diversity Program, an animated
tutorial aimed at younger students will be developed and broadcast on the BU
YouTube channel.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The CMMT Program of the Division of Materials Research, and the CTMC Program of
the Division of Chemistry jointly fund this award on research and education in
energy transport in organic molecular arrays based on first-principles
calculations. The intent of this research is to aid in the design of new organic
molecular assemblies for solar energy conversion. Organic materials are a highly
tunable class of optically active materials that are promising for photovoltaics
and artificial photosynthesis. To make organic materials in such applications
feasible requires an intuitive understanding of how to improve the efficiency
and lifetime of the component materials. Moreover, the vast space of realizable
organic molecular systems afforded by the maturity of the field of organic
synthesis provides a great opportunity to both explore new physical phenomena
and design novel materials. Theoretical approaches are necessary to develop
deeper physical intuition about the optoelectronic properties of these materials
in order to advance the technology. This project focuses on the role of long-
range order on the optical and electronic properties of recently synthesized
perylene diimide molecular arrays. The PI and research team will employ first-
principles electronic structure theory to better understand how optically
excited states within ordered organic assemblies can be controlled to deliver
improved photovoltaic and photocatalytic efficiency.

This project addresses a key, unanswered question related to energy transport
within molecular assemblies: what is the role of inter-molecular interactions on
the evolution of the excited-state? The determination of structure-property
relationships is critical for design of new molecules; this study will quantify
aspects of inter-molecular interactions and electronic structure, such as the
interplay between electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions, enabling
their application to molecular design. This approach is unique in that the
first-principles calculations focus on extended systems, where long-range
interactions play a significant role on the nature of excitations. Additionally,
this work will develop new computational methodology for probing the role of
electron-phonon interactions, which are very difficult to characterize for
extended systems. Experimental collaborators will test the predications using
their unique synthetic technologies, validating and improving upon the
computational approach, and thereby increasing the impact of this research. The
ultimate aim of this research to provide new design rules to efficiently direct
optical excitations along molecular nanowires that will be synthesized.

This project will disseminate the knowledge gained through numerous channels: i)
The developments made to the simulation methods will be made publicly available
through the computational tool BerkeleyGW on nanoHub.org. Nanohub is a website
created by the National Science Foundation Network for Computational
Nanotechnology, that allows experts in nanotechnology-related fields to share
knowledge and simulation tools. ii) In collaboration with the Boston University
(BU) Technology Innovation Scholars Program, where undergraduate students
interested in becoming teachers will contribute to teaching at diverse high
schools throughout the Boston area, lesson plans will be developed that
incorporate the applicability of the research to solar energy conversion. iii)
In collaboration with the BU Outreach and Diversity Program, an animated
tutorial aimed at younger students will be developed and broadcast on the BU
YouTube channel.