* 1610074
* Collaborative Research: Modular Multilevel Converter with Parallel Connectivity -- Novel Topology, Control, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Srdjan Lukic, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2020
* USD 240,001.00

Rechargeable-battery systems are critical to two technologies that will help
reduce the consumption of fossil fuels: electrically-powered transportation
systems and energy storage systems for the grid. Despite great improvements in
battery cell performance, battery integration into systems still faces
significant challenges. Existing solutions are typically highly integrated with
the target application, and cannot be repurposed. The systems are often not
scalable, and the failure of a single battery cell can cause the entire system
to fail. In addition, the power electronics of such systems is optimized for the
nominal load, not for partial load, where the system typically operates. This
work explores a radically new approach to designing energy storage and energy
conversion systems by modularizing and integrating the battery with the power
electronics to provide multiple functions using the same semiconductor chip
area. The proposed battery technology will use a new multilevel inverter
topology that allows dynamically reconfigurable series and parallel
connectivity: the modular multilevel series-parallel converter (MMSPC). Modular
design of identical sub-systems will enable the same modules to be used in
multiple applications, making use of economies of scale to reduce system cost.
In electric vehicles, the proposed system can replace hard-wired battery packs
with a flexible, dynamically reconfigurable AC battery and replace multiple
power electronics units, such as the drive inverter, battery charger, and
battery balancing circuits, to provide the output directly from the AC battery.
For grid energy storage, the proposed technology enables repurposing modules
from various applications, such as electric vehicles, incorporation of cells of
different capacity or age into one system, high output quality with
substantially reduced or eliminated magnetic components, rapid dynamic response,
and easy scaling of the storage and power converter systems by simple addition
of AC battery modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To leverage the
advantages of MMSPC, efficient control strategies have to be developed to
optimize performance while minimizing system complexity and cost. The control of
modular multilevel converters (MMCs) presents both challenges and opportunities
associated with the large number of possible switch states. The MMSPC degrees of
freedom are even more due to the additional parallel state, which allows widely
flexible series-parallel configuration of the circuit, amplifying the need for a
coherent control strategy. For instance, in both MMC and MMSPC the same output
voltage can be achieved with a multitude of module configurations, providing the
opportunity to optimize the switch states based on various additional
constraints and objectives such as module balancing, efficiency, output quality,
electromagnetic emissions, and switch and storage-element stress. Existing
control approaches, however, do not fully exploit this opportunity as they
typically reduce the number of objectives and treat the various constraints and
objectives independently. Critically, established strategies are not designed to
utilize parallel connectivity, precluding exploitation of the MMSPC advantages.
Addressing these limitations, we propose to develop a real-time predictive
multi-objective optimization framework that systematically unifies the treatment
of multiple system constraints and objectives, and overcomes the exponential
growth of degrees of freedom with system size and prediction horizon. This
control framework will be applicable to both MMC and MMSPC, and will consider
additional topology variations within each of these converter families. The
advantages of the novel MMSPC topology and control strategy will be demonstrated
with the development of a modular AC battery that incorporates multiple battery
units, battery management, and inverter functionality for applications such as
energy storage systems and electric vehicle drive trains. This innovative
concept will improve lifetime, efficiency, and cost of battery systems, and is
practical only when the capabilities of the MMSPC and the associated control are
leveraged.