* 1610614
* Chain Entropy and Polymerization Thermodynamics: Quantifying Nanoconfinement Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Sindee Simon, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry used to create
polymeric materials is called polymerization. For many applications it is
important to make such polymeric materials within extremely tight spaces, even
down to the nanoscale (i.e. to thicknesses about 10,000 times smaller than the
thickness of a human hair). This process is called nanoconfinement. In this
project, polymerization under nanoconfinement will be studied and theoretical
predictions will be tested. The results of the research are important for a
fundamental understanding of confined polymerization in nanoelectronic and
nanolithography processes, and thus could facilitate technological advances
important to these industries. In addition, the results have implications for
understanding biopolymers and proteins in biological systems where, for example,
protein polymerization can occur in confined environments. The project includes
the training of one graduate student, one postdoctoral researcher, and an
undergraduate researcher in cutting-edge research involving polymer chemistry
and physics at the nanoscale. Ethics training will be incorporated into the
training of the students. The PI has a strong track record working with minority
and female students, and a vigorous effort will similarly be made to include
underrepresented students in this project. Outreach will include organization of
two one-week-long polymer modules for the TTU program, "Science -- It's a Girl
Thing," for girls in junior high school, and the development of four two-hour
modules for the TTU Super Saturdays science program for 4th to 6th graders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental question of entropy loss on confining a chain to a nanopore is
addressed, and theories for the scaling of confinement entropy with chain size
and nanoconfinement size and dimension will be tested. The entropy loss on
confining a chain to a nanopore will be directly determined from the difference
in the entropy change on reaction in nanoconfined and bulk conditions. The
research focuses on nanoconfined free radical n-alkyl methacrylate
polymerizations since the thermodynamics of these systems in the bulk case are
well understood. Monomer/polymer equilibria will be studied using calorimetry as
a function of reaction temperature and confinement conditions, ranging from weak
confinement for dilute solutions in large cylindrical pores to strong
confinement for undiluted monomer in small spherical cavities. Monomer and
initiator concentrations will be varied to change molecular weight independent
of pore size and reaction temperature, whereas pore surface chemistry and
monomer structure will be varied to change interfacial interactions. In
addition, comparisons will be made with nanoparticle-filled systems having
similar surface to volume ratios as the nanoporous matrices but without the
chain confining constraints.