* 1610781
* Proximate Two-Dimensional Electron and Hole Gases in Ambipolar Cuprates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 302,660.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The laws that govern how atoms interact differ
significantly from what we are used to in everyday life such as how baseballs
fly through the air or ocean waves move and interact with each other. For atoms,
our notions of particles and waves merge together and quantum mechanics are used
to describe their interactions. Although commonly relegated to atomic scales,
behavior that is only explainable with the use of quantum mechanics can
transcend from the microscopic to the macroscopic world and produce some
spectacular effects. Examples include superconductivity, superfluidity, and
coherent matter waves. The long-term goal of this work is to achieve coherent
waves of moving pairs of opposite charges in a solid at a temperature where they
could be of practical importance. Matter within which coherent waves of opposite
charge pairs move could provide society with behaviors useful for the next
generation of electronics. Toward this end, the PI will create targeted
structures containing copper and oxygen atom-by-atom with precise control of
their arrangement and the spacing between the atoms. The broader impact of this
research includes the training of undergraduate and graduate students to use one
of the most sophisticated techniques known for creating new materials with atom-
by-atom control of how they are assembled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The technical objective of this project is to grow new copper-oxide-
based superconductors with tunable hole or electron mobile carrier
concentrations. Achieving a superconductor that can be doped with holes or
electrons in a way that can switch abruptly from hole to electron doping is an
important step on the path to synthesizing proximal two-dimensional electron
liquids and two-dimensional hole liquids. A key advantage of this approach is
that the resulting excitonic system created is in its ground state; it does not
rely on optical excitation for its creation, is not subject to recombination,
and can thus, in principle, access much higher exciton carrier concentrations, a
completely uncharted state of matter where unusual behavior (e.g., Bose
condensation) is expected. Although oxide systems are known that can support
either two-dimensional electron liquids or two-dimensional hole liquids, there
are only a few oxides in which the same parent phase can be highly doped in an
ambipolar manner. A standout among these is SrCuO2, the so-called "infinite-
layer" cuprate, which is the parent structure of all high transition temperature
(high Tc) cuprate superconductors. The broader impact of this research includes
the training of students to use one of the most sophisticated synthesis
techniques, molecular-beam epitaxy known for creating oxide materials with
atomic-level control of the constituent atoms.