* 1610190
* High Throughput Tip-Enhanced Near Field Microscopy using Radially Polarized Fiber Modes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 360,684.00

Title: Tip-enhanced near-field microscopy using optical fiber
vortices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description: Optical microscopy is
arguably one of the most successful techniques for non-invasive examination of
the microscopic world ever created. In the last decade nanoscience, phenomena at
length scales orders of magnitude smaller than the microscale, has played an
increasingly larger role in the development of widespread technology such as
nanoscale semiconductor devices, nanoparticle based therapies in medicine, and
sensors that can measure minute forces and signals from biological as well as
inanimate physical systems. Likewise, nanotechnology has also furthered our
understanding of fundamental scientific phenomena at the nanoscale, such as the
electronic structure of two-dimensional materials that promise to usher in the
next generation of high-speed wearable electronic devices, images of intrinsic
vibrational modes capable of sub-cellular classification and local presence of
important proteins in biophysical systems. Probing, and in particular, optical
probing at the nanoscale is thus of paramount importance to help lead the next
revolution in science and technology much like the optical microscope did in the
microscopic world. Our proposed optical fiber vortex light source will provide
two to three orders of magnitude signal enhancement and background reduction in
devices that can optically resolve nanoscale
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The goal of this proposed
program is to develop a tip-enhanced near-field microscopy system that retains
all the advantages of current scattering type near-field scanning optical
microscopes, including the ability to probe the amplitude and phase response of
materials in the nanometer scale using well-established elastic or inelastic
scattering techniques, but with an increased throughput by several orders of
magnitude (simulations suggest the possibility of 75% efficiencies, as opposed
to 0.1-0.2% in current implementations). This will reduce background problems
that have limited the application of current implementations of tip-enhanced
microscopy systems. The primary intellectual significance of achieving program
goals will be the realization of a nanoscale microscopy system that can probe
signals orders of magnitude weaker than currently possible, aided by the
dramatic reductions in background that an optical fiber-based nanoscale tip
would enable. In the proposed effort we will use fiber tapering, electrochemical
etching techniques, and precision metal deposition techniques to adiabatically
convert the stable radially polarized optical modes in the fiber into plasmonic
modes at the fiber tip, as required for tip-enhanced microscopy. The adiabatic
mode transformation, as opposed to external illumination as is currently
employed, will be the key differentiator between current tip-enhanced microscopy
systems and the proposed device, as this is expected to yield the two-to-three
orders of magnitude increase in signal throughput and corresponding decrease in
background.