* 1610333
* Atomic Layer Lithography for Integrated Optoelectronic Devices with Sub-10-nm Critical Dimensions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will use
an advanced nanofabrication technique called atomic layer lithography to create
tiny gaps between metallic electrodes. The gaps can be as small as 1 nanometer
across and centimeters long with nearly any geometry, including linear, curved
or closed loops. Metallic nanogaps with these dimensions have unique electrical
and optical properties. When an AC voltage is applied across the nanogaps, a
phenomenon called dielectrophoresis is observed. Dielectrophoresis results in
forces that can attract or repel small particles from the gaps. In this way the
gaps can be used to trap or sort small biologically-relevant particles for
further analysis with optical or electrical techniques. By shrinking the gap
between electrodes to nanoscale dimensions, the dielectrophoretic forces can be
orders of magnitude larger than with electrodes fabricated with traditional
techniques. Additionally, these gaps can be integrated into nanoscale
transistors that incorporated 2-dimensional materials like graphene. These
nanogaps interact with electromagnetic radiation ranging from visible/infrared
light to microwave radiation. The nanogaps strongly amplify optically-generated
electromagnetic fields, which can be exploited for sensing interactions between
molecules in solution and particles trapped along the gap. By creating nanogaps
that can simultaneously trap biological particles and probe them with nanogap-
enhanced optical techniques, this project will enable ultra-sensitive chemical
analysis. This project also includes educational and outreach components, such
as the training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students. The PI also
maintains a relationship with the Science Museum of Minnesota and leads an
annual activity station during the museum's NanoDays on the impacts of
nanotechnology on everyday life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design, fabricate, and
characterize new devices with sub-10-nm electrically controllable metallic gaps
that will enable a series of novel optical and electrical experiments. Atomic
layer deposition will be utilized as a lithographic patterning method - atomic
layer lithography - to produce electrically contacted metallic gaps with atomic-
scale thickness resolution. Independent control of the gap thickness and contour
shape allows for broadband and precise tuning of the electromagnetic resonance.
The integration of electrical interconnects will enable new functionality of the
nanogaps and a platform to demonstrate their potential applications. The nanogap
devices will be integrated with 2D materials, turning the metal on either side
of the gap into source and drain contacts of field-effect transistors and
photodetectors. These example experiments will serve to entice experimental
experts to utilize atomic layer lithography technique and also use nanogaps as a
platform for their research. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To date, most
researchers rely on electron-beam lithography to create nanogap structures.
While suitable for proof-of-concept experiments, these techniques make
integration into more complex devices difficult, since they are places where
precisely defined geometries and patterns are needed. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research is that the PI will transform atomic layer deposition as a
top-down patterning method, thereby converting its precise thickness control
into lateral patterning resolution without using electron-beam lithography.
Electrical interconnects will be integrated to expand the capabilities of the
devices. Example experiments in optoelectronics and nanoparticle trapping have
the potential to make a large impact on the respective fields.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful, the proposed atomic layer lithography
technique will allow researchers the ability to create ultra-long single-digit
nanogaps with built-in electrodes Therefore, this proposal has the potential to
transform the fields of 2D materials optoelectronics. Graduate and undergraduate
students will gain experience in nanofabrication and characterization. For K-12
outreach, the PI's team will build an interactive Activity Station at the
Science Museum of Minnesota.