* 1610737
* Building a Proportional Cell: Statistical Physics of Subcellular Size Control
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Jane Kondev, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2021
* USD 480,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research,
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Physics Division
contribute funds to this award. This award supports theoretical research and
education on fundamental questions of cell biology with implications for
biomaterials and statistical physics. A remarkable feature of all living cells
is that they contain many subcellular parts called organelles that perform
different functions. Organelles come in different sizes and shapes and these
physical attributes are often intimately related to their function. For example,
mitochondria are compartments filled with lipid membranes folded upon themselves
many times over. The large membrane supports protein machines that are imbedded
in the membrane and whose function is to make cellular fuel molecules.
Similarly, cells build long polymer cables of length precisely matched to the
size of the cell, and are used to transport materials from one side of the cell
to the other. These observations motivate the question: How do cells assemble
such three-dimensional structures? While genes encoded in the cell's DNA carry
the information needed to make the molecular building blocks, how they self-
assemble into intricate and functional three-dimensional structures remains
largely unknown. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will consider these fundamental questions
using mathematical models for assembly of subcellular structures. These models
will be tested against experimental data obtained by several collaborating
biology labs. The goal will be to identify common design principles for assembly
that lead to sub-cellular structures of a well-defined size and shape. New
experiments in cells will be stimulated leading to potentially useful insights
for making synthetic materials which self-assemble into specific shapes and
sizes. &lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of the research will provide
opportunities for physics students to engage in cutting edge biological
research. It will provide them with skills necessary to be effective members of
an interdisciplinary research team consisting of biologists and physicists.
These skills are particularly important for the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics workforce of the future since most of the big problems facing
society will require a concerted effort of scientists from different
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Physics Division contribute funds to
this award. This award supports theoretical research and education on
fundamental questions of cell biology with implications for biomaterials and
statistical physics. Subcellular structures in cells have been observed for
hundreds of years and yet it is only recently that we have developed the
experimental tools to address key questions about them, such as: How do cellular
organelles obtain their specific shapes? How do cells control their number and
size? How does a cell 'decide' how many mitochondria should it have? How does a
cell construct structures with precisely arranged parts, such as sarcomeres in
muscle with its regimented arrays of actin filaments interdigitated with myosin
fibers? &lt;br/&gt;The cytoskeleton provides a particularly fruitful arena in
which to develop quantitative models that address these questions of morphology.
Namely, over many years biologists have obtained a wealth of quantitative
information about the structure and dynamics of the cytoskeleton. This work has
produced a parts list of molecules that the cytoskeleton is made of, and how
these molecules interact, while the question of how these interactions are
coordinated in space and time inside the cell remains largely unanswered.
&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use theoretical physics and mathematics to develop a
common language for describing the various size control mechanisms of
cytoskeleton structures. An assembly of sub-cellular structures will be
investigated as a stochastic process that involves different molecular
components and mathematically different feedback mechanisms that cells employ to
control their size will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance the fields of statistical physics, cell biology, and biomaterials. One
of the key features of the proposed theoretical research is a close
collaboration with experimental labs that study assembly dynamics of actin
structures in yeast, the assembly of cilia in mouse hair cells, and of nucleoli
in developing embryos of the worm C.elegans. It will also help train theoretical
physicists interested in working on fundamental problems in cell biology.