* 1610796
* Advanced Algorithms for Colloids with Induced Many-Body Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Erik Luijten, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2020
* USD 369,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research with a focus on developing new ways to use computer simulation to
understand self-assembly of colloidal particles, objects with sizes in the range
1 to 1000 nanometers, suspended in another medium. They can be used as building
blocks to create new materials that can be reconfigured and tuned by means of
external electric and magnetic fields, which has become an important focal point
of current materials science and engineering. Such materials find a wide range
of applications, but it is poorly understood how the individual building blocks
making up the material respond to fields that vary over time, such as those
generated by electromagnets powered by alternating currents. The PI and his
research team are developing novel computational methods that make it possible
to predict and understand such properties with unprecedented accuracy, opening
the way to designing responsive materials. The same algorithms also can be
employed to understand and improve microfluidic devices, in which minute amounts
of fluids are manipulated, for example for analytic
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational methods developed by this project
will be integrated into computer simulation packages widely used by the
materials and other research communities. The PI will continue to maintain a
Wiki that provides computational tools developed in his group which has become a
resource to the broader computational research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational and theoretical research focused on the development and
application of accelerated algorithms that account for induced many-body
interactions that arise from electric and magnetic polarizability. These methods
will be used to explore and understand new dynamical behavior of anisotropic
colloids in external fields, and to design building blocks for targeted self-
assembly. The dynamics and self-assembly of colloidal particles in suspension
are of widespread interest, as they allow the creation of materials with novel
structures. Only recently have algorithms become available that make it possible
to simulate these phenomena while taking into account fully resolved surface
polarization. The PI will now exploit this approach to explore and understand
the behavior of anisotropic colloids in external fields, where the electric
double layer is distorted, giving rise to induced interactions or even
propulsion that results in collective dynamics. Moreover, the algorithms will be
extended to bulk polarizability, a phenomenon that until now has barely been
explored computationally, and to a hybrid method that will accelerate the
simulation of important classes of dielectric model systems by two orders of
magnitude compared to what is currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer
simulations of soft materials now routinely take into account long-range
electrostatic interactions. In recent years increasing attention has been
devoted to the role of dielectric mismatch ubiquitous in nature but
traditionally ignored owing to its computational complexity. With prior NSF
support, the PI has developed a research program that has delivered a
practically usable boundary-element method capable of dealing with mobile
dielectric objects. The current project applies this method to understand the
propulsion mechanism in model systems of active matter and the behavior of
electro-osmotic flow in microfluidic devices. Moreover, the development of an
equivalent algorithm for bulk dielectrics will enable the study of materials
behavior that has been virtually unexplored for want of appropriate
computational techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is timely because
control over colloidal interactions is a focal point in the development of
reconfigurable materials. Computational methods and resources are now able to
provide direct guidance to experiments. The advances proposed here will
significantly extend existing capabilities and elucidate dynamic collective
phenomena as well as self-assembly driven by induced
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational methods developed by this
project will be integrated into computer simulation packages widely used by the
materials and other research communities. The PI will continue to maintain a
Wiki that provides computational tools developed in his group which has become a
resource to the broader computational research community.