* 1610725
* Nonlinear Growth of Polyelectrolyte Multilayers: Chain Dynamics and Film Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Svetlana Sukhishvili, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 423,707.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
controlling the structure of functional polymer coatings. Such coatings could be
used, e.g., for biomedical or optical applications. Examples might be coatings
that can deliver drugs locally in a multi-stage, time-resolved protocol, or
structured polymer films that can serve as precursors for better anti-reflective
optical coatings. To support these advanced applications, (a) the coatings
should be able to be easily deposited on a variety of surfaces via an
environmentally friendly process, and (b) their structure should be easily
controlled by the deposition procedure and conditions. The layer-by-layer (LbL)
technique is a unique method which, through a deposition process entirely in
water can create conformal coatings of controlled thickness on virtually any
surface. The challenge, however, is to control the mixing of polymer molecules
within the coated film to preserve film layering. This project will explore the
effect of various molecular and deposition parameters on film layering, with the
goal of achieving structured films which can be deposited through fewer steps.
Advanced instrumental techniques will be used to take snapshots of how
multilayered structures, water content, and film mechanical properties can be
manipulated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, this project will create a
fertile training ground for the participating graduate, undergraduate and high-
school students. The PI is currently the academic advisor of the "Women in
Materials Science" (WIMS) organization, which is strongly involved in many
outreach activities, ranging from on-campus tours and demonstrations for Girl
Scouts and high-school students to visits to local schools with the goal of
encouraging and engaging female and minority 5-7th graders to pursue careers in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to control dynamics and the
structure of layer-by-layer (LbL) polyelectrolyte films lies at the heart of
advanced biomedical and optical applications of polyelectrolyte multilayer (PEM)
films. Of specific interest are films with defined and controlled internal
stratification. Yet nonlinearly growing LbL films (NL-LbLs) which deposit at
larger thicknesses and therefore are highly desirable for many applications,
suffer from molecular intermixing. This proposal aims to (a) uncover the
mechanism of polymer chain diffusion within NL-PEMs during film growth, (b)
establish correlations between molecular interactions, dynamics, and order for a
broad range of NL-PEM films and (c) use this knowledge to control structure of
NL-PEMs and develop strategies for constructing stratified and gradient LbL
films. This project will involve synthesizing well-defined polybase-polyacid
(PB-PA) pairs associated through ionic pairing or hydrogen-bonding. Interchain
dynamics will be studied during PEM assembly, as well as at a post-assembly
step. Neutron reflectometry (NR) will be used to track diffusion of polymer
chains across the film thickness, in situ ellipsometry to determine film water
content, and nanoindentation to explore film mechanical properties during film
construction. At the post-assembly step, NR will be applied to resolve internal
stratification, and fluorescence recovery after pattern photobleaching (FRAP) to
study lateral mobility of assembled chains. This knowledge will then be used to
rationally construct films with programmable density, water content, charge
balance, and permeability. It will also enable rationally designed diffusional
barriers and gradients of water content within NL-PEM films, in order to achieve
films useful as matrices for conformal antireflective coatings or for sequential
drug delivery via improved control of permeability of functional molecules.