* 1610471
* Optimizing Energy Management in Microgrids with Datacenters: An Integrated Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Shaolei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Microgrids are localized grids that have become an integral component of future
smart grids. Meanwhile, datacenters have been expanding enormously to support
the exploding digital economy worldwide, emerging as significant energy
consumers that are commonly co-located with a diverse set of non-datacenter
loads in microgrids. Nonetheless, prior research on datacenter energy
management, although encouraging, has traditionally viewed datacenters as
isolated stand-alone facilities and rarely considered their physical
interconnection with other loads. On the other hand, the rich literature on
microgrid energy management has primarily focused on non-datacenter loads (e.g.,
thermostatically controlled loads), while treating energy-intensive datacenters
as miscellaneous loads and ignoring their unique global-routing capabilities.
This lack of integration and coordination between datacenter and non-datacenter
loads poses a series of challenges to microgrid management, such as high peak
demand, waste of on-site renewables, and even potential threats to the stability
of main grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address the
challenges and optimize microgrid energy management for minimizing the energy
cost and facilitating demand responses to better protect the main grid. Towards
this end, this project takes a transformative shift from the current view that
treats datacenter and non-datacenter loads separately, to an integrated approach
that holistically coordinates both datacenter and non-datacenter loads in
microgrids. Specifically, this project investigates two complementary research
thrusts. First, when the microgrid operator can directly schedule the loads,
this project investigates novel control algorithms to holistically manage both
datacenter and non-datacenter loads, while taking into account datacenters
spatial-routing and heterogeneous communications capabilities. Second, when the
loads are managed by self-interested entities, this project studies market
mechanisms to coordinate both datacenter and non-datacenter loads for microgrid-
level efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the existing
research on microgrid energy management by transforming datacenters' role in
microgrids from miscellaneous loads into a valuable asset with high scheduling
flexibilities. It can catalyze a shift in the way that microgrids evolve,
bearing great economic, environmental and societal impacts. This project will
also incorporate the research into existing courses and provide abundant
opportunities to nurture and attract students, especially those from under-
represented groups, to engage in research careers.