* 1610387
* Ferroelectric HfO2 on Germanium Tunnel Junctions Towards Sub-Femto Joule Switching
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Toshikazu Nishida, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 408,000.00

The rapid increase in data generated by mobile devices and computers
necessitates research and development of advanced solid-state data storage
technologies. The ferroelectric effect, a switchable polarization charge, which
occurs in certain materials combined together with an advanced memory device
concept provides a promising approach to achieve a transformative improvement in
non-volatile memory technologies. The discovery of ferroelectricity in lead-free
hafnium dioxide thin films in 2011 offers a sustainable route for further
scaling of the next generation of manufacturable, low-power, and high
performance nonvolatile memory ferroelectric devices. In this project, an
advanced device concept known as a ferroelectric tunnel junction (FTJ) will be
investigated using the ferroelectric hafnium dioxide thin films. In a FTJ, the
tunneling electroresistance is switched between a low and a high value by
switching the polarization direction (internal electric field). Numerical
studies indicate that the hafnium dioxide-based FTJ can yield substantial
reductions in the amount of power required to store data. In a two-pronged
approach, experiments and numerical modeling will be conducted to test the
numerical models and to advance the fundamental understanding and state-of-the-
art in nonvolatile FTJ memory technology using hafnium dioxide thin films.

The overriding goal of the project is to understand and tailor the atomic
structure of the ferroelectric phase of hafnium dioxide in thin film capacitors,
thereby enabling complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible FTJs.
A comprehensive and methodological study evaluating the deposition and
processing conditions of hafnium dioxide-based thin film ferroelectrics will
provide critical insights about the effect of impurities, dopants, film growth
and annealing temperatures, and interfacial stability that influence the
ferroelectric properties. These studies will pave the way toward investigating
the physical limits of ferroelectric hafnium dioxide-based films and the
realization of CMOS-compatible and scalable FTJs. Recent studies on macroscopic
variation of the dopants concentration as well as the atomic layering of mixed
mono-layers of dopants in hafnium dioxide suggest extreme possibilities in fine-
tuning ferroelectric properties of doped hafnium dioxide thin films. The
discovery of CMOS compatible and scalable ferroelectric hafnium dioxide offers a
unique opportunity to investigate the performance potential of CMOS compatible
hafnium dioxide FTJ through carefully coupled theoretical and experimental
investigation. Numerical studies indicate that ferroelectric hafnium dioxide FTJ
on germanium substrate can approach sub-femto Joule/bit for a feature size of
F=20nm. This ability to experimentally tune the characteristics of the
ferroelectric hafnium dioxide thin films of varying thickness coupled with
advanced ab initio material and device simulation enable this investigation of
the performance limits of FTJ devices employing ferroelectric hafnium dioxide on
germanium.