* 1610893
* Novel Infrared Optical Materials Based on III-Nitride Semiconductors: Growth, Structure and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Manfra, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 435,000.00

Nontechnical Description: This project investigates fundamental materials issues
of a new class of complex materials containing two or more metal nitrides. These
materials are interesting because of their potential use in novel optoelectronic
devices of importance for technological applications beneficial to society
(sensing, imaging, and telecommunications). Due to their widely dissimilar
physical and chemical properties, these complex compounds form a variety of
unique nanostructures when grown together in thick stacks of many layers. This
project aims to understand, control, and tailor the local atomic arrangement of
the materials at the nanoscale to maximize light absorption in the invisible
infrared range. The project also explores the effect of nanostructure on local
transfer of free electrical charge. Of particular interest is the impact of the
crystal orientation on optical and electrical properties. The principal
investigators, students and high-school teachers involved in this project
participate in outreach activities organized either in-house or at local schools
to increase exposure of K-12 students and the general public to modern
scientific topics at the border between physics, material science, and
engineering.

Technical Description: The main objective of this project is to establish the
relationship between growth, atomic structure and infrared optical properties of
AlIn(Ga)N/(In)GaN multi-quantum well structures grown by plasma-assisted
molecular beam epitaxy on c- and m-plane GaN. The project particularly focuses
on unraveling the impact of nanostructure on infrared intersubband absorption, a
property that is essential for the application of these materials in novel
infrared optoelectronics (emitters and detectors). The research effort involves
material design and growth, as well as structural and optical material
characterization of AlIn(Ga)N/(In)GaN heterostructures. The growth of nitride
heterostructures advances the state-of-the-art in nitride epitaxy. In order to
correlate the nanostructure with optical properties, the atomic structure of the
semiconductor materials is characterized in detail using high-resolution x-ray
diffraction and transmission electron microscopy, while the infrared optical
properties of the materials are examined experimentally using Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy. A secondary goal is developing of predictive material
modeling capabilities that enable conduction-band engineering for light
emission. The research project also increases the learning opportunities for
students, inside and outside the traditional classroom by integrating
interdisciplinary research with broader physics and engineering education and
training. The students involved in this project have the opportunity to acquire
experience with the latest nanomaterials fabrication and characterization tools
and techniques. A special thrust of the proposed outreach plan is enhancement
the participation of underrepresented groups, in particular of females, in
physical sciences and engineering.