* 1610447
* Graphene-based all-proximity-coupled quantum spintronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jing Shi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Owing to graphene's unique band structure, two new topological quantum phenomena
can emerge: the quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE) and the quantum anomalous Hall
effect (QAHE), both offering attractive potential for quantum spintronic
applications. A common prerequisite for these two quantum phenomena is strong
spin-orbit coupling, either intrinsic or the Rashba type. Of the two phenomena,
QAHE requires additional exchange interaction or ferromagnetism in graphene.
Although native graphene has neither interaction, its open and flexible
structure allows modifications of the properties by proximity coupling to other
materials. The proposed quantum phenomena based on quantized anomalous Hall
effect can be potentially used for dense, robust, low-power, and scalable non-
volatile memory which will drastically improve the performance of the current
memory devices based on magnetic tunnel junctions. The non-volatile memory
devices are ubiquitous in the modern society. High-performance memory devices
based on quantum spintronic phenomena will have a significant impact on low
power memory. PI proposes to train the undergraduate and graduate students,
especially the underrepresented minority students by engaging them with research
projects and teaching them newly developed elective courses. The also PI plans
to continue outreach activities to a STEM school by coaching the Science
Olympiad events to STEM High school students as well as giving lectures to the
summer Physics teachers from southern California high schools during Physics
Teacher Summer Academy sponsored by the Physics Department.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's group has successfully demonstrated the anomalous
Hall effect in graphene via the proximity coupling with a magnetic insulator.
More recently, PI's group also demonstrated a strong enhancement of spin-orbit
coupling via the proximity effect with a transition metal dichalcogenide
material (e.g. WS2). In this work, the PI aims to explore the induced effects in
all-proximity coupled graphene devices, which acquire new interactions for
realizing the predicted quantum effects at relatively high temperatures.
Currently few materials are predicted and even fewer materials have been
experimentally shown to exhibit QSHE (e.g. HgTe/CdTe quantum wells) and QAHE
(e.g. magnetic topological insulators). These materials are extremely difficult
to be synthesized or only show the desired properties at extremely low
temperatures. The proposed graphene-based devices are ideal systems in which the
required interactions can be induced by proximity effects. Those quantum
phenomena have not yet been explored in graphene, but it I expected to show many
novel and interesting properties, such as quantized transport, robust Hall
voltages, pure spin current, etc. These unmatched properties, if demonstrated at
high temperatures, can potentially revolutionize the present-day spin
electronics. In this proposed research, the PI plans to demonstrate a prototype
quantum spintronic memory device based on QAHE. The knowledge learned in the
graphene-based devices will deepen our fundamental understanding of two-
dimensional electron systems with tunable interactions.