* 1610889
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Oyita Udiani, Udiani                  Oyita
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2019
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Oyita Udiani &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1610889&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-
represented in Biology. The fellowship supports a research and training plan for
the Fellow that will increase the participation of groups underrepresented in
biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to PI Oyita Udiani
is 'Learning in models of animal behavior: a novel game-theoretical approach.'
The host institution for this fellowship is the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Nina
Fefferman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
game theory framework incorporating adaptive heuristics ('rule of thumb'
strategies) to guide animal behavior in complex environments. A central question
in behavioral ecology is how natural selection shapes animal behavior in
environments where the success of one's actions depends on the strategy of
others. Evolutionary game theory provides a framework to study this question.
Traditional models tend to focus on games where 'players' follow genetically
determined strategies, and ask how selection acts on competing genotypes in a
population. But these models have limited scope for understanding how social
interactions shape behavior as part of the ongoing life history of an
individual. A more realistic approach is to focus on games where players can
assess their situation in each interaction and make active choices, which in
turn produce payoffs that contribute to their reproductive success. However,
existing models of this caliber typically make unrealistic assumptions about
players' rationality, assumptions that are most likely violated in nature where
animals face cognitive constraints, time costs, and other stochastic factors
that limit what they can know about others. The Fellow is developing a novel
framework to analyze games where players instead use adaptive heuristics such as
reinforcement learning to guide their behavior. By doing so, the Fellow is
expanding the existing formalism and analytical toolkit for studying games with
learning, thus opening it up to new and exciting areas of application in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is receiving extensive training in
mathematical optimization and computational modeling for biological
applications. He is also developing a publically available web-based tutorial
explaining applications of game theory in the study of animal behavior and
social evolution. In order to broaden participation of groups underrepresented
in biology, the Fellow is collaborating with the National Institute for
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis (housed at the host institution) on a pre-
college outreach program, providing mentoring activities at local public schools
around the Knoxville, TN area. In this way the Fellow serves as a role model to
increase the visibility of minorities leading cutting edge science research.