* 1610762
* Dynamic Network Analysis: Analyzing the Chronnectome
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Peter Mucha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 356,420.00

Networks describe interactions between objects: they can for example describe
connections between people, as in social networks; capture dependencies in
biological processes such as gene regulation; or represent the interplay and
connectivity of different structural and functional areas in the brain. Numerous
methods for network analysis have been developed using different quantitative
approaches. However, many of these methods are still predominantly available for
the analysis of static networks, i.e., snapshots of a network at a particular
point in time. However, to assess how networks such as those in the brain change
over time, improved methods for dynamic network analysis are required. This
project will develop mathematical approaches motivated by the driving biological
problem of analyzing temporal change of structural and functional brain
connectivity, the chronnectome. Structural connectivity includes white matter
connections in the brain and hence the underlying cabling enabling information
exchange. Functional brain connectivity on the other hand describes how tasks
influence brain activity and how different brain areas behave similarly under
tasks. Quantifying changes in structural and/or functional connectivity over
time can improve understanding of brain diseases, which deviate from normality.
Moreover, the approaches developed here will have general use for other dynamic
networks, from other biological networks to social networks and beyond. To
maximize impact, the computational methods developed here will be made available
in open-source form, with a software license permitting free commercial and non-
commercial use. The project also includes research training and courses for
students in network science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks are commonly
described as graphs, with nodes describing entities in a system and edges node
relationships. Networks range from unstructured and rapidly changing social
networks to structured slowly varying networks capturing structural brain
connectivity. Network science seeks to develop methods to mine information from
interaction patterns, for example, extracting tightly coupled nodes in
communities. Time-dependent network data is increasingly available; however,
sufficient analysis methods are still lacking as the majority of approaches have
focused on static data, with ongoing development of methods for time-dependent
networks having become more common only recently. The goal of this project is to
advance general time-dependent network analysis, with brain chronnectome
analysis as the guiding driving problem to motivate the technical development.
Current approaches for the analysis of time-dependent networks lack several key
properties required for chronnectome analysis: e.g., (i) the ability to analyze
longitudinal network data, where networks are available for multiple subjects at
multiple timepoints, (ii) the ability to include domain-specific prior
information (such as prior knowledge of connectivity patterns), and (iii) the
ability to deal with inhomogeneous subject groups and discontinuities in time.
To address these shortcomings, this project will develop customized network
analysis approaches based on (i) extensions to the stochastic block model
approach of network analysis, and (ii) regression models for network-valued
data.