* 1610427
* Spectroscopy of Many-Body Processes in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 183,852.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMMT program of the Division of
Materials Research and the HBCU-UP program of the division of Human Resource
Development jointly fund this award that supports research and education in
theoretical and computational studies of plasmon-enhanced optical spectroscopy.
Surface plasmons are collective electronic oscillations that can be created at
the interface of metal/dielectric structures. Plasmons can interact strongly
with molecules and solids to significantly change their optical characteristics.
In such plasmonic systems, the optical interactions between surface plasmons and
semiconductor nanostructures or dye molecules form the basis for numerous
applications in photovoltaics, optical sensing, and photochemistry, among
others. This project aims at modeling the optical properties of complex
plasmonic systems that are determined by interactions and/or energy transfer
processes between the systems' constituent parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is carried out at Jackson State University, which is a historically
black university that primarily serves the educational needs of Mississippi's
largest urban community and provides research opportunities to undergraduate
students from traditionally underrepresented minority groups. A major goal of
the Physics department at Jackson State University is to increase the fraction
of African-American students interested in pursuing careers in STEM disciplines.
This project will enhance the research and education opportunities for African-
American undergraduate students in Mississippi by introducing them to concepts
and methods of research in nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMMT program of the Division of Materials
Research and the HBCU-UP program of the division of Human Resource Development
jointly fund this award that supports research and education in theoretical and
computational studies of plasmon-enhanced optical spectroscopy. The project aims
at studying many-body and cooperative phenomena in complex plasmonic systems,
such as metal or graphene structures conjugated with semiconductor
nanostructures or dye molecules. The main topics include: i) loss compensation
and spaser action in composite nanoparticles with metal core and dye-doped
dielectric shell, ii) energy transfer processes in large ensembles of
fluorophores situated near plasmonic structures, iii) strong exciton-plasmon
coupling in hybrid plasmonic systems, and iv) graphene plasmonics. The main
research focus is on the role of crosstalk between system constituents in
determining the structure of system eigenstates that governs plasmon-enhanced
spectroscopy phenomena. The methods include a combination of analytical and
numerical approaches suitable for plasmonic systems with many constituent parts.
The results will be used to explain available experimental data and to model the
efficiency of plasmon-based sensing devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is carried out at Jackson State University, which is a historically black
university that primarily serves the educational needs of Mississippi's largest
urban community and provides research opportunities to undergraduate students
from traditionally underrepresented minority groups. A major goal of the Physics
department at Jackson State University is to increase the fraction of African-
American students interested in pursuing careers in STEM disciplines. This
project will enhance the research and education opportunities for African-
American undergraduate students in Mississippi by introducing them to concepts
and methods of research in nanoscience.