* 1610633
* Quantum Phase Transitions in Mott Insulator Systems and Itinerant-Electron Magnets:  MuSR Studies of Magnetic Order, Volume Evolution and Spin Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 356,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;One of the central and unresolved issues in
modern condensed matter physics is the evolution of phases in materials with
strong interactions among constituent electrons. Quantum phase transitions
(QPT), achieved at nearly zero temperature by doping charges or application of
pressure, are of particular interest, since they involve many research themes
yet to be thoroughly explored, such as the roles of disorder, and short-time and
short-ranged dynamic magnetic fluctuations which may be viewed as a precursor
phenomenon to the magnetic order. Using a beam of radioactive muon particles
generated at particle accelerator facilities and implanting muons into solids,
Muon Spin Relaxation (MuSR) provides a novel method to measure magnetic
properties of solids. In studies of magnetic phase transitions, MuSR
measurements can determine the volume fraction of the magnetically ordered
regions independently from the size of the individual ordered magnetic moments
within the ordered regions. Thanks to this feature, MuSR has a unique advantage
over conventional magnetization or elastic neutron scattering studies which
measure volume-integrated responses. In this project, PI Uemura performs MuSR
studies on magnetic order in selected systems which exhibit Mott metal-insulator
transitions. Mott transition was originally proposed by Sir Nevil Mott of the UK
who was awarded a Nobel Prize for his theoretical prediction. Interplays among
metal-insulator transition, magnetic order, and structural phase transitions,
however, have not yet been fully clarified. In addition, the present project
also examines magnetic phase transitions of particular weakly magnetic metals
near disappearance of magnetic order. These studies may lead to better
understandings of subtle phase transition phenomena caused by strong
interactions among constituent electrons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The planned MuSR studies focus on (A) RENiO3 [RE=Rare
Earth], V2O3 and several other Mott transition systems where strong correlations
drive localization and magnetic order of otherwise metallic charges; and (B)
(Mn,Fe)Si and a few other itinerant-electron magnets (IEM) where competing
interactions and spin fluctuations lead to variety of novel spin phenomena. In
Mott systems (A), the PI aims to disentangle the roles of spin, charge and
lattice and to develop a comprehensive understanding of generic and system-
specific features of Mott transitions controlled by band width, charge filling
and/or electric current. The goals of IEM studies (B) are to elucidate magnetic
volume evolution, to clarify the roles of disorder in prototypical IEM systems
and to study novel topological phase transitions in MnGe due to magnetic
monopoles and the 3-dimensional Skyrmion lattice. Inelastic neutron scattering
studies of V2O3 and (La,Sr)VO3 will also be performed to search for dynamic
spin-charge soft mode of the imminent Mott transition. To date, most theoretical
studies on QPT were limited to second order QPT, due to lack of experimental
results demonstrating first-order QPT / phase separation. The PI's recent
results showed clear evidence for first-order QPT in MnSi, RENiO3 and V2O3, and
a recovery of second order QPT due presumably to disorder in (Mn,Fe)Si. Present
MuSR studies combined with other methods will contribute to new views and
conjectures for first-order QPT, which may have far-reaching implications for
studies of other relevant systems such as high-Tc and heavy fermion
superconductors.