* 1610758
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Collaborative Research: Spin Selective Electron Transmission through Highly Conjugated Multi[(porphinato)metal] Oligomers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Therien, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 478,525.00

Nontechnical description: The emerging field of spintronics, in analogy to
electronics, envisions devices that utilize the magnetic properties of electrons
instead of their electrical charges. Spintronics are anticipated to propel the
next generation of ultra-miniature computational and information-storage
technologies, lead to device operation speeds significantly higher than that for
current electronics, while significantly decreasing energy consumption. The
project highlights fundamental new materials research of organic compounds that
facilitate spintronic operation at ambient temperature, providing new insights
into how molecular structure governs spintronic capabilities. The impact of this
project also derives from the interdisciplinary training of a next generation of
scientists, new curriculum development, as well as from recruiting, retaining,
and mentoring of under-represented minorities in science and engineering.
Project participants learn new science and develop important new technologies,
build networks of collaborators and contacts, and acquire skills important for
working in interdisciplinary environments, and are thus better equipped for
future careers and leadership roles in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Because
electron spins can be efficiently polarized by helically chiral molecular
structures at room temperature, new opportunities exist to generate and
manipulate polarized spin current in soft materials. This project focuses on
fundamental investigations of electron spin polarization, interactions, and
transport in designed highly conjugated helically chiral superstructures. This
effort begins with exploring superstructures designed to possess exceptional
polarized spin transport properties, and their attachment chemistry to metallic
electrodes. Model devices for testing spin-transport and related non-magnetic
organic/inorganic room-temperature spin injector devices are attained through
assembly and fabrication of electrode-molecule-electrode junctions using the
nanotransfer printing technique. The project aims to delineate fundamental
structure-property relationships in engineered helically chiral assemblies that
provide new insights into the chirality-induced spin selectivity effect, while
quantifying spin-dependent electronic transport through prototypical two-
electrode devices, as functions of electrode material, molecular structure, and
anchoring groups.