* 1610933
* GOALI: Paper-based Skin
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* George Weng, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 432,000.00

Skin, the largest organ of the human body, is essential for human-environment
interactions and survival, yet humanoids, prosthetics, and wearable devices
continue to lack comparable sensory devices and protection. An ideal synthetic
skin must be flexible, scalable, easy to wrap around limbs, able to detect touch
and force from surrounding objects, and protect against or limit the spread of
microbes. Large-area, skin-like sensors for detecting spatial distributions of
touch, pressure, and impact will be useful for a number of applications ranging
from civil infrastructure to prosthetics to robotics to structural health
monitoring of ground and aerospace vehicles. To enable these future
applications, the proposed work will include design rules to aid engineers in
scaling up imprint lithography and assembly for roll-to-roll processing of
synthetic skins. Lightweight, inexpensive skin will prevent life-threatening
disasters, such as those linked to undetected structural damage (e.g., the
catastrophic impact damage from loose tiles on space shuttle Columbia). The
active antimicrobial protection will sterilize robots, machines, or wearable
garments in sterile or contaminated environments. The industrial and artistic
collaborators will provide materials and guidance to the research team working
toward commercially viable processing and assembly. Undergraduate and high
school students will have opportunities to build paper-based devices with skin-
like sensing through their participation in the Rutgers Honors College, Byrne
Seminars, Aresty Research Center, and the New Jersey Governor's School of
Engineering and Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
GOALI proposal is to create scalable, skin-like sensing devices made of tunable
paper-based composites with capabilities of sensing touch, measuring spatial
distributions of forces, and providing plasma-based sterilization. The
fabricated devices will consist of embossed piezoresistive paper sandwiched
between two layers of metallized paper. The sensing mechanisms will be passive
and interface with an array of attached electrodes. A central hypothesis is that
tunable porosity near a critical/percolation threshold in cellulose-based
composites containing conductive nanofillers that will dominate large
transitions in electromechanical properties in both mechanically elastic and
plastic regimes of strain. The specific tasks will include (i) fabrication and
imprint lithography of tunable, piezoresistive paper; (ii) modeling electrical
properties in paper-based composites bridging the meso and nano scales; (iii)
mechanical modeling and characterization to establish design rules for imprint
lithography; (iv) disinfecting mechanisms of plasma-based sterilizers with
metallized paper; and (v) stacked integration of multiple layers of paper-based
materials for combined sensing of touch, pressure, and plasma-based
sterilization.