* 1610827
* Structure and Deformation in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yair Minsky, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

Geometry and topology in two and three dimensions display a particular richness
of structure where many different fields of mathematics come together, including
classical complex analysis, combinatorial topology, geometry, dynamical systems,
and the theory of groups. When three-dimensional spaces (manifolds) are glued
together along their two-dimensional boundaries, the properties of the resulting
space depend in complex ways on the properties of the gluing maps. The gluing
maps themselves form a rich algebraic structure known as a mapping class group;
this research project explores a number of settings where this structure comes
into play. A particular role is played by a special geometric property of the
mapping class group known as relative hyperbolicity, which has enabled the fine
geometric structure of three-dimensional manifolds to be teased out and
analyzed. Some of the previous advances in this area have yielded general
statements but not concrete estimates, and in a number of areas the investigator
expects to be able to sharpen current understanding and compute concrete bounds.
The focus, nevertheless, is to deepen conceptual understanding of the way that
two-dimensional and three-dimensional manifolds fit together.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates aspects of the interaction
between topology of surfaces and three-manifolds, with connections to
deformation spaces of geometric structures and geodesic flows in Teichmuller
space. A common thread in the work is the hierarchical structure of mapping
class groups and the phenomenon of relative hyperbolicity via curve complexes.
In a project on fibered hyperbolic three-manifolds, the investigator will
explore the "subsurface profiles" of the set of all fibrations, namely the
pattern of projections to fiber subsurfaces of the stable and unstable
foliations associated to the monodromy maps. The goal here is to obtain uniform
(genus independent) descriptions and to relate them to the combinatorial
structure of veering triangulations. In Teichmuller theory, the investigator
will pursue a conjectural description of the Weil-Petersson geodesic flow on the
moduli space of a surface, developing new tools with which to analyze the
combinatorial patterns or itineraries of geodesic rays. The investigator will
study the skinning map defined by Thurston on the Teichmuller space of the
boundary of a hyperbolic three-manifold. He will work toward a better
quantitative control of the diameter bounds known for such maps in the
acylindrical case. In the general case he will extend previous work that
established relative bounded image results, to complete the proof of a claim of
Thurston on iterates of the skinning-and-gluing maps in the setting where a
gluing yields an atoroidal manifold. This work will also connect to a project on
establishing new uniform bi-Lipschitz models for hyperbolic three-manifolds.