* 1610094
* Towards a Fundamental Basis for Controlling Shear Flow Instabilities in HCP Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kevin Trumble, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When metals are deformed to large
strains they often undergo a transition from smooth, steady flow to unstable
flow modes, which are usually undesirable. Shear banding, in which the strain
becomes concentrated in highly localized bands is one mechanism for the flow
instability. Another mechanism, recently discovered, is sinuous flow, which is
characterized by a folding process near surfaces, analogous to vortex-like fluid
flow. These instabilities can cause failure during the deformation itself, as
well as leave behind defects that initiate failure in service. They are thus of
critical importance in product quality for a wide range of applications (e.g.,
biomedical, automotive and aerospace). The instability phenomena will be
characterized in model metal systems (magnesium, titanium, zinc) using a
controlled shear deformation apparatus, in concert with direct, high-speed
imaging of the microscopic flow fields and image analysis. Complementary ex situ
characterization of the flow will be done using advanced microscopy methods, and
low-load indentation. The experiments will be coupled with analytical and
numerical modeling to develop flow mechanism maps that depict the various
instabilities and the conditions of their occurrence. The research will provide
a fundamental basis for developing methods of broad applicability for
controlling flow instabilities in advanced metals, advance experimental
techniques for flow analysis, and facilitate understanding of other types of
instability phenomena in nature. The research results will broadly impact
synthesis of metal structures for energy absorption, friction and wear, metals
processing and discrete products manufacturing. Complementing the research is an
education program involving undergraduate and graduate students in creating a
video gallery of flows in materials; and a modest focus on fostering
entrepreneurship in graduate study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to advance our understanding
of meso-scale plastic flow instabilities in large-strain deformation of metals,
and how these instabilities mediate transitions from laminar to unsteady fluid-
like flows, e.g., shear band, sinuous and serrated flows. Prior work has
established a suite of experimental techniques to characterize flow fields at
high resolution that will be built upon in this work. Three coordinated thrusts
will study flow instabilities at the meso-scale to establish a fundamental basis
for controlling unsteady flows. First, key flow attributes will be mapped,
combining direct in situ analysis at high spatial and temporal resolution, with
complementary ex situ characterization by microscopy and profilometry. Second,
modeling approaches will be developed to describe the flow instabilities and
development of unsteady flow dynamics. Third, by integrating the experimental
results with model analyses, a phase diagram will be constructed for flows,
demarcating unstable regimes and flow transitions in terms of quantitative
deformation parameters. The study will be conducted specifically on model HCP
alloys (Mg, Ti and Zn) selected for their experimental suitability and range of
deformation responses. The resulting flow phase diagram will provide a basis for
tailoring and controlling simple-shear flows, from suppressing flow
instabilities to enhancing unsteady flows for energy dissipation. The research
will foster an education program involving graduate and undergraduate students
in developing video galleries to illustrate diverse flow and instability
phenomena; student internships in research labs; and graduate student
entrepreneurship.