* 1610953
* Nanostructured materials for photonics and spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Paola Barbara, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 389,978.00

Title: Materials with reduced dimensions for light detection.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: Materials with a layered structure similar to graphite, where the
atoms within each layer are strongly bonded, but the layers are weakly coupled
and can be easily separated, have become the focus of intense research efforts
worldwide. This is because it is now possible to reduce their thickness down to
a few or even a single layer to create atomically thin devices or transparent
conductors that are suitable for flexible substrates. However, the full
potential of their drastic reduction in thickness and their new physical
properties has not been realized. This project focuses on the study and
applications of novel photodetectors based on graphene, a single layer of
graphite, and single-layer MoS2. The PI will further reduce their dimensions by
patterning single layers into structures that are just tens of nanometers wide,
to create high-performance photodetectors that will work in the visible range,
as well as in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, including terahertz
radiation. Terahertz radiation comprises the electromagnetic spectrum between
microwave and infrared radiation, in the frequency range between 100 GHz and 30
THz. Because it can penetrate through most plastics and non-conducting materials
without the damaging ionization effects of x-rays, it has promising potential
applications for security and medical imaging. Other applications include
chemical fingerprinting (to identify chemical compounds), communication, either
terrestrial short-range or between satellites, and imaging of blackbody
radiation emitted by the landscape, to allow aircraft to land in conditions of
poor visibility due to fog or smoke. Notwithstanding the potential for
application in many fields, terahertz technology is far from advanced, because
powerful sources and sensitive detectors are scarce. This project builds on
previous work by the PI demonstrating that nanometer-patterning of graphene
yields terahertz detectors with extraordinary performance.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
Graphene has material properties that are ideal for bolometric application:
small electronic heat capacity and weak electron-phonon coupling, making it easy
to create hot electrons with the incident electromagnetic radiation. This
project will build on recent work by the PI who demonstrated that graphene
quantum dots can yield extremely high-performance THz bolometers. This was done
by measuring the current of hot electrons formed in the graphene source and
drain electrodes and propagating through the graphene quantum dot. New work will
extend the study to gated quantum dot bolometers to better understand the
underlying physics of their extraordinary performance. This study will include
the frequency and power dependence of their response and the coupling of these
bolometers to antennas. In addition to graphene, hybrid structures based on
graphene and MoS2 will also be investigated for hot-electron bolometer
applications. Finally, this project will investigate detection of visible
radiation in nanopatterned MoS2-based photosensors.