* 1610967
* On-chip studies of neuron cells under magnetic field stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Long Que, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2021
* USD 363,113.00

Proposal Title: On-chip studies of neuron cells under magnetic field
stimulation&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Brief description of project
Goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop a microchip for studying
the single neuron cells and their interaction under magnetic field
stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;One in five Americans above the age of 18 suffer from
diagnosable neurological disorders and there are 50,000 new cases of Parkinson's
disease diagnosed every year in the United States. 10 to 20% of apparently
healthy service members returning from conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Therefore there is a critical need
to develop new, safe, non-invasive methods for the treatment of deep brain
disorders. Non-invasive techniques including repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) have had
some success, but progress has been limited because of poor understanding of
interaction of magnetic fields with neurons. Basically the molecular/cellular
mechanisms of neurons under TMS are still lacking. To address these issues, the
scientific and technical component of this project focuses on the investigation
of the effect of transient magnetic fields on the neuronal growth rate and
synaptic activity, which is essential in developing new treatment procedures for
debilitating neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease, PTSD and
traumatic brain injury. The education, dissemination and outreach component of
this project includes mentoring graduate, undergraduate and
underrepresented/minority students, dissemination and outreach to the local
community. The overall educational goal is to help next-generation workforce
development by training students to carry out research with sound technical
background and allowing them to gain hands-on laboratory skills for their
advanced careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to develop an integrated microchip that allows, for the
first time, studying the growth, synaptic activity and regeneration of single
neuron cells and interaction among the separated neuron cells under both
AC/transcranial magnetic and DC magnetic field stimulation. Specifically, this
project focuses on: (i) the development of a new microchip, which consists of
microholder arrays with integrated patch-clamp probes to store single neuron
cells; (ii) the study of the growth behavior and monitoring of the action
potential of single neuron cells (N27 cells and PC12 cells as the models) under
AC/transcranial magnetic field stimulation; (iii) the study of the growth
behavior of the neuron cells inside a 3D extracellular matrix, mimicking the in
vivo environment, under AC/transcranial magnetic field stimulation; and (iv) the
study of the guided neuron growth by functionalizing the neuron cells with
magnetic nanoparticles (mNPs) under DC and AC/transcranial magnetic field
stimulation. This proposed research may help advance fundamental knowledge of
growth and regeneration of single neuron cells under the magnetic field
stimulation, which might have significant impact on the field of regenerative
medicine from both scientific and engineering points of view. This proposed
integrated technical platform offers some unique features otherwise unavailable
by any other existing platforms, providing the capability for monitoring the
behaviors of single neuron cells and the interactions among them. These
functions in this platform might help trigger some basic discoveries, some
important ideas and innovations for biomedical applications.