* 1610899
* Printed and flexible photovoltaics from aqueous solutions with integrated power electronics for energy harvesting
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ana Arias, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to print flexible
solar modules integrated with power electronics. Power electronics ensure that
the maximum power is drawn from the solar module even if lighting conditions
change. Printing electronics from solution is an additive process that could
offer cost, energy and materials savings when compared to lithographic
processes. For the power electronics, printed passive components'inductors,
capacitors, and resistors will be integrated with silicon chips to ensure
maximum performance in a flexible form factor. The intended solar modules will
be printed from water-based inks eliminating the health and environment risks
posed by typical organic solvents used in printed organic electronics. This
project has the potential to take the necessary steps for the field of organic
electronics, specifically organic photovoltaics, to evolve from single idealized
devices to a low-cost mature technology. Emerging fields such as flexible and
wearable electronics require a reliable manufacturing process for power supply
and this work will impact flexible power harvesting systems and their
integration with a load device. The proposed activities are addressing one of
the biggest challenges of organic electronics: reliable manufacturing of
flexible integrated devices for a specific application.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish such a low-cost
environmentally friendly energy harvesting system, this work will focus on three
tasks. The first task is ink formulation for the components of the integrated
power system. The aqueous inks for the active layer in the solar module will
consist of nanoparticles fabricated using a mini-emulsion method. The work will
characterize the variables in the fabrication process, using a combination of
size, absorption, and electrical measurements to determine the compositions of
materials that provide ideal morphology for photovoltaic performance. Polymers
with different functional groups have been selected to determine how functional
groups, which are known to affect a polymer's solubility and surface energy,
also affect nanoparticle size and stability in water. Ink formulation will also
take place for power electronic components, such as capacitors. The goal is to
achieve high specific capacitance while maintaining fabrication reproducibility.
The second task is to develop printing methods for polymer solar cells from
aqueous inks and power electronic components. Blade coating and screen printing
will be used for polymer solar cells and power electronics, respectively.
Printed passive components will be developed, studied and characterized for
maximum power point tracking, so that the solar cells may be operated
efficiently in various irradiances. The third task is to integrate the organic
solar cell modules with power electronics. Monolithically integrated solar
modules will be designed and fabricated by printing series-connected solar
cells, and the performance of the solar modules and maximum power point tracking
circuit will be characterized under realistic practical conditions. The goal is
to design a photovoltaic energy harvesting system that will perform at its
maximum efficiency at both indoor and outdoor light intensities, with the intent
of use with loads spanning a range of sensors, in addition to portable and
wearable devices. In addition to these tasks, the project will utilize
environmentally friendly methods to address the challenge presented by the use
of organic solvents in a manufacturing process. For the outreach program it is
planned to develop science modules for use with middle school students. The
project will involve two REU programs, with one designed to involve community
college students in the proposed research.