* 1610516
* Transient Induced Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy (TIMES) for study of protein-ligand interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Yu-Hwa Lo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 03/31/2020
* USD 395,197.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;Transient Induced Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy (TIMES) for
study of protein-ligand interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Goal:&lt;br/&gt;To test protein-ligand interactions, the key mechanisms for most
drugs, without any external disturbances caused by molecular labelling or
immobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Protein
ligand interaction is one of the most fundamental and widely studied areas in
biology and chemistry because of their close relation to many diseases and
disease therapies. Nearly all diseases including cancer, neural disorders,
infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases, renal diseases, metabolic
diseases, immune diseases, etc. are connected to the abnormality of protein-
protein or protein-ligand interactions. Unfortunately, all the current methods
for in-vitro protein-ligand tests use either labels (often fluorescent) or
ligand immobilization, both of which can produce substantial disruptions and
introduce artifacts. These limitations have caused significant delay and cost
increase in drug development. A new method is proposed and investigated to
fundamentally solve the above problems, allowing precise in-vitro tests of the
binding strength and kinetics of proteins ligand interactions to accelerate the
process of drug discovery. The work can have significant impact on public health
and the country's healthcare by shortening the time and saving the cost for drug
discovery. The proposed research will also contribute to education and training
of new generation of scientists for multi-disciplinary research involving
biology, biochemistry, biophysics and engineering. The research also includes
significant outreach activities to engage middle and high school students and
underrepresented minority students to advance the STEM
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Since a protein and
ligand have a large molecular weight and size difference (e.g.,100 kDa versus 1
kDa), linking organic fluorescent molecules to a protein or ligand can perturb
or even change the binding properties. Similarly, the bioactivity of protein
depends on its 3D configuration. Immobilization of the molecules limits its
degree of freedom for binding, thus often yielding results different from
reactions in physiological conditions. Lacking a precise method of in-vitro
detection of protein-ligand interactions without any external disturbances has
presented a major challenge for mid to late stage drug tests. Drug companies
have often conducted unnecessary and unsuccessful human trials while the
failures should have been detected earlier if a precise in-vitro test method
exists. The most significant scientific and technological contributions of the
proposed research will be the development of the method of Transient Induced
Electronic Molecular Spectroscopy (TIMES) that allows label-free and
immobilization-free detection of protein-ligand interactions. The TIMES method
measures the signal caused by the dipole moment change when protein and ligand
form protein-ligand complex. When integrated with ultralow noise electronics and
microfluidics, the new µTIMES system will enable researchers to collect
unprecedented rich information with high timing resolution and enhanced signal-
to-noise ratio. This method will be applied to quantitative studies of protein-
ligand and protein-aptamer interactions by measuring the dissociation constant
and reaction kinetics.