* 1610313
* Quadratic Echoes and the MRI of Hard and Soft Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Sean Barrett, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 444,649.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the development of new tools to
'see' inside opaque solids has been an important driver of progress in science
and technology, with far-reaching economic impact. This project is developing
new approaches to a long-standing goal in the field of magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), namely, multinuclear MR images of hard and soft solids with high
spatial resolution. Conventional MRI detects only the signal from the Hydrogen
in liquid water; MRI of solids is so much more difficult that it is rarely
attempted. To perform high-resolution MR imaging of solids, this project uses
the innovation of quadratic echo line-narrowing, which was recently discovered
as a direct result of the NSF's investment in basic, curiosity-driven research.
Potential solid targets include porous rocks, composite materials, "through-
silicon vias" in 3D integrated circuits, bone and soft tissues. Cutting-edge
science with a broad range of potential applications enables excellent education
and training of students from the early undergraduate level through the Ph.D.,
along with K-12 outreach efforts. While this project's plan of work is aimed at
making fundamental scientific contributions, the work should find applications
in other areas of science and technology, and there are potential societal
benefits as well. For example, applying an entirely new experimental tool to
problems in granular physics, such as the properties of grain in silos, can
advance theory and experiment in a field that is very important to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The small difference
between hard pi-pulses and their delta-function approximation can be used to
generate new classes of spin echoes which have promising applications in nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or microscopy of
solids, and related spectroscopies. For example, using the quadratic echo line-
narrowing pulse sequence, a novel tool for the control of spin coherence, this
project is pursuing a new approach to carrying out MRI of solids with high
spatial resolution. This project has a strong focus on the education and
training of students from the early undergraduate level through the Ph.D., along
with K-12 outreach efforts. While the plan of work is aimed at making
fundamental scientific contributions, there are potential societal benefits as
well. First, advancing new forms of spin coherence control, applicable to a wide
variety of spin (pseudospin, or qubit) Hamiltonians, is broadly useful in many
areas of spectroscopy. As part of this effort, we are working to extend the
reach of quadratic echoes to an even wider range of nuclei (e.g., Carbon-13,
Silicon-29) and experimental systems. Second, finding ways to squeeze more
information from less data, in an effort to accelerate the imaging of solids,
has immediate benefits to the kind of NMR that is used for structure
determination in biology and chemistry (including drug discovery). This
project's efforts to reconstruct high-quality MR images (or NMR spectra) from
non-uniformly sampled data build upon Veit Elser's iterated maps approach, which
is a form of compressed sensing well-suited for this application. Third,
applying an entirely new experimental tool to problems in granular physics will
advance theory and experiment in a field that is very important to industry.
Historically, improvements in our ability to 'see' inside opaque solids have had
broader impacts.