* 1610693
* Collaborative Research:  Partnerships to Strengthen and Diversify Broader Impacts Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Kevin Niemi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/28/2021
* USD 388,449.00

As higher education institutions (HEIs) work to enhance Broader Impacts (BI)
efforts, collaborations with informal science education institutions (ISEs)
(e.g. science centers, aquaria, zoos) can help them strengthen their impact and
reach broader audiences. This project builds on the successful Portal to the
Public (PoP) framework, bringing together the expertise and resources of HEIs
and ISEs around the shared mission of engaging public audiences in current STEM
research. The project is designed to address several critical needs: (1) Public
outreach BI activities are relatively uncommon compared to BI that is focused
within the infrastructure of academia; (2) Because collaborations with ISEs are
frequently tied to individual Principal Investigators (PIs), there is limited
opportunity to build a body of knowledge around the practice of partnering for
BI work; and (3) Collaborations are often transient, making it more difficult
for universities to view BI on an institutional level in ways that leverage
particular institutional assets or strategies and even link investigators from
multiple projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific areas of study are:
&lt;br/&gt;a. Develop and test a structure for education/outreach BI experience
design that addresses a public audience need and meets NSF's BI criterion: The
project will create disseminatable tools around the activity design process
(including evaluation of learning impacts). By convening cross-disciplinary
teams, the project will ensure that experiences will reflect a wide range of
expertise and will help meet the needs of multiple stakeholders. These
established structures will lower the barrier to entry for PIs who want to do
public outreach BI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b. Design, test, and study structures
for long-term, mutually beneficial HEI-ISE partnerships: The project will build
on the proven PoP model to create flexible, disseminatable tools around the
development of institutional partnerships at three collaborating HEI-ISE site
pairings that consider each institution's resources, constraints and strategic
goals, including a cross-institutional and cross-disciplinary Broader Impacts
Design (BID) Team structure. Sustained partnerships will support ongoing public
engagement with current STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;c. Anchor the
partnership at the HEI with a representative from an office of research support:
Research support professionals will be a core part of the BID Team and will help
support institutional strategies for aligning BI activities with broader goals
around community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;d. Study the culture of HEI-
ISE partnerships, building knowledge about how these institutions can form
effective, sustained and mutually beneficial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners include Pacific Science
Center with the University of Washington, Bothell, WA; University of Wisconsin-
Madison with the Wisconsin Institute for Discovery; and the Sciencenter with
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. In addition, the Center for Research in Lifelong
Learning, Oregon State University will oversee the research aspects of the
project. The project's primary benefit is the development of more effective
mechanisms for HEIs and ISEs to collaborate, that will better enable them to
engage their communities in experiences and conversations about current STEM
research and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.