* 1610396
* Optimal Energy Scheduling in Microgrids with Photovoltaic (PV) Generation and Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Landers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 339,301.00

This award supports fundamental research to address two major threats to public
health and welfare, namely global warming and air pollution, by enabling the
optimal use of solar photovoltaic energy. This project seeks to create optimal
scheduling of energy storage systems incorporated in microgrids, which is a key
part of a solar energy solution, and to overcome two critical limits of solar
energy, intermittency and uncertainty, by addressing the degradation process of
energy storage systems and the uncertainty in solar output and power demand at
loads. The research results can help to fully utilize energy storage systems and
to minimize their lifetime cost, enabling solar energy to become a vital source
of renewable energy. Additionally, the project will engage, motivate, and train
US students preparing them for the workforce in the interdisciplinary area of
energy, power, and control through the development of interdisciplinary
curricula and various science activities for diverse youth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a fundamental trade-off in energy
storage systems for power grid applications, which involves the integration of
PV generation requiring more frequent charge/discharge cycles and the
corresponding degradation process. The research will find answers to the
following unsolved questions that are essential for optimal energy scheduling of
a microgrid: (1) how multiple degradation mechanisms of energy storage systems
are coupled, and how battery capacity fade is eventually affected by loading and
environmental conditions; (2) what is the impact of uncertainty of solar
radiation, market prices, and load on battery loading profiles, and how can
uncertainty be addressed in optimal scheduling of microgrids. Specifically, the
project has the following four objectives: (1) gain a fundamental understanding
of battery degradation mechanisms and how they couple, and integrate that
knowledge into a high-fidelity battery model; (2) create a low-order battery
model that can generate the predicted results quickly without losing accuracy;
(3) understand uncertainty phenomena in microgrids, and create a model to
incorporate all of the phenomena; and (4) develop algorithms for optimal
scheduling by considering battery degradation and microgrid uncertainty. The
proposed research will discover how the uncertain nature of a microgrid can
affect individual components, including energy storage degradation; the results
are expected to constitute critical knowledge for the power engineering
community. In addition, this project will develop a stochastic optimization
technique for near-real-time optimal scheduling. It is expected that the general
framework developed here will be adaptable for applications beyond power
engineering.