* 1610077
* Using the Effective Diffusivity of Polycrystals to Infer a Complete 5D Structure-Property Model for Hydrogen Diffusivity in Iron Grain Boundaries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Eric Homer, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,433.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grain boundaries are
defects that strongly influence-and in some cases govern-the properties of
engineering materials including strength, embrittlement, corrosion, solar cell
efficiency, among others. For example, these defects in structural metals can
act as preferential sites for corrosion and embrittlement, which can lead to
catastrophic failure of engineering structures like the recent failure of the
seismic safety rods in the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge. In spite of their
profound importance, the structure of these defects is so complex that it is
extremely difficult to predict their properties. Furthermore, there are so many
types of grain boundaries that isolating and testing each kind one-by-one is not
feasible. Instead of testing them one-by-one, this project presents a new
efficient framework called "property localization" to infer the properties
simultaneously using a small number of samples. Because of its relevance to the
problem of corrosion and embrittlement, this framework will be used to develop a
model to predict the effects of hydrogen in iron. By combining theoretical tools
from diverse fields (medicine, computer science, and materials science) with
advanced computational and experimental methods and emerging microscopy
techniques that permit high-throughput probing of this project will yield new
insight and enable the prediction of properties. This new understanding will
lead to the development of devices and engineering structures with improved
safety and performance. This project is being conducted within the framework of
a combined graduate and undergraduate mentoring program that is designed to
increase the representation and retention of female engineering students through
two primary strategies: involvement in mentored research early in their academic
career, and engagement with peer-to-peer mentoring networks via a social media
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to exploit the confluence of three scientific advances to tackle a
previously intractable problem: predicting the properties of grain boundaries
(GBs) as a function of their five-dimensional crystallographic structure. 3D
surface EBSD microscopy, polycrystalline atomistic studies, and inverse methods
for deconvolution of large datasets provide the keys for this transformational
opportunity. A significant obstacle to the development of GB structure-property
models has been the dimensionality of the 5D GB crystallography state space and
the correspondingly large number of bicrystal experiments that is required to
adequately probe this space (~10^5). The proposed work will use tomographic
reconstruction techniques to invert the concept of homogenization, and thereby
determine structure-property relationships from known microstructures and
effective property measurements. This deconvolution method is referred to as
property localization and has the primary advantage of reducing the number and
complexity of the required experiments by orders of magnitude. The new framework
is applied to the specific problem of constructing a quantitative model for
hydrogen diffusivity in iron GBs as a function of their five crystallographic
parameters. This work has implications for damage and degradation, such as
hydrogen embrittlement and corrosion, leading to more resistant materials and
enabling the safe, reliable and efficient storage and delivery of hydrogen fuel
necessary for a clean energy economy. The integration of the research with the
mentoring and outreach activities to increase retention of women students will
support the development of a diverse science and engineering workforce that will
directly benefit society.