* 1610832
* INFEWS N/P/H2O (SusChEM): MEMBRANE-SUPPORTED METAL COMPLEXES FOR CATCH-AND-RELEASE OF PHOSPHATES
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Valerie Pierre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 511,875.00

Phosphorus is one of the elements present in DNA, the genetic material of plant
and animal life. Phosphate ions are important components of fertilizers used by
farmers to enhance plant growth. However, excess phosphate ions from farms
contaminate water streams and have harmful environmental effects. Professor
Valerie C. Pierre of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota,
Twin-Cities conducts research to develop approaches to selectively remove
phosphate ions from polluted lakes and rivers and later release these ions, at
will, on farmlands in the form of fertilizers. The research program involves
graduate and undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities, in
interdisciplinary research and education. The education activities includes
teaching elementary school children from nearby public schools about scientific
methodology and environmental science. In collaboration with the Tamarack Nature
Center of Ramsey County, Professor Pierre teaches children how to monitor
phosphate levels in lakes and ponds, and in doing so, introduces them to basic
scientific concepts and experimental skills. Moreover, students working in the
research group of Professor Pierre are expected to present their research to the
broader scientific community through participation in regional and national
meetings. They also publish results in journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the NSF
Chemistry Division supports Professor Pierre's research group to develop and
promulgate novel metal-based supramolecular self-assemblies for the reversible
and selective capture of phosphate ions from aqueous systems. The approach
employs the coordination chemistry of hard metal ions with open coordination
sites. The research also emphasizes supramolecular principles such as
complementarity in shape and hydrogen-bonding for selective sequestering of
phosphate over other oxyanions. The ultimate goal is to produce porous membranes
that can selectively remove phosphate ions from polluted lakes and rivers and
reuse them in the form of fertilizer. This work advances the field of
supramolecular chemistry by investigating the structural parameters of metal-
based supramolecular assemblies that govern selectivity and reversibility in
binding of oxyanions. This interdisciplinary research is at the nexus of food,
water and energy systems.