* 1610060
* Magnetic Nanostructures with Perpendicular Anisotropy for Room Temperature Skyrmions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Kai Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic skyrmions are a special type of
arrangements of magnetic moments following a particular winding configuration.
They possess some fascinating properties. For example, they cannot be
continuously deformed to a state where all the moments point to the same
direction. Skyrmion magnetic configurations are stable once they are formed, but
a key challenge has been the realization of magnetic skyrmions at ambient
conditions. This project focuses on construction of artificial skyrmion arrays,
operational at elevated temperatures. The physical properties of these skyrmions
are studied using a set of experimental techniques as well as simulations. These
artificial skyrmions are expected to be stable even at room temperature and in
zero magnetic field, thus are an exciting novel platform to explore the
intriguing skyrmion physics. They also may have potential applications in highly
energy-efficient data storage, magnetic memory and logic devices. This project
provides opportunities to train junior researchers in university as well as
national laboratory and user facilities. The principal investigator plans to
initiate and actively participate in a variety of efforts to broaden
participation from underrepresented groups through course offering, internships,
exchange visits with partner universities, and other specific programs at the
Magnetism Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Room
temperature artificial skyrmion lattices based on nanostructures with
perpendicular anisotropy are realized over macroscopic areas. A multi-step
nanofabrication process is employed to achieve a variety of artificial magnetic
skyrmions, including embedded skyrmion lattices, skyrmion "race-tracks", and
skyrmion lattices on curved substrates. A set of magnetic field sequences is
followed to establish the skyrmion states. Microstructural characterizations,
magnetometry, first-order reversal curve, magnetic imaging, polarized neutron
reflectometry, and magneto-transport measurements are carried out to probe the
spatial and magnetic profile of skyrmions, their topological characteristics,
stability, mobility, and dynamic responses to external stimuli. Simulations are
employed to provide insight and guidance to the experiments. These studies not
only help to advance fundamental understanding of artificial magnetic skyrmions,
but also have potentially important technological impacts in low dissipation
information storage, magnetic memory and logic devices, due to the topologically
protected quantum states of the skyrmions. They also offer potentials to
transform the energy landscape for future nanoelectronics in the "beyond Moore's
law" era, which is well aligned with the National Strategic Computing Initiative
and the Big Data Initiative, as well as grand challenges for future
nanoelectronics. The principal investigator plans to initiate and actively
participate in a wide variety of efforts to broaden participation from the
international community, students, female scientists and other underrepresented
groups, through his extensive service to the magnetism community. Students
involved in the project receive excellent exposure to research experience in
university, national laboratory and other research facilities.