* 1610882
* Porous Molecular Solids with Zero-Dimensional (0D) Pores
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kevin Holman, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 455,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes currently employed
for the separation of the chemical compounds required by our modern economy are
responsible for a significant portion of our society's energy demands. A great
deal of scientific effort is currently directed toward trying to minimize these
demands by developing new sponge-like materials that can be employed in these
separations, broadly via selective absorption of chemical compounds into the
available pores. The funded project seeks to develop a novel class of relatively
simple sponge-like solids, those that possess individual cavities as opposed to
interconnected pores. The work is expected to advance our understanding of
chemical confinement and permeability in molecular solids with broader
implications in materials and separations science and green chemistry. The
project will support the education of our next generation of materials
scientists and will provide internship opportunities for promising, low-income
high school students in the DC metro area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microporous materials find a
host of applications in industrial settings and open-pore structures, wherein
pores are interconnected in one, two, or three dimensions, are the targets of
much contemporary research in this area. The funded project will study and
develop intrinsically zero dimensionally (0D) porous molecular solids in the
context of the seemingly broad misconception that the pores of such materials
are inactive as sorbents. The project aims to: i) conduct fundamental studies
toward the understanding the factors that govern sorption/desorption kinetics
(and thermodynamics) in 0D porous molecular solids, seeking to understand the
influence of structure, atomic motion and disorder, sorbate affinity, sorbate
properties, and defect density, on crystal permeability, ii) develop novel
materials and methods for enhanced exchange in 0D porous molecular solids,
seeking to expand the functionality of 0D porous materials such that they may be
on par with traditional open-pore materials for chemical separations, and iii)
exploit the confinement properties of certain 0D porous molecular solids for
novel science and applications (e.g., the stabilization of reactive species, or
storage of volatiles).