* 1610250
* Investigations on Circuit Requirements to Enhance the Bandwidth of Point-Field Detectors Used as Current Sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Babak Parkhideh, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2021
* USD 329,935.00

Power electronics is an integral part of today's power delivery systems such as
renewable energy systems, electric vehicles, data centers and most consumer
electronics. In these applications, electric current information is often an
essential parameter that needs to be known and measured for control, diagnostic
and prognostic purposes. With advances in power electronic circuits with
specific attention to high frequency power converters, there is a need to
investigate alternative approaches and techniques to measure the current. These
approaches should result in availability of current sensors that have fast-
response, are accurate, loss-less, and preferably non-intrusive. This project
investigates techniques and methods to create a platform to develop current
sensing schemes that can be utilized in high frequency power electronic circuits
or integrated in power semiconductor modules. It is expected that the research
conducted as part of this project will result in contactless current sensors
with an order of magnitude performance improvement over state-of-the-art
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, there is no current sensor that can be
used in many power electronics systems optimized to operate with switching
frequencies beyond 1MHz. This research will address the need and requirements
for such sensors. The objective of this research is to investigate contactless
integrated current sensing techniques for high frequency, high voltage power
electronic systems. The research in this project will involve investigating
materials and techniques that respond to the magnetic field produced by the
current in a printed circuit board trace. In particular, very high bandwidth
current sensors using Magneto-Resistor (MR) and a miniaturized inductor together
with complementary characteristics will be investigated. This research will
address the challenges of measurements due to asymmetrical current distribution
and significantly non-uniform magnetic field around the trace at frequencies
beyond 1MHz. The proposed approach is achieved through properly shaping and
amplifying the magnetic field with Magnetic field CONcentrators (MCON) to avoid
circuit board layout modifications. Different MCON configurations with respect
to spatial and material parameters will be studied through simulation and
hardware experimentation.