* 1610281
* Single Particle Investigation of Environmental Chemical Processes using Nano-Impact Collision Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program, Professor
E. Silvana Andreescu of Clarkson University is studying the chemical processes
that occur at the surface of individual nanoparticles upon exposure to
environmental contaminants. To meet this challenge, a new method based on
measurements of the collision events of nanoparticles with a microelectrode is
developed. The integrated characterizational approach can be used to assess
nanoparticle stability and predict their change as a result of exposure to the
environment. These studies provide new data for understanding the relationship
between nanoparticle properties and their behavior under environmental
conditions. Since nanoparticles are used in many consumer products (such as
soaps and make-up), increasing our knowledge of their changes in the
environmental has significant economic and societal implications. This research
provides training for graduate and undergraduate students, especially women and
minorities, who have demonstrated significant promise for career development and
leadership. The project also provides undergraduate research experience to
underrepresented minority students from three 4-year public colleges that
usually do not have access to research to broaden their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the development of a new
electrochemical collision method for the investigation of the surface
properties, size-dependent effects and redox reactivity of model metal and metal
oxide nanoparticles. Changes in oxidation state, surface adsorption / desorption
and reaction kinetics are evaluated using collision electrochemistry and the
results are correlated with a suite of spectroscopic and surface
characterization methods. These experiments determines how environmental
constituents and solution chemistry affect the surface properties and reactivity
of individual nanoparticles, and establish the mechanism of these interactions.
The development of a new methodology for studying nanoparticles by collision
electrochemistry has potential for broad application as a complementary and
inexpensive tool for particle characterization and environmental screening
purposes. These studies provide new data for understanding the relationship
between nanoparticle characteristics and their behavior under environmental
conditions.