* 1610062
* Type-II hot carrier solar cells: control and manipulation of non-equilibrium carriers using band engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Ian Sellers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 380,000.00

Abstract: Control and manipulation of thermal losses in quantum-engineered
structures: a practical route to high efficiency hot carrier solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Improved solar cells are vital not
only to the U.S. economy and energy independence; they are essential to the
reduction in global warming and for economic growth throughout the developing
world. Solar cells offer a free and abundant source of clean power, but
currently operate at efficiency levels that limit their economic viability. The
central issue is that solar cells convert considerably less of the sun's energy
to useable power than fundamentally possible. One major loss mechanism is the
rapid loss of energy through heat generation when high energy photons of light
are absorbed. This program addresses mitigation of these hot carrier losses via
a fundamental investigation of quantum-engineered solar cell architectures that
have been shown to inhibit heat generation in proof-of-principle studies.
Improved versions of the solar cell structures will facilitate the control and
manipulation of hot carriers to increase the fraction of solar energy that is
converted into electricity. The development and operation of such structures
offer a real potential for practical hot-carrier solar cells, which have the
potential to impact utility-scale power generation supporting existing utility
infrastructure during peak operating periods, increasing global capacity, and
reducing dependence on traditional fossil fuels. Through involvement in this
program, graduate and undergraduate students develop expertise in a
multidisciplinary range of technical skills, and gain a unique perspective of
fundamental research while acquiring an appreciation of the subtleties of novel
technology development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The project focuses on
quantum-engineered structures based on Antimonide and Arsenide heterostructures.
Despite several potentially important advantages, these semiconductors are
relatively unexplored for next generation solar cells. The research builds on
recent advances at the University of Oklahoma showing stable and robust hot
carrier populations at elevated temperatures in Indium Arsenide (InAs)/Aluminium
Arsenide Antimonide (AlAsSb) superlattices. The generation of "hot" high energy
carriers has been observed to be more stable in quantum wells, in general,
particularly at low temperatures where thermal losses are inhibited. These
effects, however, are rapidly quenched at higher temperatures, conditions in
which real solar cells must operate. InAs/AlAsSb superlattices are ideal for
studying the physics of hot carriers in semiconductor structures. The large
confinement potential in these structures facilities hot carrier generation
directly in the quantum wells. The degenerate valence band improves the
extraction of the positive charge carriers (holes), which serves to slow hot
carrier relaxation through increased electron lifetimes in the conduction band
of the superlattice. In solar cells designed to harness hot carriers, direct
absorption will create hot carriers in quantum wells in the upper emitter region
of the cell, which are then rapidly extracted via superlattice and resonant
tunnelling architectures. Confinement can be used to tune the energy-gap to
optimize the operating voltage, while effectively harnessing the hot carriers
generated by the UV-visible photons of the solar spectrum. The semiconductor
heterostructures will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy and their hot carrier
properties will be characterized by optical spectroscopy and optoelectronic
measurements. Solar cell devices will be fabricated from optimized structures
with the goal of improved efficiency. Investigation of these structures and
devices will enable a better understanding of hot carrier dynamics in practical
systems, which are of great interest to the photovoltaics community and
important for the cost-effective implementation of solar cells in the domestic
energy market.