* 1610073
* Planar Wurtzite III-N Gunn Diodes for High Power Millimeter Wave and THz Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Russell Dupuis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract Title: Planar Wurtzite III-N Gunn Triodes for High Power Millimeter
Wave and THz Electronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed research
is to develop innovative high power III-nitride millimeter-wave and terahertz
sources of electromagnetic radiation, filling a long-standing technology gap for
robust, compact, solid-state devices capable of operating at room temperature.
The transformative Gunn triodes proposed here will leverage many years of
experience with III-nitride HEMT technologies, and focus on high-quality
materials growth, fabrication, design, modeling and high-power high-speed III-
nitride device physics research. Through the proposed research tasks, an
entirely new architecture for room temperature solid state millimeter-wave and
terahertz sources will be demonstrated for a host of diverse applications
including wireless communications, automotive radar, remote sensing, medical
imaging, concealed object detection, spectroscopy and inter-satellite
transmissions. In education outreach activities, the program will enable a close
collaboration between the PIs' groups and Georgia Tech's Center for Education
Integrating Science, Mathematics and Computing to actively engage in K-12
education. The program will create online resources for the Georgia STEM
Incubator initiatives for K-12 science course modules and help design online
professional development curriculum units for teachers on green energy
technologies and energy conservation related topics. Students from
underrepresented groups will be involved in the research through Summer
Undergraduate Research in Engineering/Science programs at Goergia Tech. The
program will also host Georgia Intern Fellowship for high school S&amp;T
teachers for both continuing education and cultivation of the next-generation of
the Science of Engineering education workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the proposed work shall
result in the very first demonstration of a wurtzite III-nitride based Gunn-
effect device. The basis of the proposed approach is the use of advanced
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) growth systems to produce GaN-
based HEMT-like triode structures with atomically smooth polar interfaces on
high-quality GaN substrates. Novel heterostructure Gunn triode designs and
fabrication processing technologies will be explored and studied to facilitate
successful demonstration of the proposed devices. A comprehensive understanding
of the non-stationary and highly non-equilibrium carrier transport mechanisms
under high electric-field conditions in these structures will be achieved
through the application of state-of-the-art numerical simulation software based
on full-band ensemble electro-thermal Monte Carlo solutions of the Boltzmann
transport equation. Such calculations have recently provided valuable insight
into the reasons why previous attempts to realize GaN-based Gunn effect devices
have failed, and have facilitated the identification of a prototypical HEMT-like
heterostructure in a triode configuration which addresses each of these
shortcomings. The successful demonstration of the proposed III-N Gunn triodes
will represent both a significant technological breakthrough in the field of
III-N power electronic device research, providing a solid-state solution for the
efficient generation of high-power millimeter-wave and terahertz signals at room
temperature, as well as an advancement of fundamental science through the very
first expression of the Gunn effect in the wurtzite III-nitride material system.