* 1610361
* A New Design of Nanoscale Optical Voltage Sensors from Plasmonic/Nonlinear-Optical Material Core/Shell Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2019
* USD 377,184.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Duan at University of California, Los Angeles, designs
and develops a new generation of nanoscale optical voltage sensors (NOVS) based
on core/shell nanoparticles with a core of plasmonic nanostructure and a shell
of nonlinear-optical (NLO) material. The design of plasmonic/NLO core/shell
nanoparticles creates a new signaling pathway to sensitively and rapidly convert
the local voltage signal into a detectable optical signal. This project focuses
on designing, synthesizing and investigating the electro-optical sensor of
described core/shell nanoparticles, and exploring the feasibility of using the
optimized sensors for monitoring cell membrane potential. The design of optical
reporters of voltage signal is of considerable interest for diverse
applications, particularly for recording cell membrane potentials that are
essential for high throughput, high space and time resolution. Such applications
can be used to examine neural circuits, an integral component of brain
activities. In line with the NSF "Understand the Brain" initiative, the
successful development of the described NOVS may greatly expand our capability
in detecting, imaging and monitoring dynamic neural activities to provide
insight on brain function. Professor Duan's research program is closely
integrated with education and outreach activities to broadly disseminate the
research results. His program provides students with educational and training
opportunities. He also works with the California NanoSystems Institute to help
training high school teachers to bring new nanotechnology concepts to their high
school science classes.

Professor Duan is developing nanoscale optical voltage sensors (NOVS) consisting
of a core/shell nanoparticles with a core of plasmonic nanostructure and a shell
of nonlinear-optical (NLO) material. He uses an external electrical field to
actively modulate the dielectric environment and thus its plasmonic resonance
spectrum, creating a new signaling pathway to sensitively and rapidly transfer
the local voltage signal into a detectable optical signal. This project includes
five research and educational activities: (1) to use finite element simulation
to guide the design of a series of plasmonic/NLO core/shell nanostructures with
desired plasmonic properties and electro-optical modulation; (2) to develop
robust chemistries to synthesize the plasmonic core with controlled composition,
morphology, dimension and the plasmonic resonance properties; (3) to use single
particle spectroscopy to investigate the electro-optical modulation and the
voltage sensitivity of the designed core/shell nanoparticles; (4) to explore the
feasibility of using the optimized NOVS for monitoring cell membrane potential;
and (5) to integrate fluorescence materials with the plasmonic/NLO nanoparticles
to convert scattering-based plasmonic signal to fluorescence signal.