* 1610874
* A Fundamental Study on Energy Efficient Wireless Communication Networks: Modeling,  Algorithms, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yu Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

The rapid development and wide deployment of wireless networks incur a fast
escalation of energy demand, which eagerly calls for energy-efficient networking
techniques. At the same time, wireless networks are evolving into complex forms
with multi-dimensional resources including communication link, radio, channel,
antenna, and transmit power; algorithms with low complexity for energy
efficiency optimization are highly demanded. This project targets at a
fundamental study on energy-efficient wireless networking through establishment
of a uniformed analytical framework, development of efficient and low-complexity
algorithms, and application of the generic studies into important scenarios in
the fifth generation (5G) cellular systems. This interdisciplinary research will
not only provide various training projects to undergraduate and graduate
studies, but also inspire students to pursue high-quality research with a
creative, open-minded, and cross-disciplinary perspective.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is going to demonstrate that a uniformed
multidimensional optimization framework for energy efficiency optimization can
be constructed by the principle of scheduling proper transmission patterns,
which are defined by the interference model of the network. With such a
uniformed optimization model, low-complexity decomposition techniques are
fundamentally related to a maximum weighted transmission pattern (MWTP) problem,
under a physical interference model according to the signal-to-interference-
plus-noise ratio. Approximation algorithms and associated performance analysis
for the MWTP problem (which is NP-hard in general) are critical research issues
to be studied. Distributed algorithms for solving the energy efficiency
optimization problem further involves decomposition with multi-objective
optimization, and innovative Lyapunov function design and associated stability
analysis under the physical interference model, which will also be addressed in
this project. Energy efficient solutions in a couple of important 5G cellular
scenarios will be enabled through innovative modeling and algorithms in the
uniformed multidimensional framework, including joint optimization that
incorporates massive MIMO interference mitigation with flow constraint at
network layer and base station sleeping at system level, formulation and
algorithm development for a MWTP problem under the massive MIMO interference
model, and modeling of the interplay between massive MIMO and device-to-device
communications. In this project, the proposed research seamlessly integrates
studies in the areas of optimization, graph theory, dual decomposition,
approximation algorithms, and wireless communication and networking. The
research outcomes are expected to provide important guidance for the development
of the 5G cellular systems.