* 1610311
* SusChEM: Resourceful Polymers Derived from Polyhydroxyl Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Donald Darensbourg, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 719,305.00

Organic polymer materials, commonly thought of as plastics, are of critical
importance to every aspect of human life, from the clothes that we wear to the
computers that we use to the tires on which we drive to the devices through
which medicines are administered. Two key challenges with polymer materials are
their production from petrochemical sources, which are non-renewable, and their
persistence in the environment. To address these challenges, Professors Wooley,
Darensbourg, and Dr. Sun of Texas A&amp;M University are designing strategies to
produce polymer materials from natural building blocks while also incorporating
degradable linkages that regenerate those natural building blocks once the
material has completed its useful lifetime. This project includes research and
educational components to impact fundamental knowledge about polymer materials
across the disciplines of chemistry and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is developing synthetic chemistry approaches to the production of
a series of polycarbonates and polyphosphoesters that originate from renewable
resources, exhibit novel chemical, physical and mechanical properties, and
undergo hydrolytic breakdown to biologically-beneficial or benign by-products.
In one direction, this project combines polyhydroxyl natural products as the
monomeric building blocks and carbonates as the linkages. Hydrolytic degradation
of the resulting polymers produces the polyhydroxyl compound plus carbon
dioxide. In a second direction, phosphoester linkages are utilized, again
borrowing from Nature, in phosphoesters commonly found in biological
macromolecules, such as DNA or RNA. The research activities include 1) the
synthesis of functional monomers from polyhydroxyl natural products, 2) the
transformation of those monomers into linear, branched or crosslinked polymer
materials by either step-growth condensation or chain-growth ring-opening
polymerizations, 3) rigorous characterization studies to determine the
compositions, structures, physicochemical and mechanical properties; and 4) the
study of hydrolytic stabilities and degradation products.