* 1610068
* Sensing and Imaging with Motion in Structured Optical Illumination
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 12/31/2019
* USD 339,999.00

Title: Sensing and Imaging with Motion in Structured Optical Illumination
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Enhanced information
about an object is available with optical measurements as a function of object
position, with either natural motion or controlled adjustment of position. This
concept is being exploited in an imaging and detection method having two facets.
In one, speckled patterns of scattered laser light measured as a function of
object position are being used to reconstruct the obscured moving object. The
initial experiments use scanned dielectric objects between scattering acrylic
sheets, allowing control over all relevant variables, which will enable
applications including optical imaging in living subjects, such as cells and
contrast agents deep within the brain, and imaging given environmental clutter.
The safety, convenience, resolution, and information available from optical
imaging in these applications are paramount. Of particular significance, the
method will be effective for very heavy scatter, making it possible to image
through substantial amounts of tissue. At a more general level, the effort
relates to new opportunities for communication in a scattering environment that
exploit natural motion and spatial diversity. The other aspect of the work
involves use of optical measurements as a function of the precise position of a
semiconductor wafer in a spatially varying optical intensity to find defects at
an early stage of manufacture. This addresses a major need in industry, because
there is no satisfactory method to find defects in three-dimensional devices
that have become important in consumer electronics. This approach is being
evaluated using example material arrangements with an introduced defect.
Understanding from this aspect of the project will also be useful in other
applications related to structure and material characterization.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Laser optical speckle patterns as a function of object
position are being used to form intensity correlations over position. This data
has been shown to provide access to information about the moving object, and
through a reconstruction method, to an image of the hidden object. For example,
the image of a hidden aperture has been obtained. The key aspect being sought is
evidence that the object's dielectric constant as a function of position can be
obtained, thereby establishing the general principle of imaging in heavily
scattering media. Experiments use scattering media with controlled properties
and a translation stage. Information on the possible resolution is also being
investigated. The other aspect of this project involves use of a model material
arrangement representative of a semiconductor wafer with a defect, whereby the
sample is scanned using a piezoelectric stage in an optical standing wave field
created by illumination with a laser and reflection from a mirror. Detected
light as a function of sample position, coupled with a model, allows the
presence of a defect to be determined. The efficacy of this approach is being
evaluated for application in the semiconductor wafer inspection industry.
Because existing optical inspection methods are incapable of adequately
detecting small defects in three-dimensional semiconductor structures, the
prospect that this approach will provide a solution could address a multi-
billion-dollar inspection market need.