* 1610495
* The Nanomechanical and Viscoelastic Responses of Ultrathin Polymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Gregory McKenna, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 809,286.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological infrastructure
that provides science and engineering solutions to the rapidly growing
nanotechnology area is of considerable national interest. The present work
addresses fundamentals of the nanoconfinement behavior of materials that form
the basis of the relevant enabling technologies. One important set of problems
addressed relates to the engineering properties (such as stiffness and yield
strength) of nanometer-thick films that are in freely standing form and,
consequently, cannot be readily measured. The only method available for making
such measurements in such materials is a bubble-inflation method developed in
the PI's laboratory that allows testing of extremely small quantities of
material, especially nanometer-thin polymer films. The work investigates the
engineering properties of freely standing polymer films deep in the glassy state
with particular emphasis on yield behavior. These studies will be the first to
provide film thickness and temperature dependence of yield in freely standing
films. Also, in the freely standing films, a large enhancement in the material
stiffness is observed and, recently, conflicting theoretical models of the
stiffening behavior have appeared to explain the phenomenon. Such predictions
are, of course important to nanomaterial design and use, and the present work
will establish the range of validity of these theories. Molecular architecture
effects will also be investigated. Finally, the nanobubble inflation experiment
permits investigations of novel materials that were previously unachievable due
to their extremely small quantities. In this case, the investigators will study
ultrastable polymer glasses made by physical vapor deposition (PVD) and that can
be made more stable than even a 20 million year old amber glass. This high
stability allows the interrogation of a long-standing question whose resolution
is fundamental to theories of glasses and, in particular, how to make long-term
predictions of their behavior in applications to important areas such as
advanced composites and adhesives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of ultrathin polymer films remains an
intense area of investigation, but most studies have been limited to the case of
substrate-supported films even though studies suggest much larger effects occur
in the freely standing state. The present work tests three aspects of freely
standing ultrathin films using the TTU bubble inflation method and takes
advantage of the method's capability of making viscoelastic measurements on
extremely small quantities of material to study the response of an ultrastable
polymer glass made by physical vapor deposition (PVD). One important set of
problems addressed relates to the engineering properties, such as modulus and
yield strength of nanometer thick films that are in freely standing form and,
consequently, not readily measured. The only method available for making such
measurements in such materials is a bubble inflation method that allows testing
of extremely small quantities of material, especially ultrathin or nano-metric
polymer films. The work investigates the engineering properties of freely
standing polymer films deep in the glassy state with particular emphasis on
yield behavior. Also, in freely standing films, a large modulus enhancement is
observed and, recently, conflicting theoretical models of the stiffening
behavior have appeared to explain the phenomenon. Such predictions are, of
course important to nanomaterial design and use and the present work will
establish the range of validity of these theories. Branched polymers have been
shown to exhibit different nanoscale behavior from linear counterparts upon
confinement on a supporting layer and the TTU bubble inflation method will be
used to examine the effects of branching and unentangled polymer chain length on
the viscoelastic properties of freely standing ultrathin films. Finally, it
remains controversial whether or not the dynamics (relaxation time or viscosity)
in glass-forming liquids, including polymers, diverge at a finite temperature.
The PI's group has now demonstrated the first PVD ultrastable polymer glass that
can be used to determine the upper bound relaxation times in a fashion similar
to prior work with a 20 million year old amber but over a larger "window" of
temperatures because the PVD polymer has a fictive temperature at least 50 K
below the glass transition temperature, and optimization of the PVD conditions
offers the possibility of an even larger testing window. Should the experiment
be successful, it will provide further experimental data that can challenge
theories of the behavior of glass-forming systems.