* 1610328
* Kinetically Viable Pathways for Multitopic DCC
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,460.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeffrey S. Moore of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign is
developing chemistry to synthesize new, shape-persistent, carbon-based cage
molecules. He is investigating methods to link small precursor molecules into
larger, hollow cage-like structures. Knowledge obtained from this project will
directly impact the design and synthesis of important carbon-based materials. In
addition, the three-dimensional structures contain voids on the order of a few
nanometers in length and with persistent shapes, so these structures may
sequester other small molecules. Professor Moore and his research group continue
to participate in several mentoring and outreach activities to communicate the
importance of scientific advances to K-12 audiences and the general public. They
are involved in specific programs such as Encouraging Tomorrow's Chemists (ETC)
and the Illinois Female Engineers in Academia Training (iFEAT).

Professor Moore is exploring synthetic methods to construct cage molecules with
defined cavities for host-guest interactions, adsorption, separation, and
stabilization of reactive intermediates. The typical approach in this field is
to use a heuristic, structure-focused strategy and design precursors with the
appropriate geometry required for a targeted structure. However, this method
frequently fails to produce the desired outcome, or yields no discernable
products. In this project, Professor Moore is developing experimental methods to
probe dynamic covalent chemistry (DCC) energy landscapes and to use that
information in formulating strategies to direct DCC precursors along kinetically
viable pathways while avoiding undesirable kinetic traps. The particular DCC
method being used is alkyne metathesis, and the specific issues being addressed
include how kinetic traps affect the outcome of multitopic DCC, what design
strategies will direct DCC along kinetically viable pathways, and how strategies
used to construct 2-dimensional structures can be adapted to the synthesis of
3-dimensional cages. Knowledge gained from this project is expected to relate
directly towards the construction of other important classes of materials such
as covalent organic frameworks (COFs).