* 1610143
* Nanoscale Studies of Surface Doping Effects and Superconductivity in Fe-based Superconductors and Iridates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Vidya Madhavan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 449,579.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Achieving electrical transport with zero
resistance (superconductivity) has been a dream of condensed matter physicists
for many decades. Our best `high-temperature (high-Tc)' superconductors still
however require low temperatures to be functional. The search is therefore on to
discover higher `high-Tc' superconductors. Two recent discoveries have created
tremendous excitement in this field. The first is the discovery of enhanced
superconducting transition temperatures (Tc) in monolayer films of FeSe grown.
The Tc in these films is enhanced by a factor of approximately eight or ten
compared to bulk crystals. The second exciting discovery is the observation of
potential superconductivity in a new class of materials called iridates. The
dramatically high Tcs observed in FeSe and potential superconductivity in the
iridates have not only renewed our interest in the search for new and higher Tc
materials but have also generated a series of new and as yet unanswered
questions. This project investigates the occurrence and mechanisms of
superconductivity in doped FeSe thin films and iridate single crystals with
spectroscopic imaging scanning tunneling microscopy (SI-STM), which has emerged
as a powerful technique to obtain nanoscale information on the structural and
electronic properties of materials. The goals of the project are to investigate
the mechanism by which superconducting transition temperature (Tc) is enhanced
in ultrathin FeSe films and explore superconductivity in the iridate compounds.
Understanding the mechanism of the surprisingly high superconducting transition
temperatures may point the way to realizing higher Tcs in other materials.
Students working on these materials with are being trained on materials and
instruments at the forefront of today's research. The PI's integrated outreach
and education activities exposes talented high school students to cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the occurrence and mechanisms of superconductivity in doped FeSe
thin films and iridate single crystals with spectroscopic imaging scanning
tunneling microscopy (SI-STM), which has emerged as a powerful technique to
obtain nanoscale information on the structural, electronic and bosonic
properties of materials. The project includes a special focus on the effects of
surface doping on the properties of materials such as FeSe monolayers and
multilayers electron-doped with potassium (K), and bulk and surface doped
iridates. The PI's laboratory has the technology and expertise to probe the
electron, phonon, and spin excitations of complex materials in real- and
momentum-space using high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and
spectroscopy (STS), Fourier transform STS, and spin-polarized STS. In addition,
a custom molecular beam epitaxy system in the PI's lab allows transport of thin
film samples to the STM without exposing the films to air. These instruments are
critical in the success of the projects. The goals of the project are multifold.
The project investigates the mechanism by which superconducting transition
temperature (Tc) is enhanced in ultrathin FeSe films and provides data to
distinguish between the different mechanisms of Tc enhancement. For the
Iridates, SI-STM data is used to differentiate Fermi arcs from Fermi pockets. If
arcs are observed, studying the iridate system might shed light on the origin of
such arcs in both iridates and cuprates. Understanding the mechanism of the
surprisingly high superconducting transition temperatures in FeSe may point the
way to realizing higher Tcs in other materials. If iridate d-wave
superconductivity were confirmed, it would help elucidate many of the
outstanding questions in cuprate superconductivity and provide a new playground
to explore oxide superconductivity in general. The project has impact beyond
progress in understanding superconductivity in these new materials. Students
working on these materials with SI-STS and MBE techniques are being trained on
materials and instruments at the forefront of today's research. Many of PI's
former advisees have been women. The success of the project enhances the
research experience for women in physics. The PI's integrated outreach and
education activities exposes talented high school students to cutting edge
science.