* 1610110
* The Microscopic Electronic Structure of Iron Superconductors Under Strain: New Frontiers in Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Abhay Pasupathy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;When a material is mechanically stretched, its
properties can undergo dramatic changes. For example, we are familiar with how
the elasticity of rubber changes as it is stretched. Less familiar but equally
important are changes to the electronic properties of materials. When stretched,
materials can change their electrical resistance, light absorption and a host of
other electronic properties. The causes for such changes in the electronic
properties are often poorly understood at the microscopic level. In this
project, the research team will use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to study
the electronic properties of materials as they are stretched. STM is a technique
to measure the electronic properties of materials with the precision of single
atoms. In this research, a specially designed apparatus is used to mount and
stretch crystal materials in the STM while their response is monitored. This
equipment is designed, manufactured, assembled and run by the principal
investigator's research team. It is used to impart training to students at the
high school, undergraduate and graduate levels, and is used to liaison with
industrial partners. The goal of the project will be to develop a microscopic
understanding of the changes brought about by strain in materials, especially
those belonging to the iron pnictide class of superconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;External strain when applied
to materials can cause electronic changes via modifying band structure,
interaction strengths and even changes in phase. Understanding the microscopic
changes brought about by the application of strain is the key scientific problem
of interest in this project. The main scope of the research is to study the
electronic nematic phase of the iron pnictides. In this phase, electronic
properties display nematicity, the spontaneous breaking of the underlying
discrete rotational symmetry of the lattice. Developing an understanding of the
nematic electronic phase and its coupling to the other phases of these materials
is the key scientific goal of this project. The main experimental technique used
will be atomic-resolution, cryogenic STM measurements. The project is enabled by
a technical breakthrough that allows for the very first time the application of
uniaxial or biaxial in-plane strains to a sample, while continuously performing
microscopic measurements on the same atomically resolved area of the surface.
Using this apparatus, STM is used to measure (a) gaps from spectroscopy (b)
domain structure from topography and (c) scattering rates from quasiparticle
interference, all under the influence of strain. The apparatus is used across
the phase diagram in three different pnictide families of NaFe(Co)As, Fe(Te)Se
and LiFe(Co)As systems that display very different nematic behaviors. The final
goal of the project is to determine the driving forces for nematicity and its
connection to superconductivity in the pnictides.