* 1610390
* Catastrophic impacts of geomagnetic disturbances on power system operation: Analysis and Mitigation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Ergun Simsek, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 327,246.00

Solar storms, caused by the violent outburst of explosive activities on the sun,
may lead to geomagnetic disturbances (GMDs). During GMDs, a large mass of
charged solar energetic particles escapes from the sun's halo, travels to Earth,
perturbs Earth's magnetic field, and gives rise to undesirable dc currents in
power systems. This results in overheating, overloading, and abnormal operation
of power system equipment. As a result, GMDs have demonstrated the ability to
disrupt the normal operation of power grids and cause widespread blackouts. The
collapse of the Hydro-Quebec system is a prominent example, where more than six
million customers were left without power, and major power system equipment was
damaged; this episode resulted in economic damages of approximately $300
million. Experts estimate that a severe GMD has the potential to cause
widespread, long-term losses with a recovery time of four to ten years and
staggering economic losses of $1-2 trillion. The main goal of this project is to
accurately model the impacts of GMDs on the normal operation of bulk electric
power systems and develop systematic approaches to mitigate these impacts,
including power grid reconfiguration and determining proper placement of
blocking devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the main goal of this research
project, the following two objectives are defined: Accurate modeling and
analysis of GMD impacts on power systems, and systematic mitigation of GMD
impacts based on power system reconfiguration and blocking device installation.
To this end, the major contributions of this project to the scientific community
are as follows: 1) Spectral element analysis of power transformers: This will be
the first attempt in applying spectral element method to power transformers and
generally to any electric machine. Due to its compact formulation and use of
high order basis functions, this technique requires much less memory and CPU
time compared to traditional finite element methods and hence provides more
accurate results and a better and more efficient platform for the analysis of
electric machines. This project benefits from the results of this task by better
transformer saturation modeling; impact of GMDs on transformers is the root
cause of all GMD adverse impacts. 2) Nonlinear harmonic power flow analysis:
Certain nonlinear phenomena, such as transformer saturation, can give rise to
power system harmonics. This project seeks to develop a comprehensive approach
for estimating the harmonic content of system voltages and currents under these
circumstances. Despite the great deal of effort on this problem and past
advancements in the area, to date no robust solution technique exists for large-
scale problems. 3) Optimization-based GMD mitigation: To prevent GMDs from
causing widespread blackouts, measures such as power system reconfiguration and
blocker device installation can be taken. Power system reconfiguration aims to
provide an improved stability margin to the power system or prevent the
propagation of undesirable DC currents in the system by means of equipment
planned outages. Blocker device installation aims to block the GICs from
circulating in the grid by installing high-impedance hardware devices. This
project will create systematic approaches based on optimization techniques to
determine optimal mitigation strategies while ensuring consideration of power
system stability and equipment loading limits. In summary, this project will
create accurate modeling techniques and mitigation approaches to prevent GMD
from having severe impact on the grid. Moreover, the deliverables of this
project will also contribute to broader applications in general power system
modeling and analysis.