* 1610175
* Dispersion, Chemical Functionalization and Dynamics of Boron-Nitride Nanotubides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Matteo Pasquali, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 280,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professor Angel A. Martí and Professor Matteo
Pasquali of Rice University to study the properties of tubular nanostructures
made of boron and nitrogen known as boron-nitride nanotubes (BNNTs). The goals
of this research are to develop methods to chemically modify the surface of
BNNTs and to study their solution behavior. Controlling the surface chemistry
and organization of BNNT in solution will allow their utilization as building
blocks for a variety of applications including high strength materials, water
purification membranes, heat dissipation materials, and antifouling agents.
While exploring the chemistry of BNNTs, the PIs pursue broader impact activities
to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering careers and to disseminate chemistry, engineering, and nanoscience
concepts to the larger community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BNNTs are the ultimate
building blocks for the manufacture of nanoarchitectures and novel macroscopic
assemblies. However their chemical functionalization, dispersion, and phase
behavior in liquids, and thus their self-assembly into supramolecular ordered
structures, are still challenges in this field of research. In order to address
these challenges, the proposed research involves synthesizing negatively charged
BNNTs, or boron nitrides nanotubides (BNNTDs). The BNNTD properties provide
control over the dispensability, chemical properties, and solution dynamics of
BNNTs. This project involves studying how to prepare BNNTDs by chemical
reduction and the functionalization of the BNNT surface by reaction of BNNTDs
with alkyl and aryl halides. The solution dynamics of BNNTs are studied using
microscopy techniques. The results of this research will accelerate the
maturation of BNNT science and technology, which is expected to provide new
supramolecular structures with unusual combinations of properties (e.g., strong,
flexible, electrically insulating, thermally conductive fibers). The research
not only advances the state-of-knowledge in nanoscience, but also promotes the
discovery and understanding of advanced nanotechnology concepts by graduate and
undergraduate students. The educational plan includes offering talks to
underrepresented minority students from K-12 to graduate school about different
topics such as nanotechnology research, careers in science and engineering, and
graduate school.