* 1610114
* Creating, manipulating, and detecting Majorana fermion states in hybrid superconductor-topological insulator Josephson devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 489,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: This award supports experimental research aimed at
understanding a newly-discovered class of materials and enabling future advanced
electronic devices. The research focuses on topological materials, called
"topological" because their properties depends primarily on the topology, or
geometry, of their electronic structure. By fabricating and measuring a series
of advanced devices that integrate these topological materials with
superconductors, the capabilities and limitations of this rapidly emerging field
will be explored. In addition to their possible technological applications,
these unique materials can be implemented in electronic circuits to create a new
type of computer platform in which the information is stored in states protected
from the detrimental effects of the environment. This is a unique feature of
topological devices that has the potential to extend dramatically the speed and
capability of large-scale computers. In addition to the new science and
applications that may arise from this project, this research program exposes a
diverse cadre of postdoctoral researchers, graduate research students, and
undergraduate students to scientific issues and experimental techniques relevant
to the development and applications of new materials and phenomena. This
training at the interface of materials science and device physics has been
demonstrated to be highly effective in launching the careers of scientists and
engineers in high technology fields.

Technical Abstract: Exciting new phenomena have been predicted to arise in
hybrid superconductor-topological insulator systems in which pair correlations
induce an effective complex superconducting order parameter exhibiting chiral
edge states, topologically-protected surface states, and Majorana fermions,
exotic excitations that are their own antiparticles. This project focuses on
schemes to nucleate these exotic excitations and manipulate them in controllable
ways to verify their existence and explore their stability and dynamics. A
series of specific experiments are designed to reveal their unique non-Abelian
statistics and to develop functional approaches to image, manipulate, readout
the parity that encodes their critical phase information, and braid them to
perform logical operations, all critical steps toward understanding the
underlying physics of these novel states and crafting a technology for quantum
information processing, quantum metrology, and quantum simulation/computing. Key
experiments fall into four interwoven categories: (1) mapping the location of
Majorana fermions via spectroscopy and imaging, looking for the zero-energy
states in the gap that are signatures of these unique states, (2) probing the
dynamics of Majorana fermions by phase-sensitive Josephson interferometry,
searching for the periodic current-phase relation that is a characteristic
signature of the Majorana fermions states, (3) manipulating and detecting the
parity of Majorana fermions, exploring ways to measuring the parity via direct
measurements of specific components of the supercurrent using Josephson
electronics, and (4) verifying and using the non-Abelian statistics of Majorana
fermions, the most characteristic and intriguing aspect of Majorana fermion
modes and the property that makes them highly attractive for quantum information
processing and computing. The field of topological physics is very new and
researchers worldwide are collectively just starting to explore the materials,
measurements, and theoretical concepts that will be important in achieving an
understanding of Majorana fermions and how to exploit them in electronic
circuits. This project explores the key unsolved problems in this field and
paths for making significant advances in understanding the nature of exotic
Majorana fermions and implementing them in functional superconductor circuits.
It also provides opportunities to train students in the science and technology
of this field that is anticipated to grow in the coming years.