* 1610345
* Exploring how a Conductive Polymer Emerges from its Component Polymer Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Randall Goldsmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

Nontechnical description: This study examines the electrical properties of
flexible, transparent and conductive polymers - materials of tremendous
importance to a variety of devices including solar cells and portable displays.
Although such polymer films are composed of numerous individual molecules, their
optical and electronic properties are extremely different from those of their
isolated molecular constituents. The study aims to understand how the properties
of these polymeric films emerge from their molecular building blocks.
Specifically, it aims to elucidate the role fabrication conditions and
interactions between molecules play in the emergence of electronic properties of
ordered, crystalline polymer films. To explore this evolution, the project
implements optical measurements of single polymer molecules, as well as
molecular aggregates of increasing size. In this manner, electronic properties
of polymers are examined over increasing scales, ranging from individual
molecules through ordered thin films. The research team comprises graduate
students and undergraduate researchers from diverse backgrounds. Participants
receive training in materials science, chemistry, and photonics. An
international collaboration serves to enhance research efforts as well as
interdisciplinary training opportunities. In addition, a teaching module on
photonic materials is being developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Conjugated polymers (CPs) are technologically important due to
their ability to conduct excitons and charge. Most device applications of these
materials utilize thin polymeric films. This project entails the use of a
recently developed spectroscopic tool to elucidate how thin film electronic
behavior emerges from the properties of its individual molecular constituents,
as well as from intermolecular interactions. Specifically, studies implement
single-molecule spectroscopy to address the nature of polarons - charge carriers
in conjugated polymers - whose electronic structure and distribution are
critical for ensuring optimal device performance. Experiments encompass
spectroscopic studies on a range of length scales, from isolated polymers,
through globules and domains, to multi-domain structures. In this manner it is
possible to identify the critical length scale over which film-like behavior
emerges, and the control parameters influencing the onset of this transition.
The study utilizes ultra-high quality-factor optical microresonators as
platforms for electronic and polarization spectroscopy, enabling the probing of
charged and conducting CPs. Through studies of the interplay of optical
properties, electronic structure, and molecular ordering it is possible to
construct a detailed model of the electronic properties of photonic organic
materials.