* 1610342
* Multidimensional imaging techniques using Metasurface modulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Willie Padilla, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,837.00

Imaging is an essential technology enabled by numerous devices that have shaped
our modern world. In the terahertz range of the electromagnetic spectrum,
imaging is highly desired due to its potential for non-destructive evaluation,
bio and chemical hazard detection, and personnel screening. Although significant
efforts continually strive to achieve arrays of terahertz detectors, from which
to fashion cameras, imaging within the terahertz range is extremely difficult
and ultimately restricted due to low source powers and detector sensitivity.
However a different type of imaging system may be constructed using metamaterial
spatial light modulators (SLMs), where only a single pixel is used to form the
image, and may remove critical impediments toward making terahertz imaging a
reality. Novel computational imaging techniques will be developed and applied to
enable multidimensional images to be captured including hyperspectral,
polarimetric and three-dimensional information. Beyond facilitating
technological breakthroughs and exploring novel imaging techniques, the proposed
project will establish a research training and teaching laboratory in the area
of structured materials. The proposed research project is interdisciplinary and
will permit members of the laboratory to actively contribute to the burgeoning
field of metasurfaces for terahertz sensing and communications and advanced
imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research
program is the development of spatial light modulators and computational imaging
techniques to realize multidimensional imaging in the terahertz frequency
regime. The project utilizes recent developments in metasurfaces engineered sub-
wavelength metallic structures capable of achieving exotic electromagnetic
response. The effort has been organized into three thrusts focused on providing
significant gains in: (i) parallel coded aperture imaging, (ii) sub-Nyquist
sampling, and (iii) advanced modulation schemes for multidimensional
acquisition. All three efforts are synergistic and cross-cutting and the
techniques and algorithms developed will be combined into a single system to
enhance overall performance and/or functionality. The general technical approach
for each of the research thrusts begins with conceptual and computation design
and analysis. In step two the PI and his students will engage in various
fabrication approaches to realize desired designs. Next they will characterize
the fabricated materials and setup the various imaging systems proposed.
Finally, the PI and his students will analyze the results of measurements for
subsequent iteration and optimization of project goals.