* 1610964
* Chemical Studies Utilizing Back Scattering Interferometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Flowers, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 426,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Bornhop at Vanderbilt University and Professor Flowers
at Lehigh University are developing a unique sensing technique that greatly
simplifies the measurement of molecular interactions. The method is termed
backscattering interferometry (BSI). BSI is a simple and inexpensive way of
studying chemical reactions, like those used to understand how a drug molecule
works, to monitor environmental pollutes, or to diagnose disease from a blood
test. BSI works by placing a sample into a microscale, glass or plastic, liquid-
filled chamber that is illuminated by a laser like those used in a grocery store
checkout. When the laser light is reflected back from the chamber it forms a set
of alternating bright and dark spots (interference pattern) that are captured by
a camera. These patterns are exquisitely sensitive to chemical or biochemical
changes of the solution in the chamber. Most tools used to measure chemical
interactions require the solution to be modified by tagging, labeling, or
attachment to the chamber surface, yet in BSI none of these modifications are
required to make the measurements. With support from this grant Professors
Bornhop and Flowers are developing and validating the physical model for these
"free-in-solution" measurements, by showing that the BSI signal originates from
property changes in the solution, such as molecular shape (conformation) and the
amount of water closely associated with the molecule (hydration). These
properties have not previously been recognized or measured. The BSI model,
termed the Free-solution Response Function (FreeSRF), is being expanded to a
wide array of chemical and biochemical interactions (such as protein-to-protein,
DNA-to-DNA interactions)to determine if FreeSRF can be used to predict chemical
structural changes. Professor Bornhop is working with companies closely to
commercialize a benchtop, compressed BSI that will allow more users to apply the
developed approach to their own research. The students engaged in the project
receive a broad range of scientific training, ranging from the construction and
modification of the instrument, to the development and benchmarking of
bioassays, to the development and refinement of the FreeSRF models. Professor
Bornhop is also actively engaged in K-12 outreach through the Vanderbilt Student
Volunteers for Science (VSVS) program and the Tennessee Governors' School
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Back-scattering interferometry (BSI) is the
refractive index (RI) sensor used in the studies performed under this NSF
project. BSI is a free-solution, label-free technique with sensitivity that
rivals fluorescence assays, is compatible with a wide range of analytes, can be
used with complex matrices, and is fully quantitative. Professors Bornhop and
Flowers are studying how intrinsic property changes report molecular binding
events at unprecedented sensitivities (pM-fM) in complex milieu, even when the
individual binding partners are undetectable by BSI. Having shown that
interferometric, free-solution, label-free studies performed on BSI report
conformation and hydration changes, two groups are working together to develop a
model that provides a theoretical and experimental underpinning for the
phenomenon being measured by BSI and other label-free methods. In addition,
building on their theory that refines, or redefines, the basis for label-free
free-solution RI measurements, the Free-Solution Response Function (FreeSRF),
they are expanding investigations to a more diverse set chemical and biochemical
interactions, including DNA and RNA hybridization, metal ion-chelator binding,
and protein folding. It is anticipated that the research will impact on how
scientists generally think about label-free sensing, going beyond BSI and SPR,
leading to the development of new sensing/imaging systems and novel approaches
to the analysis of ligand-protein interactions. A newly developed, highly
compensated scattering interferometer (CSI), is being combined with FreeSRF to
enable translation of the methodology to a broader scientific community. This
bench-top CSI for mix-and-read free-solution assays enables a wide array of
applications and serve as a foundation for an experiment-based curriculum that
teaches students how understanding interaction determinations are critical in
chemistry, biochemistry, molecular biology, and medical technology.