* 1610254
* Enhancing the Performance of High Performance Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Using Nanofibers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Susan Olesik, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 545,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement & Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Professor Susan Olesik of
the Ohio State University is developing analysis methods with the ability to
detect compounds at low concentration levels with improved analysis time
compared to current capabilities. Increasing challenges in this country such as
the need to monitor low levels of pollutants in natural waters and the need for
fast clinical and forensic analyses may be impacted by this work. The broader
impacts of this work include the potential societal benefits from the
discoveries of the carbon based stationary phases as well as, middle school
student and teacher engagement in active science projects developed from this
research.

This project focuses on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric methods with
increased kinetic performance, improved sensitivity, and unique selectivity.
There are four project goals. First, a carbon based open tubular liquid
chromatographic methods is being developed. Second, a carbon based packed liquid
chromatographic column is being studied and developed. Third, the mechanism of
nanofiber-based surface assisted laser desorption ionization are studied.
Fourth, nanofiber based planar chromatography that is compatible with middle
school studies are developed and added to a new active-learning, science
outreach program for local middle schools.