* 1610349
* Spin Fluctuations at Exposed Quantum Critical Points
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Johnpierre Paglione, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials promise to revolutionize
future technologies. The study of quantum criticality plays a pivotal role in
research of a poorly understood class of such materials called unconventional
superconductors. Quantum criticality appears to be related to the occurrence of
unconventional superconductivity. But important questions remain about the
nature of this relationship, which often remains hidden because
superconductivity "masks" the relevant quantum phenomena. This program focuses
on using advanced measurements performed at ultra-low temperatures to fully
characterize the relation between quantum criticality and superconductivity. The
broader impact of this program involves the inclusion of high-school students,
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists in
interdisciplinary research and areas of scientific and technological
significance, including collaborative and exchange programs with external
institutions. An ongoing participation in the Graduate Resources Advancing
Diversity with Maryland Astronomy and Physics (GRADMAP) program will involve
undergraduates in research exposure programs designed to attract a broader
audience to graduate studies. Researchers are also integrated into the UMD
Physics department's prominent existing outreach programs, including Physics is
Phun, Physics Lecture Demo, and the Summer Girl's Project. Ongoing participation
in the NIST SURF (Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships) Program will also
continue to integrate facilities, mentorship and training between UMD and the
NIST Center for Neutron Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;There are two closely related but disparate mechanisms for
superconductivity in the vicinity of a quantum critical point: 1) an enhancement
of the bosonic coupling strength due to the increase in fluctuations of the
suppressed order parameter, and 2) an indirect enhancement of the pairing
strength due to an increase in normal state entropy near a critical point that
favors a lower-energy ground state. Both scenarios are quite important but are
difficult to discern if superconductivity intervenes, but can be elucidated by
carefully studying fluctuations in non-superconducting systems. This program
focuses on the study of quantum criticality in systems that do not exhibit bulk-
phase superconducting instabilities upon approach to their critical points. The
approach is from three directions, utilizing three related systems that each
entail uniquely different magnetic behavior: a) a benchmark electron-doped iron-
pnictide material that, surprisingly, does not harbor bulk superconductivity
upon suppression of antiferromagnetic order; b) an overdoped iron pnictide
material that exhibits telltale signatures of quantum criticality, again without
superconductivity; and c) a binary iron-pnictide material that harbors a
metallic spin-density wave magnetic order that can be suppressed with chemical
substitution toward a metallic ground state. The full characterization of
critical behavior via measurements of both thermodynamic properties (specific
heat, thermal transport, nuclear magnetic resonance) and dynamic
susceptibilities using inelastic neutron scattering techniques, allows for an
understanding of the failure to stabilize Cooper pairing in select systems, and
hence helps elucidate the pairing mechanism in known families of high-
temperature superconductors.