* 1610139
* Interplay between strongly correlated quantum Hall states and superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 310,469.00

Non-technical Abstract: Electrons are charged particles, and two electrons
brought close to each other repel according to the Coulomb's law. Behavior of a
large number of electrons may be much more complex and sometimes
counterintuitive. For example, lattice vibrations can change repulsive
interactions into attractive resulting in superconductivity, a state with no
resistance to electrical current. In two dimensional systems, where electrons
are confined to a thin sheet of material, even more exotic states can develop in
high magnetic fields. At some fields resistance vanishes, as in superconductors,
but transverse (Hall) resistance remains non-zero and is quantized. Some of
these states may be superconductors of a very special type, where charges are
fractions of an electron charge, something impossible in a three dimensional
world. After many years of studies these states are still poorly understood,
primarily due to a very limited amount of tools that can be used to investigate
these fragile states. Yet some of these states may possess properties
necessarily to create fault tolerant quantum computers. In the past with NSF
support, the PI's group developed a technology to form high quality electrical
contacts between conventional superconductors and two dimensional electron
systems. Our research team is now using superconductivity as a new tool to probe
exotic states at high magnetic fields, a regime previously not accessible to
experimental scrutiny. This research can potentially lead to the development of
quantum bits where quantum information is encoded in the topology of the system.
Such quantum bits are predicted to be inherently fault-tolerant. Educational and
outreach goals include training students in a multidisciplinary program and
organization of a Summer Physics Camp for middle school students.

Technical Abstract: Among all the experimental systems high mobility two-
dimensional electron gases (2DEG) play a unique role of a model system where
strong electron-electron correlations lead to the formation of a plethora of
exotic states at high magnetic fields, some of them predicted to form
unconventional superconducting states. The PI's group's recent breakthrough in
the fabrication of transparent ohmic superconducting contacts to high mobility
2DEG in GaAs opens this previously inaccessible regime of superconductor-2DEG
interface to experimental scrutiny. Preliminary results indicate the limited
understanding of Cooper pair injection into a quantum Hall effect regime. The
research objectives include detailed investigation of interplay between
topologically distinct superconductivity and strongly correlated fractional
quantum Hall effect, a previously inaccessible regime where exciting new physics
is waiting to be discovered. This research can potentially lead to the
development of a new platform where high order non-Abelian excitations can be
realized, a prerequisite for topologically protected fault-tolerant quantum
computing. Educational and outreach goals include training students in a
multidisciplinary program and organization of a Summer Physics Camp for middle
school students.