* 1610412
* Controlling the Conductivity of Nanocrystal Solids through their Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sean Roberts, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 437,351.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Sean T. Roberts of the University
of Texas at Austin and his graduate students study very small inorganic
particles called semiconductor nanocrystals. Nanocrystals are tiny particles
that contain thousands of atoms. While they are much larger than chemical
molecules, which contain only a few atoms, they are still much smaller than
solid materials that are large enough to see with the naked eye, containing
trillions of atoms. Nanoscale materials are unique because they have sizes
intermediate between molecules and solids, but sometimes have properties not
easily predicted by averaging the two size extremes. The optical properties of
these nanocrystals can be tuned by altering their size and shape, which makes
them useful for applications such as displays, photovoltaic cells, and
photodetectors. However, processing these materials into conductive thin films
needed for electronics remains difficult. The researchers approach this
challenge by combining the nanocrystals with surface-bound molecules designed to
improve the electrical conductivity of nanocrystal thin films. The resulting
structures are studied using spectroscopic techniques and photoconductivity
measurements. This project also includes an outreach effort entitled GReen
Energy At Texas (GREAT) designed to attract Community College students to the
physical sciences by introducing them to green energy research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to understand the
key factors that facilitate electronic coupling between semiconductor
nanocrystals and their surface ligands and to use interactions of this type to
improve charge transport in nanocrystal optoelectronic films. The nature of the
ligand can impact the bandgap and optical properties of semiconductor
nanocrystals. This suggests some degree of electronic coupling between the
nanocrystals and the ligands that involves charge transfer. This project
quantitatively assesses the degree to which ligands facilitate charge transfer
between nanocrystals in thin film. To accomplish this goal, time-resolved Raman
spectroscopy is used to map charge density changes within nanocrystal ligand
shells following photoexcitation. Two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy and
photo-CELIV (charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage) measurements
determine how exciton-delocalizing ligands (EDLs) modify charge carrier
transport in nanocrystal thin films.