* 1610367
* Atomistic Studies of Concentrated Multicomponent Nickel-Based Alloys Utilizing Atom-Probe Tomography and Vacancy-Mediated Lattice Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Seidman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,999.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is focused on
how phase separation occurs in nickel-aluminum based alloys, which are the
physical bases of all nickel-based superalloys and which may contain up to 12
different alloying elements, with each element serving a particular purpose.
Nickel-based superalloys are utilized for turbine blades and disks, which are at
the heart of both military and commercial jet engines as well as natural gas-
fired turbine engines that produce electricity, and which operate at extremely
elevated temperatures. To study these materials at an atomic scale in this
technologically important class of alloys, extensive utilization will be made of
the Northwestern University Center for Atom-Probe Tomography. Atom-Probe
Tomography is a unique technique that allows characterizing materials at the
sub-nano to nanoscale. Applying this technique to nickel-aluminum based alloys
will allow understanding the development of the final microstructure, which is
of great significance and technological importance for controlling the physical
and mechanical properties of a material at microscopic and macroscopic length
scales. This work will help train the next generation of materials scientists in
this state of the art technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The kinetic pathways in the different stages of
alloy phase separation (nucleation, growth and coarsening) of concentrated
multicomponent nickel-based supersaturated solid-solutions are critical for
understanding the development of the final microstructure, which is of great
significance and technological importance for controlling the physical and
mechanical properties of a material at microscopic and macroscopic length
scales. To study the temporal evolution of phase separation, the PI will perform
correlative experiments utilizing ultraviolet laser-assisted atom-probe
tomography (APT) and vacancy-mediated lattice-kinetic Monte Carlo (LKMC)
simulations, which permit understanding this evolution on an atomic scale. This
work will also employ microhardness measurements and transmission electron
microscopy experiments. The temporal evolution is studied starting with the
clustering of atoms to form embryos exhibiting short-range order (SRO), which
are the precursors of stable nuclei (precipitates); thus, allowing study of SRO
and then precipitates with long-range order (LRO) and observation of growth and
coarsening. All of the 10 plus physical parameters, for describing the temporal
evolution, are measured via APT and simulated via LKMC simulations.
Additionally, the PI will study the evolution during the quasi-steady coarsening
regime and compare these results with the Philippe-Voorhees (P-V) mean-field
modeling of multicomponent alloys (2013) for selected ternary and quaternary
nickel-based alloys, which involves the use of both thermodynamic and mobility
data bases. This will yield a realistic approach to quasi-stationary coarsening
of a polydispersed distribution of precipitates embedded in a matrix. This
multipronged experimental and simulation approach yields information at the
atomic scale through the continuum length scale.