* 1610631
* SusChEM: Halide Double Perovskites a New Class of Lead-Free Compound Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Patrick Woodward, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 423,551.00

Non-technical Abstract The lead halide perovskites possess the electrical and
optical properties of conventional semiconductors, but unlike most
semiconductors they can be prepared by simple inexpensive methods including
deposition from solution. They are attractive for many applications, the most
exciting of which is in solar cells where the efficiencies have 20% and are now
comparable to single crystal silicon solar cells. Their biggest liability is the
toxicity that comes from the presence of lead. With the support of the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program, the proposed research aims to discover
and develop halide double perovskites, an emerging class of semiconductors that
possess many of the favorable characteristics of the lead halide perovskites,
but without the presence of toxic elements like lead. In this way the research
aims to dramatically increase the feasibility and sustainability of halide
perovskites for technological applications.

Technical Abstract New materials will be found via computationally guided
exploratory synthesis. Detailed characterization of the optical and electrical
properties will provide the necessary feedback to design materials with
properties that are optimized for applications. The proposed research will
significantly expand the scope of the halide double perovskites producing
materials whose band gaps continuously span the spectral range from UV to near-
infrared. Growth of single crystals and thin films will provide a fundamental
understanding of the carrier mobilities, lifetimes, and diffusion lengths in
this class of materials. By finding materials with appropriate band gaps
materials will be developed that can compete with the lead halide perovskites
for use in solar cells and other applications including quantum dots,
scintillators, and transparent conductors.