* 1610416
* GOALI: Spin-Transfer in Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Daniel Stein, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: This project brings together leading researchers from
New York University and IBM with the aim of furthering the understanding and
application of nanometer scale magnetic devices and materials. Magnetic
nanostructures are widely used in technology with the most advanced applications
found in information processing. Because of ever-increasing worldwide demands
for data processing and storage, they form the backbone of a huge industry in
the United States. Innovative research in this area at U.S industrial and
university laboratories has maintained our world leadership in this vital area.
It has been discovered that in miniature magnetic devices a direct electrical
current can switch the direction of magnetization by a mechanism known as spin-
transfer. This is an exciting development that may enable dramatic improvements
in magnetic information processing and storage. There are important and
fundamental questions about the nature of the interaction between the current
and magnetization that this project will address through studies of magnetic
nanostructures excited by spin-currents using unique high frequency measurement
techniques available at NYU and magnetic imaging methods available at U.S.
National Labs. This research will be integrated with the training of young
scientists in this forefront area of magnetism research. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this collaboration will gain experience by
interactions between academia and industry and through exchanges between NYU and
IBM. Their education will be enriched through exposure to a variety of
perspectives, expertise and techniques present in an industrial setting. High
school students will also participate in this research.

Technical Abstract: This NSF-GOALI project brings together leading researchers
in nanomagnetism from New York University and IBM with the aim of furthering the
understanding of the physics of spin-transfer. Spin-transfer is a mechanism by
which a spin-polarized current can reverse the magnetic orientation of a
nanomagnet and induce magnetic excitations such as spin-waves. Understanding the
nature of spin-transfer induced spin excitations is a very active area of
present day research. The proposed research seeks to advance the understanding
and application of two types of collective spin excitations that are generated
by the spin-transfer interaction: magnetic solitons, which are localized spin
excitations excited in nanometer scale electric contacts to magnetic thin films,
and superspin currents excited in easy-plane magnetic layers. Fundamental
questions regarding the lifetime, dynamics and degree of coherence of magnetic
solitons will be addressed experimentally in samples in which soliton dynamics
can be controlled with external perturbations (e.g. applied fields and
currents). Scanning transmission x-ray microscopy will be used to image the
magnetization dynamics to provide direct information on the nature of the
current-induced spin excitations. Parallel theoretical work will explore the
effects of temperature and other perturbations, as well as the effects of
confined geometries, on soliton lifetimes and dynamics, and will explore
transitions between nontopological and topological states. Superspin currents
will be explored in samples consisting of proximal nanocontacts for the
injection and detection of spin-currents. These experiments will aim to
demonstrate and evaluate the efficiently of this newly proposed mechanism of
spin transport. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
collaboration will gain experience by interactions between academia and industry
and through student exchanges between NYU and IBM. Their education will be
enriched through this integrated experimental and theoretical project, as well
as the variety of perspectives, expertise and techniques present in an
industrial setting. High school students will also be encouraged to participate
in this research project.