* 1610126
* OP: Interlayer Excitons in Double Layer Black Phosphorus
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Salvador Barraza-Lopez, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 466,954.00

Nontechnical description: When a semiconductor absorbs light, an electron can be
promoted to a higher energy level and leave behind a hole. The attraction
between the negatively charged electron and the positively charged hole can
cause the two particles to stick together. This bound electron-hole pair is
called an exciton. In a new class of atomically thin semiconductors, excitons
are extraordinarily stable, even at room temperature. The research team aims to
understand, using both experiment and theory, the behavior of excitons in black
phosphorus, and to find out whether it will be possible to construct potentially
transformative optoelectronic devices using excitons in this class of materials.
In particular, double layer black phosphorus (two atomically thin layers
separated by an insulating spacer) provides a compelling combination of
properties for the exploration of excitons, including longer exciton lifetimes
and vertical orientation of the positive and negative charges making up the
exciton. Both of these properties, combined with the relatively high electrical
conductivity of black phosphorus, will promote both the fundamental study and
device applications of excitons in this material. This research activity
provides mentoring and training of a widely inclusive group of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students. Outreach activities focus on encouraging
the enrollment of underrepresented groups at the University of
Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Absent screening by a 3D
bulk, 2D materials generate strong Coulomb interactions and therefore host
excitons at high temperatures. This project aims to characterize and understand
the basic properties of excitons in pristine, encapsulated, few-layer black
phosphorus. Given sufficient carrier mobility and exciton lifetimes, it is
possible to create excitonic devices that transport excitons from one part of a
circuit to another. This movement of excitons could be used to encode and
transmit information, or it could be used to modulate optical signals in a
nanoscale structure. In particular, double layer black phosphorus (two
atomically thin layers separated by a dielectric spacer) provides a compelling
combination of properties for the exploration of excitons, including enhanced
lifetimes, relatively high and anisotropic mobility, and vertically-aligned
dipoles that promote control of exciton motion by non-uniform electric fields.
The research team measures and analyzes exciton energies, linewidths, positions,
and lifetimes as a function of black phosphorus thickness, temperature, and
charge density (both electrons and holes) to provide baseline material
properties of pristine black phosphorus. This information provides input to
effective theoretical models, which guides the creation and understanding of
excitonic devices in which excitons are controlled by gates voltages.