* 1610525
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Ultra-Tough Double-Network Hydrogels for Cartilage Repair
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jason Burdick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical: This NSF/DMR-BSF award by the Biomaterials Program in the
Division of Materials Research to the University of Pennsylvania will be to
advance our understanding of biomedical hydrogels for use in cartilage repair
and regeneration. This award is cofounded by the Global Venture Funds in the
Office of International Science and Engineering. Cartilage injuries account for
nearly half a million surgical procedures performed each year, yet mounting
evidence suggests that current interventions provide insufficient long-term
benefits. Even as scientists uncover precisely how to regenerate cartilage
tissue using mesenchymal stem cells, their routine clinical applications will
still require a robust implantation process that retains the cells where desired
and provides an environment that promotes repair. The overall goal of this
project is to develop an injectable hydrogel that can be used for the
encapsulation of mesenchymal stem cells and that can also withstand the
mechanically demanding environment after placement in a joint. To accomplish
these objectives, this research will be designing double-network hydrogels by
incorporating two types of polymer networks that give rise to hydrogels that are
tough and at same time support the encapsulation and differentiation of viable
cells. The project will incorporate educational programs, and will involve
students at various levels in the research activities. The scientific broader
impact of the project is to both promote the progress of science through the
design and investigation of novel hydrogels and at the same time to advance the
national health by improving on our knowledge base of new treatments that can be
used for biomedical applications in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
The overall goal of this project is to develop double-network hydrogels to
encapsulate and control the chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells. Double-network (DN) hydrogels exhibit high strength and toughness, and
mechanical features that may be desirable for application in cartilage defects
and repair. However, at present there are no hydrogels that exist that are both
injectable and bio-compatible. The specific aims of the project include: 1)
synthesis of a series of double network hydrogels, and elucidate the structure-
property relationships; and 2) assess mesenchymal stem cells survival and
chondrogenesis within the double-network hydrogels. The proposed design involves
the combination of covalently crosslinked hydrogels based on hyaluronic acid and
poly(ethylene glycol) with fibrinogen to permit enzymatic degradability, as well
as a self-assembled dynamic network based on biopolymers modified with guest-
host groups that are dynamic and self-healing. This design incorporates the
requisite rigid and ductile networks that are encompassed within DN hydrogels
that are injectable based on the physical guest-host interactions and then
covalently crosslinked through a photopolymerization reaction. The hydrogel
properties will be tailored through alterations in the ratio and composition of
each network with a focus on encapsulated mesenchymal stem cell viability and
chondrogenesis as outcomes, in addition to desirable hydrogel mechanical
properties. Upon successful completion, this work will identify fundamental
understanding of hydrogel technology, as well as develop a potentially
translational hydrogel for mesenchymal stem cells-based therapeutics for further
investigations and biomedical applications.