* 1610084
* Cognitive load and representational competence: The development of an adaptive learning system to assist students with structure creation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Nathaniel Grove, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 294,154.00

Many science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students are
required to take chemistry courses, learn to construct representations to help
them visualize the structures of molecules that make up matter, and use these
representations to understand the properties of matter. This structure-creation
process is often difficult for students and may be hindered by issues associated
with "cognitive load", which is the global amount of mental effort connected to
a task. In instances where the overall cognitive load is high, students may
struggle with completing the task and learning may be adversely impacted. The
goals of this project are to study fundamental issues surrounding the role that
cognitive load plays in undergraduate chemistry students' ability to construct
representations, to use the results of these studies to develop an adaptive
learning system that will help students become more proficient at creating
chemical representations, and to assess the impact this system has on students'
construction abilities and learning of chemistry. This work has the potential to
enhance students' proficiency with chemical representations, and therefore, help
them gain a more thorough understanding of key chemistry concepts that promote
success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE: EHR) project seeks to better understand the interplay between
cognitive load and students' abilities to construct representations of chemical
structure. It constitutes one of the first formal research studies to use
physiological metrics such as heart rate and electroencephalography to measure
cognitive load as undergraduate chemistry students work to solve problems.
Unlike other methods of measuring load, these techniques can be gathered in real
time and have been shown, in research conducted in other disciplines, to be
responsive to small changes in load. Results of these studies will then be used
to design and develop an adaptive learning system that will focus on helping
chemistry students construct Lewis and skeletal structures of molecules. The
system will make use of an initial diagnostic system that is informed by the
research results to ascertain the students' construction ability and provide
Socratic-style feedback as they seek help in creating their representations.
Although the system developed for this project will be specifically designed for
the chemistry classroom, the general methodological approaches developed will
likely have broad applicability to other STEM disciplines and serve as models
for similar work in those fields.