* 1610844
* Entropy stabilized complex oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jon-Paul Maria, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 552,194.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project addresses the ongoing challenge to
discover new materials that respond to societal needs through the new and
interesting properties they provide, and the new scientific information that
they reveal. The world depends upon a rapidly evolving set of modern
technologies that are routinely enabled by advanced materials. Maintaining this
progress requires an ever-expanding set of candidates that accompany and
facilitate new designs. Currently, the research community at large is engaged in
this process, and is doing so in many cases using the power of computational
tools. The present activity is investigating an alternative strategy where
configurational entropy - engineered by composition - is used to imagine and
create a new class of solid crystals. While the approach is generic to all
material types, this research focuses on oxide ceramics, with particular
attention to those interesting to electronic applications. During the course of
research, it is likely that new materials of importance to energy storage and
microelectronic devices will result from this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project is exploring how
configurational disorder can be engineered through composition so the entropic
contributions to free energy predominate the minimization and thus stabilization
process. Specific objectives include quantifying the strength of entropic
stabilization, extending the stabilization concept to ternary systems, using
thin film deposition techniques to quench in extreme high entropy structures,
and exploring how configurational entropy can influence phase transformations.
This research is an important complement to modern computation-led efforts such
as the Materials Genome Initiative, which address the grand challenge of finding
new materials that become the foundation of new technologies. Current
indications suggest that entropic stabilization is prominent in oxides and that
many new phases and thus new opportunities for new properties are present. If
so, the impacts will be transformational as a new avenue for material
development will be presented to the research community. A full-time graduate
student and part-time (between semesters) undergraduate student is supported and
mentored. The students and PI are participating in regional activities that
encourage pre-college student engagement in science and engineering, and thus
contribute to a robust and diverse future scientific cohort.