* 1610474
* CDS&amp;E: Coupled Thermal, Piezoelectric, and Hot Carrier Effects in AlGaN/GaN HEMTs: Multiscale Modeling of Time Evolution of Device Degradation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Shaikh Ahmed, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 282,815.00

High electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) based on nitride material systems
feature a unique combination of high breakdown voltage, high output power, high
efficiency, wide bandwidth, low noise, and temperature and radiation hardness
and have great potential in applications such as wireless communication,
homeland security, radar and satellite systems, as well as emerging harsh-
environment computing, sensing, cloud-networking and power conversion
electronics. However, issues related to long-term reliability of these devices
still remain a major concern. Reliability can be defined as the probability of
operating a system for a given time under specified conditions without failure.
For semiconductor devices, unrecoverable change of a device parameter (such as
degradation in the output current) may be considered as a failure. As evidenced
in recently reported stress or accelerated tests, high temperature gradients
(thermal effect), high electric fields and built-in or induced mechanical
stresses (inverse piezoelectric effect), and high current densities (hot carrier
effect) may all induce damages or defects in the constituent materials and
ultimately lead to device failure. Yet, the exact physical mechanisms governing
the defect formation as well as the nature and distribution of these defects are
still not clearly understood. This poses a significant challenge to not only
interpreting the experimental results but also predicting or extrapolating the
device lifetime, tasks that are critical, for example, for devices used in
remote applications. It is well acknowledged that to study physical processes
that are experimentally intractable, numerical modeling becomes essential. This
project sets out to develop a multiscale and multiphysics simulation framework
for modeling the time evolution of and the physical mechanisms responsible for
AlGaN/GaN HEMT degradation. The developed simulator will enable device design
for improved reliability. The simulator and the related instructional materials
will be deployed and made freely available on nanoHUB.org for the broader
community to use in research and classroom activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to develop a multiscale, multiphysics
simulation framework (HEMT 3-D) for modeling device degradation mechanisms in
AlGaN/GaN HEMTs. Specific fundamental issues to be addressed include: a)
correlation between metal diffusion, polarization, and induced charge density,
b) origin, spatial and temporal distribution of defects, and how they affect
electrostatics, band structure, gate leakage, carrier deconfinement and
trapping-detrapping and contact resistances, c) correlation between lattice
heating and hot-electron injection into the barrier material, d) strain and
inverse-piezoelectric effects and their temperature dependence, and e) device
optimization through engineering geometry, material composition, channel
orientation, and enhancement of heat transfer at barrier-channel and buffer-
substrate interfaces via microscopic tuning of the interface characteristics. To
properly treat the atomistic symmetry in the nanostructured active region as
well as the underlying physical processes that are complex, nonlinear, highly
stochastic and dynamically-coupled at different length and time scales, the
simulator will employ a modular approach integrating first-principles molecular
dynamics, lattice kinetic Monte Carlo, and quantum-corrected electron-phonon
transport kernels. Portability and run-time efficiency of the simulator will be
achieved through the use of open-source scientific software, compilers and
libraries, as well as incorporating optimized models, algorithms and extensions
for GPGPU platforms. Verification of the computational results will be
considered at every stage of the software development effort against
experimental data available in literature as well as through collaboration with
experimentalists in research laboratories, academia and industries.