* 1610761
* Portable, fluorescence-based bio-molecular sensor on CMOS chip with integrated nano-optics for massively multiplexed assays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Haw Yang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Molecular diagnostics is one of the growing areas of medical diagnostics and
aims to assess a person's health by detecting and measuring specific genetic
sequences or proteins. Affinity-based sensing with fluorescence-based labels
remains one of the most prevalent form of sensing of bio-molecules and while
they are routinely used in hospitals, reference labs, and blood banks to screen
for infectious diseases, current optical-based sensing technology is still
complex consisting of an assembly of electronic, optical and mechanical
components including lenses, objectives, collimators, multilayer thin film
filters, monchrometers, photo-multiplier tubes, fiber optics, precision
mechanical scanners etc., making the system large, bulky, expensive and non-
portable. On the other hand, Complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
technology, provides an unparalleled platform for integration of extremely
complex systems, with high yield in a cost-efficient manner. The goal of the
proposal is to co-opt CMOS technology and combine with new methods to integrate
optical elements on the chip to realize portable, chip-scale, fluorescence-based
biomolecular sensing technology. Miniaturizing an entire fluorescence sensing
system from the biochemical platform to the sensor and scanner on one chip with
a low-cost, optical excitation source can potentially open up completely new
methodologies of in-vitro and in-vivo sensing and imaging. The ability to
simultaneously sense multiple genetic as well as protein biomarkers in a rapid
and multiplexed detection platform can also drastically improve the statistics
of detection, critically important for diagnostics. The crosscut approach
towards this project will engage and train both graduate and undergraduate
students across multiple disciplines. The PI will also engage high-school
seniors from local schools and broadly disseminate the knowledge through his
undergraduate and graduate courses and through publications, seminars and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detection methodology for an affinity-based
bio-sensor platform relies on selective target biomolecules by capturing probes
and the chemistry is transduced label-free using methods such as impedance-
spectroscopy, electro-analysis, Raman scattering or with magnetic, dielectric or
optical labels. While detecting changes in the optical fields are mature in
CMOS-based image sensors, in absence of high-performance integrated optical
components, miniaturization of a fluorescence sensing system in CMOS has relied
on time-resolved techniques with synchronized sources or externally grown
optical filters and/or collimators which can add complexity and cost to the
system. The goal of this proposal is to investigate methods by which optical
field manipulation can be achieved in standard CMOS technology exploiting sub-
wavelength interaction of metal-photonic nanostructures with incident optical
fields in the visible range. Specifically, this work proposes design of
electronic-nanophotonic architectures, signal-processing techniques and bio-
interfaces on-chip with integrated 3D nanophotonic elements for massively
multiplexed, fluorescence-based bio-assays. These structures are capable of
excitation light suppression across a wide range of incidence angles and allow
the fluorescence signal to pass, and get detected and processed over a multitude
of sensor sites to enable high-density functionalized optical biosensor chips.
Integrated nanoplasmonic structures in the visible range in CMOS with embedded
electronics can lead to complex and miniaturized optical systems-on-chip for new
applications in sensing and imaging.