* 1610712
* Structure Dependence in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction Electrocatalyzed by Well-Defined Graphene Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Liang-shi Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The project investigates the detailed design of nitrogen-doped graphene
nanostructures (known as graphene quantum dots, or GQDs) for their potential use
as low-cost replacements for platinum-based electrodes in fuel cells. The study
will provide basic understanding of how the structures of carbon materials
determine their roles as catalysts for the important oxygen reduction reaction
(ORR) in fuel cell applications. More broadly, the work will provide design
guidance for improved carbon catalysts, thereby leading to renewable uses of
carbon materials for environment- and energy-related applications, while
providing a diverse range of educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the few well-defined
carbon nanostructures ever made, the GQDs offer unique opportunities for
studying the structure dependence in carbon catalysis, without the complexity of
conventionally-prepared graphitic carbon catalysts. Specifically, the aim is to
investigate how heteroatom dopants and sizes of the GQDs affect the ORR
activities. Tightly-controlled solution chemistry will be used to prepare GQDs
of various sizes which will be selectively functionalized with N- or
O-containing species. In this way, electrocehemical phenomena associated with
both the functionalization and edge structures of the graphenes will be
identified and used as a basis for testing theoretical predictions. The high
solubility of the nanographenes offers a unique opportunity to study their
intrinsic properties, especially their oxygen-activating potential and
associated electron transfer mechanism, without being affected by aggregation or
supporting structures. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research
will serve as an excellent recruiting and training platform for both graduate
and undergraduate students. Outreach to underrepresented groups will include a
summer research experience program with Prairie View A&amp;M University
targeting undergraduate students from that historically black university.