* 1610429
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: DataStorm: A Data Enabled System for End-to-End Disaster Planning and Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Gerardo Chowell-Puente, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 132,027.00

Natural disasters affect our society in profound ways. Between 2000 and 2009,
disasters killed 1 million people, affected an additional 2.5 million
individuals and caused a loss of about $1 trillion (2010 World Disasters
Report). Effective disaster response requires a near-real-time effort to match
available resources to shifting demands on a number of fronts. Experts today
lack the means to provide emergency response agencies with validated strategies
for disaster planning and response on a timely basis. Data-driven models and
computer simulations for disaster preparedness and response can play a key role
in predicting the evolution of disasters and effectively managing emergencies
through a diverse set of intervention measures. This project will establish an
approach that includes (a) planning disaster response, (b) public information
and warning, (c) critical transportation services, (d) mass population care
services, and (e) public health and medical services. Effective use of this
integrated modeling approach may lead to enhanced safety, quality of life and
community resilience. The project also provides an excellent context for
doctoral, masters, and undergraduate level research and students will be
introduced to career pathways through their participation in research,
publication, and partnership with public agencies and data-driven science and
engineering researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance disaster response and community resilience through multi-faceted
research to create a big data system to support data-driven simulations with the
necessary volume, velocity, and variety and integrate and optimize the key
aspects and decisions in disaster management. This includes (a) a novel
computational infrastructure capable of executing multiple coupled simulations
synergistically, under a unified probabilistic model, (b) addressing
computational challenges that arise from the need to acquire, integrate, model,
analyze, index, and search, in a scalable manner, large volumes of multi-
variate, multi-layer, multi-resolution, and interconnected and inter-dependent
spatio-temporal data that arise from disaster simulations and real-world
observations, (c) a new high performance data processing system to support
continuous observation of the numerical results for simulations from different
domains with diverse resource demands and time constraints. These models,
algorithms, and systems will be integrated into a disaster data management
cyber-infrastructure (DataStorm) that will enable innovative applications and
generate broad impacts--through close collaborations with domain experts from
transportation, public health, and emergency management--in disaster planning
and response.