* 1610936
* Multiscale Modeling of Laser-Induced Surface Nanostructuring of Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2021
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
education to develop and use computational modeling tools to understand how very
fast laser pulses can modify the structure and surfaces of metals and
semiconductors in potentially complex and intricate ways. The ability of very
fast laser pulses to deposit energy, for example in the form of heat, in small
regions of irradiated material surfaces makes it possible to perform very
selective surface modifications and produce unique surface morphologies,
metastable phases and unusual arrangements of crystal defects which constitutes
microstructure. Fast laser pulses also provide unique opportunities to
investigate material behavior under extreme conditions of highly energetic
electrons, rapid heating and cooling, and ultrafast mechanical deformation. The
objective of this research project is to develop an advanced computational model
that contains descriptions of essential physical processes across scales of
length and time and is capable of realistic representation of how very fast
laser pulses interact with targets made of a wide range of materials from metal
alloys to organic compounds. Through the use of very fast computers with many
processers that operate in parallel, the PI will apply this model to investigate
the main factors that control the surface morphology and microstructure in
laser-modified materials. While the laser pulse lasts for only a very short
time, the time for the material to respond is much longer. Together with the
size of the simulated material sample and complexity of the physical processes
stimulated by the response leads to the need for high computer performance. The
investigation of how materials respond to short-pulse laser irradiation is aimed
to provide insights into the peculiarities of material behavior far from the
steady state of equilibrium, under extreme conditions of ultrafast heating,
cooling, and deformation rates. Ultrafast laser surface modification has a wide
range of potential applications including materials fabrication with enhanced
surface properties including hardness, reduced friction, and reduced wear.
&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of students in all aspects of high-performance
parallel computing and close interaction with experimental and computational
collaborators worldwide will create a fertile educational environment in the
quickly expanding areas of scientific computing and laser-materials
interactions. An educational website containing an accessible presentation of
basic concepts of laser-materials interactions illustrated by images and
animations produced in this project will be developed as a platform for
conveying the relevance and excitement of the computational materials research
to broader audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, and education in short
pulse laser modification of material surface morphology. The ability of short
pulse laser irradiation to produce unique surface morphologies, metastable
phases and unusual microstructure has been demonstrated in experiments and is
generally attributed to the conditions of strong electronic, thermal, phase, and
mechanical nonequilibrium created in irradiated targets by the laser excitation.
Detailed understanding of the relations between the fast nonequilibrium
processes caused by the laser energy deposition and the resulting structure and
properties of laser-treated regions of the targets, however, is still lacking,
thus limiting the expansion of laser technologies into the new domains of
nanoscale material processing and fabrication. The main objective of this
research project is to provide, through advanced multiscale modeling and
theoretical analysis, detailed information on the mechanisms and kinetics of
fast nonequilibrium structural and phase transformations triggered by short
pulse laser irradiation of metal targets and responsible for the generation of
complex hierarchical surface morphology at the nanoscale and microscale, and
unusual surface microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;A key component of this project is the
design and verification of a novel multiscale computational approach combining,
in a synergistic manner, large-scale atomistic simulations of the initial
material response to short pulse laser excitation, including rapid melting,
cavitation, and, at higher laser fluences, explosive boiling and phase
decomposition of superheated liquid, with a coarse-grained modeling of the
subsequent slower hydrodynamic motion and solidification of the melted surface
region. The new computational model will enable a detailed exploration of the
complex interplay of the totality of laser-induced processes occurring at
different time- and length-scales and will reveal the connections between
irradiation conditions, material properties, crystallographic orientation of
grains in polycrystalline targets, and the microstructure of surface features
generated by laser irradiation.&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of new flexible
computational methodology for multiscale modeling of material response to a
rapid energy deposition is likely to make a broad impact in the general area of
computational materials science. The methods developed within this project will
be broadly disseminated to the research community and applied, through existing
and new collaborations, to different material systems, ranging from metal alloys
to organic materials, and various laser processing conditions, for example the
presence of a background gas, liquid environment, or a transparent overlayer.
Owing to the size of the simulated material, the need for long simulation time,
and the complexity of the model, high performance computing simulations are
required.&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of students in all aspects of high-
performance parallel computing and close interaction with experimental and
computational collaborators worldwide will create a fertile educational
environment in the quickly expanding areas of scientific computing and laser-
materials interactions. An educational website containing an accessible
presentation of basic concepts of laser-materials interactions illustrated by
images and animations produced in this project will be developed as a platform
for conveying the relevance and excitement of the computational materials
research to broader audiences.