* 1610987
* Sulfur(VI) Fluoride Exchange (SuFEx) Click Chemistry in Macromolecule Synthesis and Fabrication
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* K. Barry Sharpless, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 640,000.00

Polymers are very useful materials in our daily life. Polymers are made by
chemically connecting the building blocks into very large structures similar to
a child using Legos to construct and create a building. This research project
focuses on developing reactions that connect the polymer building blocks in a
highly efficient manner. under mild reaction conditions. Another important goal
of this project is to increase the participation of women, underrepresented
minorities, K-12 students, and undergraduates in educational programs across the
San Diego community. This project involves elementary school students through a
click chemistry lecture / demonstration at the Elementary Institute of Science.
It also involves local high school students through the High School Research
Education Program. Additionally, the project provides opportunities for
community college students to work on the development of click chemistry through
a new curriculum designed for the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellows (SURF)
Program at The Scripps Research Institute.

SuFEx chemistry is a useful click reaction recently developed to construct
structurally-diversified materials with desired properties. Sulfonyl/sulfuryl
fluorides possess a combination of synthetic accessibility, stability, and
responsiveness to the presentation of proton or silyl activators - molecular
cofactors that enhance reactivity in subtle, yet powerful, ways. The goal of
this project is to explore the feasibility of using SuFEx click chemistry to
fabricate polymeric and dendritic materials with diverse chemical structures.
There are three objectives in this project. The first objective is to search for
better catalysts to promote SuFEx-based transformations requiring lower catalyst
loading and milder reaction conditions. The second objective is to synthesize
and functionalize polymeric materials using SuFEx click chemistry developed
under the first objective. The third objective is to prepare dendritic materials
based on SuFEx click chemistry. Through these studies, this research seeks to
understand the strengths and limitations of SuFEx in the construction of
macromolecular, supramolecular and nanoscopic materials, and to establish
modular reactions to build these molecules.