* 1610226
* Understanding Spin-Spin and Spin-Lattice Interactions in Molecular Nanomagnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,042.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This highly interdisciplinary project involves
the study of magnetic molecules whose properties can be chemically engineered at
the molecular level to give desired physical properties. These so-called
molecular nanomagnets provide remarkable fundamental insights into magnetism at
the nanoscale, while promising important advances in information technologies.
In this regard, two distinct thrusts are under investigation: the first involves
the potential use of magnetic molecules as the elementary memory units (bits) in
classical computers, where the information is stored in the magnetic
polarization state (up or down) of the molecule; the second explores the
possibility of exploiting the quantum states of such molecules to implement
quantum computing algorithms. This project employs unique magnetic resonance
spectroscopic techniques that have been developed by the PI at the US National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory to establish structure-property relations that
chemists can then use to optimally design molecules for targeted applications.
Although the design criteria for classical and quantum memories (qubits) are
somewhat different, at a fundamental level, they typically involve
tuning/optimizing the same interactions in molecular systems. The research team
is exploring how the choice of magnetic element, molecular geometry, and
surrounding host material influence the stability of both classical and quantum
information encoded into magnetic molecules. The team is also researching
possibilities for "wiring" magnetic molecules together using organic linkers.
Results obtained from the project are of interest to other research communities,
including materials science, inorganic and bioinorganic chemistry. The PI is
strongly committed to diversity, both in terms of student recruitment, and
through active participation in the American Physical Society's Masters-to-PhD
Bridge Program and National Mentoring
Community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
molecular nanomagnetism field has witnessed remarkable progress during the past
few years, e.g.: a four-fold increase in the temperature below which a magnetic
molecule can retain its magnetization has been achieved; and the coherent
manipulation and readout of a single Tb nuclear spin has been demonstrated in a
molecular device. Crucial to both of these results has been a focus on simple
molecules comprised of magnetic ions with strong spin-orbit anisotropy. Recent
activity has seen a bifurcation into distinct thrusts: the first continues to
focus on single-molecule magnets (SMMs) that can function as classical memory
elements; the 2nd thrust involves the potential use of molecular nanomagnets in
quantum computing applications. This project addresses both areas. Work on SMMs
focuses on: (i) anisotropic spin-orbit mediated exchange involving orbitally
degenerate transition metals coupled to one or two additional high-spin centers;
and (ii) direct exchange between anisotropic lanthanides using spin bearing
(radical) ligands. The aim in both cases is to obtain simple, yet highly
anisotropic molecules (dimers and trimers), which have sufficiently large spin
ground states to shut down quantum tunneling and spin-lattice relaxation
pathways that prevent magnetization blocking. Meanwhile, (iii) work on spin
qubits focuses on anisotropic mononuclear species in which crystal field states
can be engineered that protect against dipolar spin-spin decoherence. In this
situation, spin-lattice relaxation can end up limiting phase memory times. High-
field/frequency electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and high pressures are
used to gain insights into the relevant static anisotropic interactions, while
pulsed EPR is employed to probe dynamical properties, including spin-spin and
spin-lattice relaxation. Instruments available at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory enable studies spanning unprecedented field and frequency
ranges, opening up this powerful technique to many materials of current interest
within the molecular nanomagnetism community. Strong collaboration with chemists
provides a much needed feedback loop, with the potential for major advances in
molecule-based magnetic materials.