* 1610674
* Novel Sensors for Detecting Single Nanoparticles/Molecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Qiang Lin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 368,000.00

Abstract Title: Novel Sensors for Detecting Single
Nanoparticles/Molecules&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:
Sensitive detection of a single nanoparticle/molecule is essential for many
important applications ranging from medical diagnostics, drug discovery,
security screening, to environmental science. The objective of this project is
to explore and develop a novel approach for particle and molecule sensing that
potentially offers unprecedented sensing resolution significantly beyond current
state of the art. By engineering micro/nano-photonic structures to produce
intriguing mechanisms to amplify and transduce the sensing signal, and to
suppress the noises impacting optical sensing, the PI's group aim to open up a
transformative research avenue towards ultra-sensitive, high-speed, label-free
detection of single nanoparticles and biomolecules that is of immense importance
for broad biomedical, environmental, and security applications. The proposed
research, if successful, is expected to have profound impact on broad sensing
areas beyond the molecule sensing itself, significantly advancing optical
frequency metrology and precision measurement that are impacted by fundamental
thermal noises in photonic devices. Fundamental research findings and device
innovations will be disseminated to the broader research communities through
published papers; the research outcomes will be also incorporated into the
courses offered by the PI at the University of Rochester. The proposed research
would result in training graduate students and undergraduate students in the
diverse interdisciplinary areas of nanophotonics, nonlinear optics,
optomechanics, and optical sensing. Through the outreach programs, this project
will also help promote the interests and participations of K-12 students, and
broaden the participations from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The proposed research aims to
explore nanoparticle and biomolecule sensing based upon novel intriguing light-
matter interaction mechanisms inside micro/nano-photonic devices that are able
to significantly amplify and transduce the sensing signal and that are able to
suppress dramatically the fundamental noises limiting conventional optical
sensing. The combined effect leads to a novel sensing methodology with
potentially unprecedented sensing resolution. With strong expertise in both the
physics and engineering of nanophotonic devices, the PI's group plan to carry
out explorative research within the three-year effort, to study the fundamental
physics regarding the detection limit of this novel sensing approach, to explore
the ultimate sensing resolution offered by the proposed approach for detecting
single nanoparticles and single biomolecules, to find the operation conditions
that can achieve such resolution, to develop novel nanophotonic device
structures on fully integrated platform that are able to provide optimal sensing
performance, and to apply them for diverse sensing applications. The preliminary
results have shown great promise to achieve these goals.