* 1610115
* Collaborative Research:   Viscoelastic Effects at the Nanoscale: Probe Rheology Theory and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jay Schieber, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to develop computer simulation methods for the
determination of mechanical properties of materials on the scale of nanometers -
some 100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. Recent advances in
chemical synthesis and fabrication technologies have made applications involving
nanotechnology increasingly commonplace. Examples include the use of
nanocomposites for athletic equipment and nanoparticle based drug delivery. The
interesting properties of these nanosystems which make them practical and useful
are determined by the specific interactions between the molecules in the system.
Conventional instruments that are used for measuring mechanical properties are
unable to probe the important molecular interactions and their implications for
nanoscale mechanical properties of the system. In this project, a robust theory-
simulation technique will be created for investigating the relationship between
the molecular characteristics of a material and its nanoscale mechanical
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentation at the nanoscale is inherently
difficult and very expensive. If successful, the technique developed in this
project can help guide the experiments, thus leading to savings in time and
cost. The formalism can also be used for designing practical applications such
as cancer treatment using nanoparticle based drug delivery. Educational aspects
of the work will consist of multidisciplinary training of graduate students.
Outreach will be achieved via participation in a program aimed at getting junior
high and high school girls interested in careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, and education to develop
computer simulation methods for probe particle microrheology, which involves
determining viscoelastic properties of materials by monitoring motion of a
microscopic probe particle in the medium. This method has become an established
experimental technique for determining viscoelasticity of complex soft matter.
Recent advances in experimental techniques have made it possible to apply the
technique at the nanoscale. The nanoscale viscoelastic properties of interest
are governed by the specific interactions and structure in the system at these
length scales. Thus, a simulation technique would be valuable for interpreting
probe particle nanorheology experimental results in terms of the molecular
properties of the system. In addition to the need for explicitly accounting for
the molecular interactions, such an endeavor faces additional challenges at the
nanoscale such as availability of an expanded frequency range, and the need to
account for the medium and particle inertia when analyzing the particle
trajectory. A particulate theory-simulation technique for nanoscale bead
rheology will be created in the project that will allow for the investigation of
viscoelasticity in complex matter. The inertial extension of the generalized
Stokes-Einstein relation (IGSER) will be used to extract medium viscoelasticity
from nanoparticle motion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will focus on three
aspects: &lt;br/&gt;(1) The frequency range that can be investigated in
molecular simulations is severely restricted due to the long-range hydrodynamic
interactions between the images of the moving probe particle, which are the
result of the periodic boundary conditions that are used in the simulations. A
framework will be created to modify the particle trajectory analysis procedure
in order to quantitatively account for these hydrodynamic interactions. Such a
formalism will significantly extend the frequency range that can be probed by
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Probe rheology is presumed to have the ability to
determine the local viscoelastic properties of the medium. This hypothesis will
be tested by creating a model system with a nanoscale temperature gradient,
which in turn, will result in a gradient in viscoelasticity. &lt;br/&gt;(3)
Particle rheology is usually used to infer viscoelasticity from the knowledge of
the probe particle motion. The usage of particle rheology in the reverse
direction - predicting the extent of particle motion in the complex medium -
given the knowledge of the viscoelastic spectrum of the medium, will be
investigated in the project. Accomplishing these tasks will yield a combined
theory-simulation technique for the determination of the nanoscale
viscoelasticity in complex soft matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentation at
the nanoscale is inherently difficult and very expensive. If successful, the
technique developed in this project can help guide the experiments, thus leading
to savings in time and cost. The formalism can also be used for designing
practical applications such as cancer treatment using nanoparticle based drug
delivery. Educational aspects of the work will consist of multidisciplinary
training of graduate students. Outreach will be achieved via participation in a
program aimed at getting junior high and high school girls interested in careers
in science.