* 1610911
* ENGAGING IN STEM EDUCATION WITH BIG DATA ANALYTICS AND TECHNOLOGIES: A ROWAN-COVE INITIATIVE
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Ravi Ramachandran, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,930.00

Large amounts of data have become available across fields in science, industry,
government, healthcare and pharmaceuticals. Big data analytics and technologies
hold tremendous promise to boost economic productivity, enhance national
security and improve the quality of life. Recognizing the acute need for big
data technology, the aim of this proposal is to create a national model by
developing multi-year curricular material that allows course content in separate
classes to be naturally inter-connected. In collaboration with industry
(Lockheed Martin Inc. and HP Enterprise), this project designs a series of
laboratory experiments in big data analytics and technologies that become more
complex from the freshmen to the senior year. The proposed approach will cut
across artificial course boundaries and introduce fundamental, contemporary and
multidisciplinary big data concepts through a series of problem-oriented
laboratory experiments. Students will also gain a better knowledge of policy,
ethical, and societal impact issues of big data.

The collaboration with Palmyra Cove Education Foundation will bring big data
activities to K-12 and further evaluate the educational impact and increase
related dissemination efforts. The activities run at Cove will excite K-12
students about engineering and enhance teacher expertise in mathematics, science
and technology. Palmyra Cove will reach out to local underrepresented K-12
school districts targeting women and minorities. The Foundation will also
organize a workshop for undergraduate students, university faculty and K-12
students and teachers on big data as applied to environmental engineering and
the geosciences. The results will be disseminated through technical and
educational conferences and journal articles.