* 1610995
* Electronic Microflow Cytometry for Surface Expression Analysis of Tumor Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ali Fatih Sarioglu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Electronic Microflow Cytometry for Surface Expression Analysis of Cancer
Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular
heterogeneity is the hallmark of cancer with individual cancer cells differing
in their tumor initiating potential and therapeutic resistance. Tumor cell
heterogeneity is often obscured by population level measurements in systems
biology and medicine; yet it has significant implications in disease
progression. This proposal is about bio-analytical technologies that are capable
of analyzing individual cancer cells and offer exciting opportunities for early-
detection and monitoring of cancer while it is still manageable, and for gaining
biological insight to develop effective therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While capable of analyzing single cells in detail,
current technologies are exclusively limited to large well-equipped laboratories
due to their high cost, operational complexity and bulky instrumentation. This
proposal will address these shortcomings by developing a fundamentally different
single cell analysis platform that is fast, low-cost, portable and hence more
amenable to point-of-care use than conventional technologies. To achieve this,
we will develop a lab-on-a-chip platform that integrates microfluidic cell
sorting with electronic sensing by utilizing engineering approaches from
multiple technical disciplines including microfluidics, electronics and
telecommunications. To further enhance the broader impact of this program, we
will be involved with outreach activities to (1) attract K-12 and high school
students to STEM education by engaging with local and elementary schools, (2)
engage undergraduate students in research activities, (3) attract
underrepresented students in engineering by utilizing Georgia Tech's diverse
student body, (4) promote teaching and training by contributing to teacher
education programs, (5) disseminate the results of the proposed research program
to the society through media releases and lab
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow
cytometry is an invaluable technique for comprehensive biophysical and
biochemical analysis of single cells. In flow cytometry, single cells in a fluid
stream are interrogated one by one and subsequently sorted based on the measured
properties. The objective of this proposal is to integrate inherently parallel
microfluidic cell sorting with a parallel electronic sensor array to create a
fundamentally different flow cytometer. The research tasks to be undertaken as
part of this project are (1) to develop a scalable electronic sensor that
utilizes resistive pulse sensing to simultaneously detect particles in multiple
microfluidic channels from a single electrical output, (2) to design a
microfluidic cell sorter based on magnetophoresis and integrate it with the
developed electronic sensor array to quantify sorted cells, (3) to analyze
surface expression of cancer cells by magnetic pre-labeling and benchmark
against established laboratory techniques. In this proposal, we combine two
traditionally distinct technical disciplines, microfluidics and
telecommunications to design a scalable electronic readout mechanism for
interfacing microfluidic chips. Our technology relies on multiplexing an array
of micromachined Coulter counters each designed to produce a distinct digital
code when a particle is detected. These digital codes are developed using the
same principles of Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) telecommunication
networks and can be uniquely recovered through simple mathematical calculations.
This approach will be used to increase number of sensors without increasing the
hardware complexity. Instead, complexity in the hardware will be shifted towards
computational algorithms to decode the signal. We will then integrate this
sensor with magnetophoretic sorting of tumor cells to quantify the expression of
a protein with clinical utility for managing and guiding cancer therapy.