* 1610975
* OP: Collaborative Research: Multimodal Molecular Spectroscopy and Imaging in Biological Tissue and Historical Artwork
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Martin Fischer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 545,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Experimental Physics Program in
the Division of Physics, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering, Professors Martin Fischer, Warren Warren, Khanh Kieu and their
groups will develop optical microscopy techniques to create high-resolution
images with novel molecular and structural contrast. These imaging methods can
provide detailed chemical information even below the surface and do not require
the physical removal of samples to create three-dimensional maps. These
techniques are ideally suited for imaging of biological tissue and historical
works of art, where the removal of a sample is restricted or even impossible.
Information obtained from these chemical maps can help lay the scientific
foundation for the development of new methods to diagnose diseases in biological
tissue and give conservators information needed to repair or even prevent damage
or degradation in irreplaceable works of art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of
function in biological tissue and historical artworks, such as discoloration or
cracking in a painting or disease in tissue, generally is reflected in changes
in the molecular composition or structure on a microscopic scale. A major
challenge in diagnostic evaluation is that to obtain this information,
mechanical sample removal is generally required. In response to this challenge,
this research seeks to develop a multimodal detection method based on nonlinear
pump-probe microscopy to noninvasively map pigments and their surroundings with
high spatial resolution in three dimensions. Specifically, the techniques being
developed access novel contrast mechanisms (such as nonlinear phase contrast)
which give much higher specificity and a wider range of endogenous targets.
Furthermore, critical degradation processes are being studied in tissue and
artwork, including inherent (e.g. natural degradation) and induced (e.g.
photodegradation) processes. Lastly, the team is working toward dissemination of
suitable instruments using these techniques to the biomedical and conservation
science communities.