* 1610003
* Stochastic Approach to Control of Large Scale Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Sean O'Rourke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 296,558.00

With the advent of multiple large-scale networks' such as biological networks,
power networks, and many social networks' the control of these networks has
become an increasingly important topic. The research objective of this proposal
is to address fundamental questions that arise naturally in network control
theory from a probabilistic perspective. In particular, the investigators will
address questions such as: how likely is it that a broadcast signal can control
a large network. Can media shape public opinion. Can a single leader move public
opinion from one state to any arbitrary desired state? The investigators will
use state-of-the-art tools in probability and random matrix theory to study such
fundamental problems. One emphasis of the proposal is the synergistic
relationship between probability and control theory. To encourage and assist
other researchers, the investigators plan survey works that will emphasis
particularly useful probabilistic tools and techniques that one needs to address
these types of problems. Based on this duel relationship, many of the problems
discussed by the investigators have the potential to lead to interesting new
questions and directions in random matrix theory, which has many applications
outside of mathematics including statistics, mathematical physics,
combinatorics, and theoretical computer science. The proposal also has several
educational components including support for graduate study in engineering and
mathematics and promoting participation of minorities in higher education in
science and engineering.

The proposed research aims to address fundamental problems and questions in
network control theory using recently developed tools from probability and
random matrix theory. Specifically, the investigators plan to analyze the
general phenomenon that most systems "even those of a very discrete nature" are
controllable. One specific motivating example is the question of controllability
for Laplacian-based leader-follower dynamics on a large network. The
investigators plan to analyze such systems by studying the case when the
underlying graph or network is random. To address such problems, the
investigators plan to use and extend a number of diverse and involved techniques
from probability and random matrix theory including analytic techniques (e.g.
resolvent techniques, concentration of measure), algebraic tools (e.g. linear
algebra), and probabilistic methods (e.g. Littlewood-Offord theory).
Additionally, the investigators also expect the proposed work to be useful to
mathematicians, as it will highlight precisely what types of problems and
applications exist in other scientific areas. Besides for the case of Laplacian-
based leader-follower dynamics, the investigators also plan to address systems
formed from directed and weighted graphs as well as a minimum-energy control
problem for systems whose parameters are random.