* 1610616
* In-situ Monitoring and Active Controls of Individual Nucleation and Crystal Growth through Nanoscale Mass Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Gangli Wang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 420,950.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Professor Gangli Wang and
his group members at Georgia State University develop new analytical methods
providing knowledge of early-stage nucleation and subsequent crystal growth at
greater time and spatial resolutions than is otherwise possible. High quality
single crystals display chemical, physical, and mechanical properties, and have
superb performance in practical applications in chemical, pharmaceutical and
materials industries. Lack of capable methods to measure and to actively control
the crystallization process has been a limit on the advance of fundamental
research as well as practical applications. The capability to measure the
dynamic process in-situ and thus to actively control crystal formation is
expected to establish much-needed high throughput and high efficiency
crystallization technology. The broader impacts are demonstrated in that the
proposed aims advance the paradigm of crystallization. Students from
underrepresented groups and from disadvantageous backgrounds in metro Atlanta
gain first-hand knowledge and experiences through the grant activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to establish an
electroanalytical methodology combined with optical imaging that enables in-situ
monitoring and active controls of single nucleus formation and single crystal
growth. Analytical platforms are being developed with optimized nanostructures
and surface functionalities to spatially confine the formation and growth of a
single nucleus at the earliest stage (molecular assembly) one at a time. The
kinetics of a single crystal nucleus formation and growth, governed by local
transport of the target molecules around the nucleus, are controlled externally
via a programmed potential waveform. Active control of mass transport is another
superior advantage over the passive diffusion mechanism adopted in conventional
crystallization methods. Because the transport and assembly processes are
associated with changes in ionic current signals as well as optical properties,
in-situ monitoring and adjustments are performed to tailor the nucleation and
growth kinetics of individual events.