* 1610357
* OP: Development of Quantum Well-Based Metasurfaces for Active Wavefront Control
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Jason Valentine, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 10/31/2020
* USD 351,696.00

Nontechnical Description: Optical metasurfaces are artificially structured thin
films in which patterning of the materials is used to engineer the optical
properties of the medium. Traditionally, metasurfaces have been formed from
materials such as metal and insulators, allowing the creation, for example, of
ultra-thin optical filters and lenses. This project focuses on investigating and
developing actively tunable optical metasurfaces that can be used for a variety
of applications, ranging from fast light modulation to ultra-thin zoom lenses.
This is accomplished by replacing metals, with which metasurfaces are typically
fabricated, with semiconductor structures whose optical properties can be tuned
using voltage. A broad range of training opportunities, encompassing computer
modeling, fabrication, and optical characterization of semiconductor
metasurfaces are available to the participating graduate and undergraduate
students. The principal investigator is also leading lectures and demonstrations
at the Nashville Adventure Science Center for K-8 students. These demonstrations
serve to introduce a general audience to nanoscale science and engineering, as
well as to optics concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
recent development of metasurfaces has provided researchers a new means to
achieve control over the phase and polarization of light, leading to ultrathin
waveplates, lenses, and complex phase arrays. A critical step towards the
practical use of these surfaces is achieving active control over their optical
properties as this would allow them to be employed for applications such as
modulation, active wavefront control, and holographic displays. The research
objective of this project is to realize active metasurfaces at infrared
frequencies that have on-demand optical properties. This is being achieved by
forming all-dielectric metasurfaces directly from III-V semiconductor multi-
quantum well heterostructures and then utilizing electrical control of the
intersubband transition frequency in the quantum wells to actively tune the
resonator elements. All-dielectric metamaterials are ideal for this purpose as
they possess bulk optical resonances in which one can utilize modes, such as the
magnetic dipole mode, that have strong out-of-plane oriented electric fields.
These modes are being investigated to realize amplitude-, polarization-, and
phase-modulation, culminating in the development of metasurfaces that serve as
spatial light modulators for arbitrary beam forming.