* 1610086
* Fostering Connections between Macroscopic, Submicroscopic, and Representational Levels Using Analogical Reasoning in the Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mitchell Bruce, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 275,284.00

Scientists and science educators have emphasized the vital role that reasoning
with analogies plays in innovation, making new discoveries, and advancing
science. Chemists are adept at using such analogical reasoning to make
connections between observations that can be made with the senses (macroscopic
level), the behavior of submicroscopic particles such as atoms and molecules,
and the various representations used in chemistry. However, many chemistry
students struggle with making these connections in college courses, and this
creates a barrier to their learning. The CORE learning cycle (Chemical
Observations Representation Experimentation) is designed to provide an
environment where students can develop their analogical reasoning skills in a
sequence that mirrors the process of experimentation and discovery. A main goal
of CORE is to support the development of strong analogical reasoning skills in a
way that fosters the connections between macroscopic, submicroscopic and
representational domains. Another key goal is to foster the integration of
strong analogical reasoning into the experimental design process and in
construction of scientific arguments. This project will investigate how students
use analogical reasoning in constructing scientific arguments related to
chemistry laboratory work and how repeated exposure to CORE experiments
influence students' abilities to coordinate their ideas across macroscopic,
submicroscopic, and representational levels. Thus, it has the potential to
provide undergraduate students with the skills needed to be successful in
participating in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) in the
future.

This NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) project will gather
critical evidence to better understand how to develop undergraduate chemistry
students' analogical reasoning skills and help students coordinate ideas across
macroscopic, submicroscopic, and representational levels. The research will
investigate student participation in CORE learning cycles over a series of five
CORE experiments. The underlying frameworks embedded in the CORE learning cycle
are based on Structure Mapping Theory and the Teaching-with-Analogy model. Two
research questions will be addressed: (1) How do students use analogical
reasoning in constructing scientific arguments related to chemistry laboratory
work? and (2) How does repeated exposure to CORE experiments influence students'
abilities to coordinate ideas across macroscopic, submicroscopic, and
representational levels? Students' laboratory work will be analyzed to assess
their understanding of analogical reasoning, their appreciation for the
limitations of analogies, and the quality of students' scientific arguments. An
adaptation of Toulmin's model of argumentation will be used to assess the
quality of students' scientific arguments. The three-year project will involve
32 student participants per year and will engage a K-12 science teacher each
summer to adapt CORE experiments for K-12 classrooms. The project will
contribute new knowledge to inform both science education researchers and STEM
instructors about ways to foster analogical reasoning skills and coordination of
ideas across macroscopic, submicroscopic and representational levels.