* 1610538
* OP:   Quantum Hyperbolic Metamaterials: New Sciences and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Zhaowei Liu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 430,000.00

Nontechnical description: Photonic metamaterials are artificial constructs whose
optical characteristics may be engineered by altering their geometrical
structure, as well as their chemical composition. In this project, the research
team explores new phenomena that arise when structural features of the
metamaterials are of only several nanometers in size. On such a small scale,
traditional optical properties such as color and sheen are no longer
discernible. Instead, the properties of the materials may now be precisely tuned
by carefully varying their nanoscale structure. The overarching goal of this
project is to conduct basic science and engineering research on such precision-
structured metamaterials, and elucidate their potential applications. This study
particularly addresses fundamental aspects of electronic and optical
characteristics of nanoscale metamaterials. In addition, undergraduate and
graduate students receive hands-on training in the fields of nanoscience and
nanotechnology, materials synthesis, characterization, and device design.
Achieving a fundamental understanding of artificial optical materials and their
fabrication is anticipated to have broad ranging impact on assessing their
potential in new optical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
This project addresses the prospects for achieving fundamental understanding of
a new class of hyperbolic metamaterials at the quantum level, and the ability to
engineer and fabricate such structures. In particular, the research team is
interested in developing quantum engineering methodologies through an approach
which combines materials optimization, detailed optical studies and theoretical
modeling. The project fosters a systematic investigation, starting from ab-
initio modeling of thin films, followed by studies of multilayered systems, and
subsequently a detailed study of patterned nano-photonic structures and devices.
By combining skills in thin film synthesis, device fabrication and
characterization, ultrafast optics and nano-photonics a comprehensive data set
is obtained. Given the current trends for nanophotonics, device miniaturization
and photonic-electronic integration, the ability to engineer new photonic
materials is expected to significantly extend current applications of existing
devices, enabling yet unforeseen implementations of quantum photonic
metamaterials.