* 1610008
* Collaborative Research: Combined transport and scanning probe studies of transition metal dichalcogenide-based heterostructure devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Emanuel Tutuc, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 11/30/2021
* USD 265,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Next generation electronics require
advances in both materials and device designs. One promising direction is
utilizing atomically thin materials because of their flexibility and high
electron mobility. Graphene was the first such material identified in this new
area of two-dimensional (2D) materials. Unfortunately, graphene is not a
semiconductor, but a semimetal and is therefore not suitable for the digital
logic circuits widely used today in electronics. Transition metal
dichalcogenides are a family of 2D materials which share many of the promising
aspects of graphene such as being atomically thin. In addition, they exhibit a
wider variety of electronic and optoelectronic properties compared to graphene
including many being semiconducting or metallic. This wide range of transition
metal dichalcogenides allows one to select a material or a combination of
materials best suited for a particular application. Indeed, by combining
different 2D materials together in vertical heterostructures an even wider range
of new device functionalities can be enabled. This collaborative research
program will create new educational and research opportunities at both the
University of Arizona, and the University of Texas at Austin. The program will
strongly emphasize the training of graduate and undergraduate students from
underserved groups, thus preparing them for industrial or academic careers. This
workforce training, along with the expected research output, will boost the
efforts to make our nation more competitive.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this collaborative research program is to study layered two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenide materials and heterostructures for device
applications, using a combination of controlled heterostructure fabrication
techniques, scanning probe microscopy, and electrical transport measurements.
Similar to graphene, the most widely studied two-dimensional material,
transition metal dichalcogenides represent a larger class of layered materials
with varying electronic properties, from semiconducting to superconducting. The
diverse set of electronic properties in these materials makes them suitable for
applications ranging from transistors to chemical sensors or photodetectors. Key
to an understanding of their fundamental electronic properties is the role of
the disorder potential, interfaces, and edges in individual layers, and of the
band and rotational alignment in heterostructures. Specifically, the proposed
effort will (1) measure band-alignment in transition metal dichalcogenide based
heterostructures, (2) realize heterostructures of two-dimensional materials with
controlled rotational alignment, (3) explore the impact of rotational alignment
on the electronic properties of two-dimensional material heterostructures, and
using these ingredients (4) design and fabricate novel heterostructure tunneling
devices. This program builds on the PIs existing collaborative research and
recent preliminary data on the fabrication and characterization of these
heterostructures. The outcomes of this research program will include uncovering
fundamental electronic properties of transition metal dichalcogenide-based
heterostructures, new methods to create heterostructures, and novel devices for
future electronics applications.