* 1610075
* Combating Counterfeit Analog and Mixed Signal ICs with Lightweight Embedded Mechanisms and Innovative Electrical Tests
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Domenic Forte, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Title: Combating Counterfeit Analog and Mixed Signal ICs with
Lightweight Embedded Mechanisms and Innovative Electrical Tests&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Brief description of project Goals: A comprehensive framework for
detecting and avoiding analog and mixed signal counterfeit ICs centered on
targeted electrical tests and design
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Globalization
has resulted in a substantial rise in all types of counterfeit electronic
components reported throughout the supply chain. Aside from the billions lost
from IP infringement, counterfeit parts are often of substandard quality,
thereby creating risks for the critical systems and infrastructures that
incorporate them. Among integrated circuits (ICs), analog and mixed signal (AMS)
ICs are the best targets for counterfeiting due to their long product life
cycles, high profit margins, prevalence across major markets (industrial,
automotive, intelligence, consumer, wireless, compute, etc.), lower complexity,
and (v) ease of reverse engineering and cloning older process technology nodes.
Given the large number of systems and sectors using AMS electronics,
counterfeits have significant impacts on major component manufacturers, original
equipment manufacturers, governments, and society. While there exist counterfeit
detection approaches based on physical inspection and electrical tests that
could be applied to AMS ICs, they are time consuming, destructive, and often
require golden (known authentic) information. In addition, new design techniques
have been developed to detect counterfeit digital ICs, but these are not well-
suited for AMS ICs due to the fundamental differences between analog and digital
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores, for the first time, a holistic framework to detect and prevent
all types of analog and mixed-signal (AMS) counterfeit ICs. Fundamental
challenges to this goal include lack of aging models (needed to detect
recycled/used ICs), lack of digital IC features (e.g., test structures,
traditional cryptographic modules, etc.), and strict resource constraints of AMS
ICs. In this work, these challenges are addressed through the development of
innovative electrical tests for detecting recycled and remarked ICs as well as
development of lightweight embedded mechanisms for detection/prevention of
cloned, overproduced, and recycled ICs. To eliminate the need for golden
information and remain applicable to a wide range of ICs, the electrical tests
target differences in behavior of general power management circuitry, which are
accessible in many large analog, mixed signal, and digital ICs, such as Low
Drop-Out Regulators (LDOs) Embedded mechanisms for passive IC counterfeit
detection are developed based on fully analog physically unclonable functions
(PUFs) and new recycling\aging sensors. While existing mechanisms require
digital control logic and an additional pin for access to PUF and sensor output,
new low cost-interfaces are developed to make all the proposed approaches easier
to adopt. For active prevention, chaotic cryptography (which can be implemented
in analog ICs) is exploited for novel IC locking\unlocking mechanisms that
prevent overproduced ICs from entering the market. All approaches will be tested
in simulation and silicon. Authentic ICs will be acquired and tested against
counterfeits available in the PI's lab from industry collaborators. The embedded
mechanisms will be incorporated into test ICs and fabricated using standard CMOS
processes for validation.