* 1610655
* GOALI: Tomography and X-ray Interferometry of Flame Retardants and Additive Manufacturing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Leslie Butler, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with Industry
(GOALI) program in the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships (IIP)
are supporting Professor Les Butler at Louisiana State University (LSU) and Dr.
Jonathan McCarney at Albemarle Corporation to develop new X-ray imaging methods
to assess the performance of flame retardants (FR) in polymers (plastics).
Currently, flame retardants are assessed with methods such as the Underwriter
Laboratory Standard for Tests for Flammability of Plastic Materials for Parts in
Devices and Appliances (UL 94) using a bunsen burner, a stopwatch, and a cotton
pad. The UL method is practical, but does not provide a chemical/physical
insight into the effectively development of new flame retardants. The approach
under development in the labs of Professor Butler and Dr. McCarney evaluates
flame retardants by fast recording 2-D x-ray images (i.e. movies) during the
burning period. The resulting movie enables direct visualization of chemical and
physical processes, such as particle dissolution, gas bubble generation, the
flow of the melting plastic, char-layer development, and micro-cracks in the
char layer. In addition, the x-ray images provide quantitative information for
more in-depth performance evaluations of new flame retardant materials relative
to traditional tests. Beyond FR testing, both groups are also applying this new
x-ray imaging technique in 3-D printing where new flame retardant materials are
incorporated into consumer objects. Professor Butler is actively engaged an
outreach effort to science students through the NSF I-Corp program where the
combination of non-destructive chemical testing, 3-D printing, and materials
development provides many research and educational opportunities to graduate,
undergraduate and local high school students. The software under development in
the Butler group, in collaboration with the Advanced Photon Source, will be made
available to the public through the TomoPy project, an open source tomography
software package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-ray imaging method under
development at LSU uses two new grating-based interferometers recently
constructed by the Butler team. The interferometers is operated in two modes:
single-shot for speed, and stepped-grating for better image quality. The single-
shot interferometry provides absorption, phase, and scattering imaging
modalities during the measurements and its fast speed in image collection
enables X-ray movie recording of flame retardant in action in a modified UL 94
test and direct observation of the performance of new-generation flame
retardants. The same imaging methods is applied to fused deposition modeling
(FDM), also known as 3-D polymer printing. The goal is development of procedures
for assessing flame retardant impact on the quality of the 3-D print where x-ray
movies show in situ fused deposition modeling of filaments composed of flame
retardant/polymer blends to assess compatible temperature, flow, and printhead
speeds. The knowledge is then to be used in exploring new options for 3-D
structure of flame retardants in the printed object.