* 1610677
* Collaborative Research: A Hybrid Biological-Microelectronic Pacemaker
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Hua Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Title: Collaborative Research: A Hybrid Biological-Microelectronic Pacemaker

Description of Project Goals: This project investigates an implantable hybrid
biological-microelectronic pacemaker that combines biological and electrical
cardiac pacing to treat cardiac arrhythmia.

Abstract:

Nontechnical Abstract: Although the cardiac arrhythmia is a serious threat to
the public health and afflicts millions of Americans annually, current
treatments remain either inadequate or largely palliative. Clinical therapies
for cardiac pacing rely exclusively on conventional electronic-only pacemakers
that cannot evaluate the patients' full physiology states or change the pacing
dynamically. Recent stem-cell technology advance opens the door to biological
pacing by engrafting engineered pacemaker tissues for heartbeat restoration,
which however faces low success rate in practice.

The proposed hybrid biological-microelectronic pacemaker system combines the
advantages of the "biological" and "electrical" pacing and addresses their
limitations. First, it solves the limitation of conventional electronic
pacemakers by employing engineered cardiac pacemaker cells as "full-spectrum"
cell-based sensors that can generate natural cardiac pacing signals and
autonomously adjust the pacing rate in response to the patient's real-time
physiology conditions, e.g., neurotransmitter release, hormone level shifts, and
cardiac drug stimuli. Moreover, the proposed hybrid pacemaker will substantially
improve the success rate and lifetime of the biological pacemakers. The living
pacemaker cells will be hosted in a bio-compatible package that localizes the
cells, enhances viability, and allows their characterizations before deployment.
Furthermore, ultra-low-power microelectronics will be included to enable signal
conditioning for safe pacing and high-intensity cardiac stimulation.

The proposed hybrid pacemaker will lead to broad societal impacts. It will
potentially revolutionize the treatment of arrhythmia-related diseases,
substantially increase the clinical success rate, and benefit millions of
Americans annually. Moreover, the proposed system can serve as a novel research
tool for scientific exploration in fundamental and clinical research on
cardiovascular physiology and implantable devices. This project also explores
hybrid bioelectronics research frontiers, which are of interest to many
scientific communities.

This project offers unique interdisciplinary education opportunities. The PIs
will recruit minority undergraduates through existing GT and Emory programs. The
research results will be integrated, e.g., as classroom demos, in the
bioelectronics and bioengineering courses at GT and Emory. The PIs will
particularly emphasize K-12 education outreach for local minority high school
students in Atlanta. The research results will be disseminated at publications,
conferences, websites, and social media.

Technical Abstract: The goal of this project is to investigate a novel hybrid
biological-microelectronic pacemaker system that harnesses the advantages of
both biological pacemaker and electronic pacemaker and explore its use in
treating cardiac arrhythmia. The proposed hybrid pacemaker contains an ultra-
miniaturized and ultra-low-power implantable hybrid pacing generation module co-
operating with a regular electronic pacemaker. The hybrid pacing generation
module employs de novo cultured pacemaker cells as a "biological pacing signal
synthesizer" to generate natural pacing and respond to the real-time patient
physiology conditions and neurohumoral stimuli. These pacemaker cells are
encapsulated and hosted on a CMOS integrated circuit (IC) chip that detects the
synthesized pacing signals, performs signal conditioning, and sends the pacing
signals to the electronic pacemaker by intra-body transmission. The research
activities include (1) designing the ultra-low-power CMOS IC for biological
pacing signal sensing, conditioning, and transmission, (2) pacemaker cells
differentiation and culture on CMOS, (3) designing bio-compatible packaging
using hydrogel matrix and 3D-printing, and (4) demonstrations with clinically
relevant biological experiments.

This project will explore and establish hybrid biological-microelectronic
pacemaker as a disruptive solution for treating cardiac arrhythmia. The research
activities and explorations will eventually pave the way toward hybrid
bioelectronics systems in the future.