* 1610146
* Spin supercurrents in ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Ilya Krivorotov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electric currents in electronic devices such as
cell phones and computers typically lose a large fraction of their power
supply's energy to the device heating. However, electric currents in some
materials can flow without generating heat if the material's temperature is low
enough. Such materials called superconductors are used, for example, in magnetic
resonance imaging scanners to create large magnetic fields. The aim of this
research project is to discover a magnetic analog of superconductivity, which is
called spin superfluidity, and to study its stability at room temperature. Spin
superfluids can transport magnetic currents with minimal losses similar to
electric currents in superconductors. The nearly lossless magnetic currents may
find use in the next generation of computers that employ magnetic materials for
information storage and processing. The principal investigator and the graduate
students involved in this research develop hands-on demonstrations on magnetism
and superconductivity for middle school students that stimulate the students'
interest in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed research is to experimentally
realize a new state of magnetic matter called spin superfluid, which has been
predicted to exist in ferromagnets and antiferromagnets with easy plane magnetic
anisotropy. The name "spin superfluid" stems from the similarity of its
properties to those of superfluid liquid helium and Cooper pair condensate in
superconductors. In particular, the spin superfluid is expected to support spin
supercurrents that transport spin angular momentum over distances orders of
magnitude longer than those achievable with spin waves. The goal of this project
is to induce the spin superfluid state in thin films and nanowires of
ferromagnets and antiferromagnet via injection of pure spin currents polarized
perpendicular to the easy plane of magnetic anisotropy. The spin superfluid
state can be detected electrically via a unique low-frequency supercurrent mode
predicted to propagate over microscopic distances in easy-plane magnetic
materials. The scope of work also includes studies of a chiral spin superfluid
state induced by Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in ferromagnetic nanowires.
Stability of the spin superfluid state against thermally induced magnetic vortex
formation is investigated both experimentally and via large-scale micromagnetic
simulations.