* 1610315
* ECCS-CDS&amp;E: High-performance computational framework for real-time phase retrieval X-Ray imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Oleg Shpyrko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Modern science and technology increasingly rely on materials and devices
utilizing unique properties of nanometer-scale composition. It is critical to be
able to characterize such complex nanoscale configurations. A unique tool for
characterization of nanoscale materials and devices is X-ray imaging, which can
provide structural images with a high spatial and time resolution. In a typical
X-ray imaging setup an X-ray source generates an X-ray beam that is scattered
from the structure. The scattered X-ray beam is captured by a camera, and the
resulting picture is processed to reconstruct the actual structure
configuration. Due to their short wavelength X-rays can penetrate the
structure's volume thus enabling not only two-dimensional but also three-
dimensional imaging. X-ray imaging typically requires a significant
computational effort for image reconstruction and often the computational time
is longer than the time for performing the experiment. This project aims at
closing this gap by creating high-performance computational tools for real-time
X-ray imaging. The created software is to serve a broad community of synchrotron
scientists. The developments in nanoscale imaging are intended to have
applications in areas ranging from condensed matter physics to biology and
chemistry of single molecules. A close interdisciplinary research effort between
a computational researcher and an expert in X-ray scattering and material
physics will benefit graduate students and postdocs working in these fields, and
is likely to result in new and unexpected discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research project is to create a high-performance computational
framework for real-time X-ray imaging to be performed at X-ray scattering
facilities. The X-ray imaging is to be accomplished using a new emerging three-
dimensional X-ray imaging methodology called Coherent X-ray Diffractive Imaging
(CXDI), which is based on computational phase-retrieval of the X-ray diffraction
patterns. The proposed research includes algorithm and code implementation,
practical application, and educational components. A set of algorithms for phase
retrieval X-ray imaging are to be introduced, including methods for image
representation and use of relevant constraints, methods for computing
transformations between real to reciprocal spaces, and implementations on
massively parallel computing systems. The research effort also introduces a
virtual synchrotron framework utilizing computational methods to simulate
experimental image reconstruction and provide required constraints, with
magnetic nanostructures as a testbed. The developed computational framework is
to be applied to real-time study of nanostructured materials and devices, such
as nanoscale magnetic devices. The program integrates research and education by
enhancing undergraduate and graduate courses on computational physics,
micromagnetics and electromagnetics as well as providing graduate and
undergraduate student training and contributing to diversity.