* 1610849
* Instrument Development for Ultrahigh-throughput 3D Chemical Imaging via Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Gerardo Gamez, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2020
* USD 381,127.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Gamez at Texas Tech University is developing an ultra-
high throughput surface elemental mapping technique based on measuring the light
emitted from a glow discharge. It is important to obtain spatial-resolution of
chemical information to order to understand natural systems and improve the
efficiency of manufacturing (that is to see where impurities might be). Current
imaging techniques, however, present several challenges. On the one hand, many
techniques require several hours to tens of hours to obtain a surface element
map with high resolution. On the other hand, current higher sample throughput
techniques may not be widely accessible. Some high throughput techniques require
the use of synchrotron radiation facilities which are relatively rare. Professor
Gamez is working on a glow discharge optical spectroscopic technique that could
potentially map element distribution &gt;1000x faster than typical techniques.
As such, imaging protocols currently limited by analysis time restrictions may
become routine diagnostic tools. This research impacts many scientific research
fields, from materials to biological sciences. The project also offers training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate researchers with regard to
instrument development, fundamental studies, and application development in
plasma-based optical hyperspectral imaging and surface analysis. Professor Gamez
works with a number of local programs to recruit next generation STEM students,
in particular those from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
(GDOES) has been recently shown to enable spatially resolved lateral information
to be obtained from within the sputtering surface area by operating the GD in
pulsed-power and at higher pressures. These modes of operation become are
important as it is no longer required to raster pixel-by-pixel to obtain a
hyperspectral data cube with the elemental distribution information. This
savings may translates into several orders of magnitude faster analysis times.
The overall goal of this project is to develop an ultrahigh throughput-, 3D-,
large area surface chemical imaging technique based on GDOES. The three
objectives are to: 1) develop hyperspectral imaging systems and novel GD
instrumentation to enable GD 3D chemical imaging, 2) study the underlying GD
mechanisms through OES and laser scattering plasma diagnostics, and 3) develop
applications in materials, biological and geological sciences enabled by GDOES
3D chemical imaging. In addition to the overall goals, this research may improve
comprehension of GD scaling, enhance the characterization of trends in molecular
OES under GD conditions, and enable of a variety of imaging protocols in
different fields.