* 1610153
* Metal Diborides: Investigating the Structure, Processing, and Properties of a New Class of Two-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Qing Hua Wang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 638,858.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metal diborides are a class of ceramic materials with
the chemical composition MB2, where M can be many different metals. They have a
common structure of stacked sheets of boron separated by layers of metal atoms.
Examples of the diverse, outstanding properties of these materials include
superconductivity in magnesium diboride and resistance to extremely high
temperatures in titanium diboride and zirconium diboride. Metal diborides also
find application in ballistic armor and heat shields for spacecraft. However,
conventional methods of preparing metal diborides result in thick, brittle
materials that do not take advantage of the flexible, two-dimensional (2D)
nature of their constituent boron sheets. The PIs recently developed a method to
directly generate substantial amounts of 2D metal diborides composed of single-
to few-layer atomically thin sheets. This project is focused on studying in
detail the structure, properties, processing, and performance of this new class
of 2D ceramics. Few-layer metal diborides suspended across porous surfaces or
incorporated into polymers are tested for their improved mechanical properties.
Thin films of the 2D metal diborides are investigated for their potential as
lightweight and flexible superconductors. Overall, these studies aim to exploit
the exceptional properties of the metal diborides in applications not possible
using conventional materials processing techniques and to improve their
performance in their conventional areas of use. The educational goals of this
project are the training of graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
materials research, incorporation of research results into the PIs'
interdisciplinary courses for graduate and undergraduate students, and outreach
to students and families in the general public through open house science events
and at-home virtual science kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
project is focused on understanding in detail the structure and properties of 2D
sheets of metal diborides prepared using solution-phase processing and
micromechanical cleavage techniques. The structure and composition of these 2D
materials are studied down to the atomic scale by aberration corrected
transmission electron microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy, electron energy
loss spectroscopy, and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Mechanical
measurements across different length scales, starting from individual
microscopic sheets of 2D metal diborides to macroscopic polymer composites
reinforced by 2D metal diborides, are being studied using atomic force
microscopy and tensile testing equipment. Solution-processed, flexible thin
films of the 2D metal diboride MgB2 are being investigated for their potential
superconducting behavior. This research project is thus providing new
fundamental knowledge of the electronic and mechanical properties of the metal
diborides once they are only a few atomic layers thick. The improved
understanding of the properties and processing of 2D metal diboride ceramics is
facilitating their integration into stretchable and flexible forms unavailable
to their conventional bulk counterparts, and yielding new application areas for
these compounds in structurally reinforced polymer composites and bendable
superconductors.