* 1610109
* Tailoring Size and Shape of beta-Sheet Nanocrystals for Crosslinking and Reinforcement of Elastomers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Mark Foster, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elastomers are rubbery materials
that are produced on the scale of 200 million tons annually worldwide. Their
applications range from daily goods (for example tires) to defense (for example
sonar domes of navy ships) and to biomedicine (for example coatings of artery
stents). This NSF-supported research/educational team led by a chemist (Jia) and
a physicist/chemical engineer (Foster) combines inspirations from biological
systems and lessons from chemical and physical principles to develop the next
generation of elastomers. A central focus is to reduce the size of hard
particles that strengthen the elastomers to the nanometer scale. The research
team will advance our fundamental understanding of how these reinforcing
elements produce elastomers that are strong, stiff, and extensible and that have
programmed capability to dissipate energy. This scientific knowledge can be used
for a number of applications, e.g. tires that are safe, durable, and fuel-
efficient. The elastomers developed can also potentially be directly applied to
make medical devices safer. Parallel to the research effort, the program will
train undergraduate and graduate students in this interdisciplinary area. The
team will carry out outreach activities aimed at attracting domestic talent to
careers in science and technology and particularly in polymer-related areas
using aspects of elastomers as the primary content
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to manipulate atoms and molecules to form
hierarchical structures with precisely controlled size and shape is central to
nanoscience. Beta-sheet nanocrystals exist in both natural and synthetic
elastomers and function as crosslinks and provide reinforcement. However, their
morphologies are drastically different in these two circumstances. In natural
elastomers (i.e., silks), they are particulates with all three dimensions
smaller than 10 nm. In synthetic elastomers (e.g., polyurethanes), they have
been found to be fibrous with the longest dimension, in the hydrogen-bonding
direction, ranging from hundreds of nanometers to microns. In silks, the size
control is attributed to specific amino acid sequences and an exquisite reeling
process. Controlling the size and aspect ratio of beta-sheet nanocrystals is an
unresolved challenge for synthetic systems. This research pursues this central
quest of nanoscience in an important area of soft materials, elastomers, to
realize material properties otherwise unattainable. The scientific approach of
the research is multifaceted, involving synthesis, characterization, and
mechanical studies across the molecular, supramolecular, and nanometer scales.
Based on their recent success in reducing the longest dimension of n-beta-sheet
nanocrystals in a series of oligo(beta-alanine)-grafted polyisobutylenes to well
below 100 nm, the research team will expand their ability to regulate the size
and aspect ratio of the beta-sheet nanocrystals without an elaborate aminoacid
sequence and to elucidate the reinforcing characteristics of the two
morphologically contrasting beta-sheet nanocrystals. The polymer brush at the
interface of the nanocrystal will be another focus as it is critical for the
morphological control and likely plays an important role in reinforcement as
well. The specific objectives of the planned research are to: (1) synthesize
monodisperse oligo(beta-alanine)-grafted polyisobutylenes that form particulate
nanocrystals with still smaller aspect ratios as well as those that form fibrous
nanocrystals. (2) characterize the structures and morphologies of the beta-sheet
nanocrystals including the polymer brush attached to the nanocrystal surface.
(3) elucidate the reinforcing characteristics and study the reinforcing
mechanisms of the particulate and fibrous nanocrystals.