* 1610377
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Supramolecular mutualism in Functional Nucleic acid and Peptide Co-assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Lynn, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical: This NSF/BSF award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Emory University is a study in understanding the emergence
of chemical evolution for the design and preparation of biomimetic systems as
complex as artificial cells and tissues. This award is co-funded by the
following programs: 1) BMAT program in the Division of Materials Research; 2)
Catalysis and Biocatalysis program in the Division of Chemical and
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG); and 3) Global
Venture Funds in the Office of International Science and Engineering. This
collaborative research combines complementary expertise of scientists in US and
Israel. While man-made processes and products are typically passive and static,
those found in the living world are active and dynamic. To better understand
this dynamic, active and complex system, this project will use radically
different approaches in areas ranging from materials sciences in the design and
study of complex systems for the construction of self-organizing, multi-
component chemical networks for storage and amplification of molecular-scale
information. This award will design bottom-up synthesis of novel mesoscale
assemblies, which in turn will be used to build cooperative interactions between
different biopolymer families to achieve the first synthetic mutualistic network
for materials research. These studies are expected to result in new materials
benefiting biotechnology in diagnostics, gene delivery, drug delivery, etc. As
part of this project, new core chemistry classes that blend chemistry, polymers,
and materials will be implemented to enhance educational curiosity in
supramolecular mutualism. Mesoscale assemblies will be captured in simulations,
visually building from blends and block polymers to mutualistic biopolymer
networks. Videos will also be developed highlighting the sciences, the humor and
the culture of the US and Israeli faculty and students. This project will also
be developing novel teaching methods and interdisciplinary materials projects in
the newly opened research/learning center - Science Commons - at Emory
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This collaborative research is
focused on designing peptide/nucleic acids based dynamic and active assemblies
that can catalyze their own replication. Toward this goal, the project will
explore dynamic networks in regulating molecular evolution by: 1) elucidating
the structure of nucleic acid/peptide intermolecular and nucleic acid/peptide
conjugate assemblies; 2) studying their assembly pathways and defining control
factors for assembly (pH, temperature and salt concentration); and 3)
characterizing the mutualistic functions enabled by these assemblies and co-
assemblies. The proposed iterative structural and functional analyses of these
composites are expected to provide sufficient insight in constructing a
synthetic digital-to-analog converter with alternative nucleic acid/peptide
assemblies. The wealth of information developed on protein and nucleic acid
interactions and the structural information that will be provided by these
assemblies would allow one to engineer mutualistic behaviors, where cooperative
peptide templates would serve as nucleic acid polymerases, and nucleic
acid/peptide co-assemblies in catalyzing their own replication. These studies
could be the first step in expanding and understanding the supramolecular
assembly into self-organizing networks for novel materials. Just as the
emergence of the ribosome provided a critical Darwinian threshold for our
biosphere, one may see these studies as first set in demonstrating the use of
mutualistic polymers and supramolecular catalysts for the creation of
intelligent materials. This work is also expected to expand the analytic and
modeling methods available for dynamic chemical systems, and for the cross
catalytic networks that will serve as a foundation for a synthetic biology,
which in turn will ultimately lead to evolutionary strategies for the discovery
and optimization of functional materials.