* 1610164
* Algae Grows the Future
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Kauser Jahan, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses the need to cultivate engineers' holistic and critical
understanding of the global, economic, societal and environmental impacts of
engineering solutions. In this project, algae provides the basis for a
collection of inquiry-based educational activities that bring together science,
engineering and humanities to foster an understanding of the broader context of
engineering work. A series of cost-effective, multidisciplinary, adaptable and
transferrable hands-on experiments will be developed to introduce engineering
and science principles through algae's versatility as a renewable fuel source,
tool for greenhouse gas mitigation, and its role in the treatment of wastewater.
Additional synergistic activities will be incorporated through introduction of
ethical, social, and environmental issues related to these problems and analysis
of proposed solutions. The three main objectives of the project are: (1) to
recruit and retain students in STEM degree programs, (2) to increase self-
confidence and self-esteem of students from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields, and (3) to develop educational methods that explore uses of algae to
address global engineering challenges.

This project will generate new knowledge about the formation of engineering
students' conceptions of engineering work, the disciplines that inform practice,
the populations impacted by engineering solutions, and the role of the engineer
in a global and societal context. In addition, it will advance understanding
about the role that educational inquiry activities can serve in the development
of self-confidence and self-esteem towards STEM careers. By reimagining what it
means to be an engineer, this project has the potential to build a generation of
diverse individuals that see themselves as engineers and appreciate engineering
for its ability to help humankind in addition to the technological solutions it
can provide. Through extensive partnerships, this project will impact students
at the K-12, community college and university levels of STEM education. A
partnership with the Center for Aquatic Sciences at the Adventure Aquarium in
Camden (NJ) will bring algae-based engineering education to the broader
community through family-based science education and informal science education.