* 1611895
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Maya Almaraz, Almaraz                 Maya
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Maya Almaraz

Proposal Number: 1611895

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Dr. Maya Almaraz is "Using isotopic signatures to
understand soil nitrogen oxide emission sources." The host institution for this
fellowship is University of California, Davis, and the sponsoring scientist is
Prof. Benjamin Zind Houlton.

This project examines sources of atmospheric nitrogen oxide, including fossil
fuels, uncultivated soils, and agricultural soil emissions, in order to better
understand nitrogen (N) cycling in ecosystems. Although N is an essential
element that sometimes limits plant production, too much N can degrade
ecosystems and endanger human health. Nitrogen oxides, in particular, are among
the most noxious components of ground-level air pollution. Fossil fuel
combustion and microbial emissions from both natural and agricultural soils are
the major sources of nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere. In contrast to these
well-studied sources, the contributions of agricultural fertilizers to nitrogen
oxide pollution have received less attention. To better characterize the sources
of nitrogen oxides to ecosystems, the Fellow is measuring nitrogen oxide
isotopic signatures across industrialization, climate, and agricultural
management gradients in California and Hawaii. Satellite data are also being
used to compare estimates of nitrogen oxide emissions from forest, agriculture,
and metropolitan regions in California. The Fellow is also estimating monetized
health costs associated with nitrogen oxide emissions, in order to value the
impact of these emission sources on human health and the economy. These findings
are informing policy makers about regional variability in nitrogen oxide
pollution sources, and thus the need to regulate fossil fuel vs. agricultural
emissions. The Fellow is receiving training in isotopic methods and in
developing regional models of atmospheric pollution.

The Fellow's project has three major broader impacts. First, the Fellow, who as
a Latina is herself a member of an underrepresented group, is mentoring UC Davis
undergraduate and graduate students from groups underrepresented in science, as
part of the Ecological Society of America's Strategies for Ecology, Education
and Diversity (SEEDS) program. Second, she is sharing her findings via a broadly
disseminated career development website co-founded by the Fellow, Inventing
Heron. The Fellow's project is featured as a regular blog, in order to promote
the teaching of scientific concepts and methods, raise awareness concerning
environmental issues, and advance public understanding of the lifestyle that
accompanies a career in the sciences. Third, the Fellow's research fits well
within the mission of the UC Davis John Muir Institute of the Environment, which
her supervisor Houlton directs, and which supports interdisciplinary
collaborations across human health, policy and environmental science and
includes more than 250 faculty and staff members. The Institute is facilitating
dissemination of the Fellow's findings and connecting her research to a breadth
of disciplines within academia and environmental outreach in the greater
community.