* 1611820
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure:  Post-Disaster, Rapid Response Research (RAPID) Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joseph Wartman, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,853,000.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office (NCO), Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and
Simulation Center, and Experimental Facilities (EFs), including a post-disaster,
rapid response research (RAPID) facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute
to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and
the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis
on earthquake engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the
George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of
NEHRP, but now broadens that support to include wind engineering research
infrastructure. NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will
improve the resilience and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as
buildings and other surface and underground structures, levees, and critical
lifelines, against the natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order
to reduce loss of life, damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI
resources is available at the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NHERI EFs will provide access to their experimental
resources, user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported
research and education awards. As part of the NHERI EF portfolio, this award
will support the NHERI RAPID facility, headquartered at the University of
Washington. The scientific goal of the RAPID facility is to support natural
hazard researchers to conduct next generation RAPID research through reliable
acquisition and community sharing of high-quality, post-disaster data sets that
will enable characterization of civil infrastructure performance under natural
hazard loads, evaluation of the effectiveness of current and previous design
methodologies, calibration of computational models used to predict civil
infrastructure component and system response to natural hazards, and development
of solutions for resilient communities. In support of this goal, this facility
will provide the following resources: (1) a portfolio of state-of-the-art data
collection tools (including geomatics technologies; image capture and laser
scanning equipment; seismological, wind, and inundation instruments; and
unmanned aircraft systems, among others); (2) new software tools to aid in data
collection and processing; (3) education, outreach, and training services; (4)
advisory services to assist reconnaissance teams with the planning of safe and
successful field missions for data collection; and (5) a headquarters that
includes a 3D mini Computer Automated Virtual Environment (CAVE) for viewing and
preliminary analysis of the various forms of image data collected during field
campaigns. As a community resource, the facility will: (1) support acquisition
of an unprecedented amount of perishable, post-disaster, high-quality, open data
by the natural hazards community; (2) provide learning and training
opportunities in post-disaster reconnaissance; (3) promote public engagement
with science and technology through a citizen science data collection
initiative; and (4) develop new and strengthen existing international research
partnerships by establishing collaborations with foreign organizations during
global deployments. This facility will also host students as part of the NCO's
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program.