* 1611306
* GOALI: SusChEM: Experimental Investigation of Chloramine and Persulfate Aqueous Photochemistry and Development of Efficient Ultraviolet-Based Water Treatment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Haizhou Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,997.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Haizhou Liu of
the University of California, Riverside (UCR) and Dr. Ken Ishida of Orange
County Water District (OCWD) are investigating the ultraviolet (UV) light-driven
advanced oxidation process (AOP) of trace organic contaminants in wastewater.
The AOP process uses two oxidants: chloramine and persulfate to remove
contamination in the water. The underlying hypothesis of this research is that
the two oxidants produce unique reactive species under UV light. The solution
chemical conditions (e.g., pH, chloride and bicarbonate concentrations) are
optimized to maximize contaminant degradation and minimize the energy required
by the UV-based water treatment system. This project promotes university-
industry partnerships in a severely water-stressed region (Southwest U.S.). The
collaboration serves as a model to develop efficient, cost-effective and
sustainable water reuse technologies, helps the water industry with smart
infrastructure, prepares our society for water sustainability, and ultimately
protects public health. This research enhances U.S. technological
competitiveness in the water sector by accelerating new knowledge transfer
between the university and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal fits
one of the National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenges- provide access to
clean water. The multi-tool research strategy advances our understanding of
photochemistry and fate of trace organic contaminants in wastewater effluent,
and promotes the application of efficient oxidants in UV-based water reuse
technologies. A transformative quality of this project derives from the
combination of computational kinetics modeling, lab-scale experiments, and
pilot-scale investigation at the OCWD's advanced water purification facility.
Understanding of the UV/AOP is mostly limited to hydroxyl radical-dominated
systems. Awareness of the reactivities of amine, sulfate, and halide reactive
species is confined to atmospheric aerosol, estuary or groundwater remediation
systems, not engineered UV processes. This study represents research that
challenges conventional wisdom surrounding radical chemistry in UV/AOP. The
investigators recruit one graduate student and minority undergraduate students
from UCR to work in the UCR lab and at OCWD on this research. Further, Drs. Liu
and Ishida and the students introduce industrial professions to local high
school students through lectures and interactive events at water treatment
facilities.