* 1611652
* Integrative STEM Education for Teachers of Young Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Nanette Marcum-Dietrich, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,479.00

Early childhood educators who are enthusiastic and confident in integrating STEM
into their teaching are crucial to engaging students early and motivating them
along a path to become the next generation of STEM innovators, workers, and
knowledgeable citizens. This Exploration and Design for Engaged Student Learning
project will target Millersville University undergraduates enrolled in a
teaching integrative STEM (iSTEM) education minor as part of their Pre-
kindergarten to grade 4 (PK-4) teacher preparation program. The minor will be
designed to prepare them with the knowledge, skills, and confidence to integrate
STEM concepts across the PK-4 curriculum. The project will investigate selected
research-based components of the iSTEM program and has the potential to result
in data that can inform other PK-4 teacher preparation programs which want to
prepare educators who are equipped with a toolkit to open the world of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics to the early elementary students they
engage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish five research-based
programmatic features that are designed to enhance teacher candidates'
integrative STEM skills, understandings, and perspectives. The features
investigated will include: development of an iSTEM Laboratory and Resource
Center, coursework that engages learners in problem-based, inquiry-based, and
design-based learning experiences that build deeper understandings of STEM
concepts, STEM focused practicums in elementary schools, STEM professional
development opportunities, and access to STEM-related community resources. The
overarching goal of this project is to determine which component(s) of the iSTEM
minor at Millersville University have the greatest impact on undergraduates'
ability to integrate iSTEM concepts/skills in non-iSTEM education courses, their
motivation to seek out STEM opportunities in their personal and professional
lives, and their STEM perspectives. Undergraduates in the iSTEM minor will be
compared to PK-4 teacher preparation undergraduates who did not choose the iSTEM
minor. Researchers will investigate which research-based features of MU's iSTEM
program are the most significant transformational elements that may increase the
likelihood that undergraduates who complete the minor will effectively integrate
iSTEM techniques in their future classrooms. By evaluating which features have
the maximum impact, researchers will be able to make recommendations on how to
replicate these outcomes at other teacher preparation institutions, thereby
contributing to an understanding of how to better prepare PK-4 teachers as
competent and passionate iSTEM educators.