* 1611695
* Partial differential equation methods in kinetic theory and their applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Yan Guo, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 261,054.00

Guo&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1611695&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many important scientific
applications require understanding dynamics of dilute gases of particles, e.g.,
re-entry of a space shuttle in the air, flows passing an airplane, or a plasma
inside a tokamak device for nuclear fusion. Kinetic theory describes the
dynamics of a dilute gas or plasma. Motivated by problems with various
scientific applications in the real world, the investigator aims to understand
the following basic and important phenomena and questions from a mathematical
standpoint: the interaction of a dilute gas with its surrounding walls,
interaction of a dilute plasma with its surrounding walls, interactions of
neutron beams with surrounding walls, characterization of the long-time behavior
of a collisionless plasma, dynamics of contact lines in fluids (e.g., the coffee
edge on the side of a coffee cup), and the validity of boundary layer theory for
flows with high Reynolds number. Graduate students are involved in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Kinetic theory is at the center of multi-scale
modeling, which connects the microscopic particle models with macroscopic fluid
models. Even though boundary effects play an important role in kinetic theory,
they have not yet been studied deeply due to their challenging characteristic
nature. As one of his main goals, the investigator and his collaborators
continue to study such boundary value problems. More specifically, the
investigator further studies regularity of Boltzmann solutions in convex domains
in the presence of external forces, well-posedness for the Landau equation in a
bounded domain, a general theory for geometric correction to the boundary layer
theory in kinetic theory, flows passing an obstacle as a diffusive limit of
Boltzmann theory, time decay around stable BGK waves in a collisionless Vlasov
theory for a plasma, and the well-posedness of the recent Ren-E model for
contact line dynamics. He also seeks to verify the validity of steady Prandtl
boundary layer expansions for flows with high Reynolds number. Graduate students
are involved in the project.