* 1611136
* Computational-Experimental Insight across Time and Length Scales of Dynamics in Ionic Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 426,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The design of new materials is one critical aspect of engineering new platforms
that will augment the energy security of the nation, impact health, and enhance
economic competitiveness. Driving innovation in technologies such as clean
energy generation and storage and numerous biomedical technologies requires new
materials that can serve in different capacities simultaneously. One promising
class of materials consists of very large molecules (polymers) able to transport
ions and electrons while retaining their mechanical integrity, often under
extreme conditions of high temperatures, solvents, and external stresses that
may affect their performance. The ability of these materials to play multiple
roles is attained by tailoring molecular segments with different chemical
functionalities into one large molecule, including blocks for transporting ions
and electrons and blocks to provide mechanical stability. Controlling the way
these segments organize and perform electrically as they are integrated into
devices is key to the design of new effective platforms. In this project, using
large-scale computational studies coupled with state-of-the-art neutron
measurements, the effects of the structure of these polymers will be correlated
with their dynamics as they are exposed to high temperatures and solvents. The
projected results will provide the understanding that will enhance the ability
to design well-controlled multi-functional polymers, tailored with desired
properties for specific applications. The project is closely integrated with
interdisciplinary education and training of graduate and undergraduate students
and high-school outreach.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymers that consist of ionizable blocks (ionomers, or polyelectrolytes)
tethered to additional segments with well defined functionalities, constitute
promising media for a large number of applications from clean energy and storage
to sensors and drug delivery vehicles. The role of the ionic groups is two-fold:
they form physical crosslinks while facilitating transport of ions and polar
guest molecules. As these two functions often require dynamics of opposing
nature, the additional blocks affect the overall stability of such polymers.
Here, using large-scale molecular dynamics simulations coupled with neutron
scattering techniques, the correlation of polymer dynamics with ionic
associations and their cohesiveness will be investigated on a series of model
copolymers that consist of styrene sulfonate as the ionic block tethered to
different non-ionic segments. Numerous studies have probed the structure of ion-
containing polymers and polyelectrolytes, revealing a rich variety of
morphologies and establishing a clear correlation between structure and
transport. One key challenge that arises from these studies is the need to
unfold the correlation between ionic associations and their impact on the
mobility of the polymers. The relationship of the dynamics with the number,
topology, and stability of the ionic associations impacts the polymer properties
and in turn affects a large number of technologies. This research is set to
resolve the effects of constraints formed by ionic associations on polymer
dynamics. Advances in computational techniques coupled with new developments in
neutron scattering will enable a new insight into the dynamics of polymers under
the confinement of physical crosslinks.