* 1611525
* Conductive Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 540,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Sponge-like crystals with precisely designed
nanometer scale pores are critically important for the efficient separation and
storage of gases. Technologically, nanoporous semiconductors also show promise
as component materials in battery electrodes, chemical sensors,
electrocatalysts, and electrochromic materials. Until recently, however,
nanoporous crystals have been almost exclusively typecast as electronic
insulators. This limitation originates from the trusswork of very strong
chemical bonds needed to maintain a stable pore structure. As such, the
synthesis of new, electrically conductive, porous crystals stands as an
inherently counterintuitive challenge. Efforts toward producing such materials
will push the limits of stability and charge delocalization across a crystalline
latticework of transition metal nodes and organic linkers. TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: Metal-organic frameworks are microporous network solids composed of
inorganic nodes linked together by organic bridging ligands. While metal-organic
frameworks have been extensively developed for their remarkable gas sorption and
separation properties, like most porous inorganic materials, they are
essentially ionic and electronic insulators. In spite of these properties, this
class of materials offers a unique opportunity to explore long-range ion and
electron transport in low-dimensional nanoporous systems. The apparent lack of
conductive frameworks that have been investigated thus far is not an inherent
structural limitation, but rather a result of a lack of focus on electronically
interesting structural motifs. That is, the vast majority of frameworks are
composed of redox-inactive, closed shell transition metals and organic ligands.
In response, metal-organic frameworks engendered with bulk electronic
conductivity through the synthesis of open shell and redox-ambiguous scaffolds
will be developed. More broadly, the investigation of electronically conductive
metal-organic frameworks will explore the limits of long-range electronic
communication in low-density hybrid solids and elucidate the primary factors
governing the resulting properties. Owing to their crystallinity and the ease of
functionalization, metal-organic frameworks can also serve as excellent model
systems to better understand and enhance ion transport in nanochannels and
nanoporous solids. Thus, the synthesis and characterization of new ion
conducting frameworks with a focus on ions that are notoriously difficult to
conduct in the solid-state will be pursued.