* 1611371
* Colloids in molten inorganic salts and liquid metals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 460,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The colloidal state is ubiquitous in
biology, chemistry, and materials science. It offers a general way to create
macroscopically homogeneous combinations of highly dissimilar components, such
as milk consisting of immiscible fat and water. Stabilizing the colloidal state
in different systems is at the heart of many technological processes. This
project is focused on a novel class of colloidal systems. Preliminary studies
show that a colloidal state can be realized for different nanoparticles in
molten inorganic salt and, probably, in liquid metals. Liquid metals and molten
salts are widely used in metallurgy and soldering, as heat transfer fluids in
thermal solar technologies, and other important areas. Demonstrating stable
colloidal systems in such media and understanding the factors that govern
stability may open up opportunities to design new types of composites using a
rich toolbox of techniques from colloidal chemistry. A comprehensive education
and outreach program accompanies this research and focuses on education
enrichment for the underrepresented African-American and Hispanic K-12
populations on Chicago's South Side. This project supports the continued
development and distribution of nanoscience educational resources for the U.
Chicago chemistry community as well as for K-12 students. This includes the
development of a new graduate materials chemistry track at the University of
Chicago and a continued successful effort to help undergraduates and high school
students gain research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is directly relevant to the
development of new colloidal systems. Nanoparticles of various transition
metals, semiconductors, rare-earth, and magnetic materials form stable colloidal
dispersions in various molten salts and liquid metals. The colloidal stability
of nanoparticles in these media cannot be explained by traditional stabilization
mechanisms. It appears that neither electrostatic nor steric repulsion can
explain colloidal stability in a molten ionic salt. Given the very high charge
density, electrostatic potential is screened on the sub-nm distance, making
electrostatic repulsion short-ranged and inferior compared to van der Waals
attraction. The absence of brush-like species at the particle surface in molten
salt also rules out the possibility of classical steric stabilization. This
project incorporates systematic experimental and theoretical investigations of
this class of functional nanomaterials that are colloidally stabilized in molten
inorganic salts and liquid metals. Specific aims of this project include the
study and development of an understanding of the colloidal stabilization
mechanism in molten salts and liquid metals at elevated temperatures, as well as
exploration of properties and potential applications for colloidal dispersions
of nanomaterials in molten salts and liquid metals.