* 1611713
* Faculty-Led Institutional Transformation for Teaching Diverse Learners in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Stephen Cessna, Eastern Mennonite University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,967.00

The need to broaden participation in STEM fields is well-documented. Meanwhile,
rapidly changing student demographics, coupled with slow instructor response to
these changes, results in lower retention rates in STEM fields, particularly for
first-generation and underrepresented students. Eastern Mennonite University is
in the midst of this shift. The significance of this project is that it seeks to
reverse those retention trends and improve affective outcomes for these students
through a collaborative, multi-faceted approach, across STEM fields and across
the university.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall scope of this project is to
improve retention, particularly for underrepresented and first-generation math,
computer science, biology, and chemistry majors at EMU. The project will use
multiple interventions, including: teaching strategies workshops, online
training, and faculty learning communities that foster evidence-based and
culturally-responsive teaching practices and assessments, particularly to
support diverse learners; mentoring a group of STEM faculty to use a Scholarship
of Teaching and Learning (SoTL) approach to their own teaching and scholarship;
and enhancing peer tutor training and other university supports for
underrepresented and first-generation students. The interventions are aimed to
achieve the following outcomes: (1) improved first- and second-year retention
and positive affective outcomes for underrepresented and first-generation STEM
majors; (2) increased appreciation for and use of evidence-based and culturally-
responsive STEM teaching strategies by faculty; (3) STEM faculty-produced SoTL
projects that contribute to understanding of how learning occurs in the STEM
classroom, particularly for diverse learners; and (4) improved peer-tutor
training and effectiveness for underrepresented students and greater STEM
faculty engagement with peer-tutors. External evaluation at multiple levels will
provide formative insight and summative conclusions concerning the program's
impact on STEM retention, affective outcomes, and the effectiveness of STEM
faculty members' pedagogical transformation. These findings will provide
information about the impact of various interventions that will be valuable to
institutions of higher education experiencing similar shifts.