* 1611798
* Collaborative Research: Open Access Blended Learning Modules for Teaching Laboratory Methods: Developing Scientific Skills for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Elizabeth Johnson, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,840.00

The lack of appropriate instructional materials at the undergraduate level for
laboratory techniques presents a significant barrier to increasing student
access to and knowledge of analytical skills necessary to succeed in the
geosciences and other STEM fields. This project will create and evaluate five
open access online learning modules for laboratory methods and scientific
inquiry skills. These materials will initially be evaluated in courses at a
four-year university (JMU) and a minority-serving two-year college (NOVA). The
community-based review, evaluation, contribution, and further testing of these
modules in various types of classrooms will create a forum for sharing ideas
among geoscience and STEM faculty who wish to incorporate analytical methods
into courses using robust peer-reviewed online teaching resources. The modular
format will provide flexibility for instructors to use as few or as many units
as needed for a specific course or student research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five learning modules will be created that represent
commonly available analytical methods as well as techniques available at both
JMU and NOVA. These units will include gas and water plumbing, petrographic
microscopes, thin sectioning equipment, energy-dispersive spectroscopy, scanning
electron microscopy, and Raman and infrared spectroscopies. Scientific inquiry
skills will be embedded into the content modules, and will include creating and
testing protocols, evaluating data quality and error, and synthesizing data. To
benefit the larger geosciences and STEM community, the modules will be published
on an open educational resource (OER) courseware site. Module structure and
content will align with active, inquiry-based learning theories, and will
include video mini-lectures, individual and group quizzes and assignments,
expository materials in video or animation formats, video tours of equipment and
laboratories, and instructor resources. This project will improve geosciences
and STEM learning by establishing effective practices for integrating open
educational resources into research-based instructional units in geoscience and
STEM courses involving the use of analytical equipment. The assessment plan will
include formative and summative evaluations of student learning and attitudes
within required and elective courses in geosciences and STEM at JMU and NOVA, as
well as module reviews by geoscience community members outside of these
institutions. Evaluation will focus on the effects of open educational resources
and a blended learning course format upon student retention of analytical
methods and instrumentation skills, student mastery of scientific inquiry
skills, and student attitude and competencies towards conducting research with
analytical equipment. The protocol established by this study will be used to
create additional modules on other analytical techniques in the future, and will
be a template the STEM community may use to develop other online learning
resources.