* 1611752
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Molly Womack, Womack                  Molly          C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Molly C. Womack Proposal number: 1611752

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Molly C. Womack is
'Selection and Constraints on Evolution of the Anuran Skeleton' The host
institutions for this fellowship are the University of California-Berkeley and
the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History, and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Erica Bree Rosenblum (UC-Berkeley) and Dr. Rayna
Bell (Smithsonian).

The goal of this research is to identify selection pressures and evolutionary
limitations acting on the skeleton diversity of frogs (anurans) over 160 million
years of evolution. The Fellow is using X-ray microtomography (micro-CT) to
examine the skeletons of 200 genera, spanning all 55 families of frogs. Using
this dataset, the Fellow is analyzing the co-evolution of traits and providing a
comprehensive study of anuran skeleton diversity. Despite the vast diversity of
forms seen in nature, particular phenotypes evolve repeatedly across both
closely related and deeply divergent species (convergent evolution). Frogs show
rampant convergence and provide an exceptional system for researching the
constraints and selection pressures that dictate evolutionary convergence as
well as the limits of morphological evolution. The Fellow is using collections
at the UC-Berkeley Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and the Smithsonian National
Museum of Natural History to generate a dataset to understand convergent
evolution and evolutionary development. The 3D models of 200 anuran skeletons
are being made freely available to other researchers and the public, allowing
future studies to easily collect morphological data from museum specimens
without destruction of any curated specimens. In addition to the proposed
research, the Fellow is utilizing this extensive dataset to highlight species
and clades of frogs that would provide ideal comparisons for future research
investigating the evolution of skeletal traits.

The Fellow is receiving training in micro-CT methods and comparative
phylogenetic analyses. The Fellow is collaborating with both the Berkeley
Natural History Museums Project and the Smithsonian's Q?rius program to create
and implement lessons to communicate concepts such as adaptation and convergent
evolution to broad audiences. These lessons use interactive 3D models of museum
specimen skeletons that the Fellow is generating, and that are being made freely
available for teachers and the general public through the Berkeley Natural
History Museums Project and Q?rius websites. The Fellow is also mentoring
multiple undergraduate researchers on the manipulation and quantification of 3D
data as well as data for comparative phylogenetic analyses. These undergraduate
researchers also have access to the broad dataset generated by the Fellow's
research, for use in independent research projects.