* 1611717
* Geometric Analysis Conferences and Seminars
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Paul Feehan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports a series of three two-day Geometric Analysis conferences at
Rutgers University, on October 27-28 in 2016, October 26-27 in 2017, and October
25-26 in 2018, that highlight recent developments in the analysis of non-linear
elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations arising in the study of
Riemannian manifolds and geometric flows. Riemannian manifolds are higher-
dimensional generalizations of the familiar concept of a surface in three-
dimensional space, such as the surface of a ball or a donut. Four-dimensional
manifolds (with three spatial and one temporal direction) are used in general
relativity as models for the universe. Manifolds of other dimensions are used by
theoretical physicists in string theory, which may lead to a unification of
quantum field theory and gravity. The conferences will bring together
distinguished senior speakers and a wide range of junior mathematicians to
disseminate recent research progress and catalyze future research in the
subject. The opportunities presented by the meetings to discuss research with
leaders in the field will help to train and encourage the next generation of
researchers. The conference series makes special efforts to encourage women and
minority mathematicians to participate in the meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of geometric flows is of great current interest
due its many applications to the understanding of Riemannian manifolds. Within
Ricci flow for a Riemannian metric, there has been progress in understanding the
structure of solutions, their singularities, their asymptotics, and uniqueness.
Flows starting from more general initial data (for example, a metric space, or a
manifold with unbounded curvature, or an incomplete metric) are becoming better
understood. A better understanding of Ricci flow may lead to advances in areas
such as general relativity, string theory, the geometry of closed four-
dimensional smooth manifolds, and renormalization in quantum field theory. The
study of mean curvature flow may lead to advances in knot theory, image
processing, materials science, and minimal surfaces. The conference series
brings together experts at the frontier of research in these various topics from
around the United States. The conference is expected to generate transfers of
knowledge, new collaborations, and a cross-fertilization of ideas, and further
inspire graduate students and junior mathematicians. The 2016 conference website
is &lt;br/&gt;www.finmath.rutgers.edu/ga2016/index.php