* 1611876
* Engaged Learning through Creativity in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Mika Munakata, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,701.00

The goal of Creativity in Mathematics and Science (CMS) is to develop and test
an innovative model of instruction that highlights the role of creative thought
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and that engages
students in thoughtful and creative approaches to scientific and mathematical
practices. This project will (i) develop course modules on creative thinking for
science and non-science majors, (ii) provide a two-year engaged student
experience for CMS Scholars, (iii) conduct research on student achievement and
changes to students' perceptions about STEM learning, and (iv) transfer the
successful elements to local high schools and a community college. All elements
of the CMS project are collaborative and interdisciplinary. For example,
students will work in teams with mentors from multiple disciplines, and faculty
members will collaborate with leaders from high schools, community colleges, and
industry to develop, deliver, and transfer effective instructional practices.
The project will to add to the literature on the role of creative instruction in
effective undergraduate STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CMS will encourage
the rethinking of undergraduate STEM education by deliberately exposing students
to the creative explorations that drive the STEM fields. The project will
address the documented need to provide students with authentic learning
experiences and to have them engage in activities that model the work of STEM
professionals. Students will experience the natural creativity in STEM and
become more science-literate citizens. The development, implementation,
assessment, and refinement cycle will allow for the identification of the
successful elements of the project, thus informing its adoption in other STEM
disciplines and academic settings. The project and its outcomes will contribute
to the research on teaching and learning in STEM by introducing new learning
materials and teaching techniques, disseminating results of learning under this
innovation, and generating evidence regarding the role of creativity as a
motivator in undergraduate STEM education.