* 1611853
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Alex Harkess, Harkess                 Alex
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Alex Harkess is "The origins of reproductive
phasiRNAs in the angiosperms". The host institution for the fellowship is the
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Blake
Meyers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All flowering plants have structures called anthers
that produce male pollen during reproduction. In the sub-group of monocots, a
unique class of small molecules, called small RNAs, are expressed in anthers
just before pollen is produced. These small RNAs regulate how genes are turned
on and off at specific times, thus likely ensuring normal reproduction. Despite
the importance of these small RNAs, details of their function and regulation are
not well understood. This project investigates when and how these small RNAs
evolved in the grasses, thereby clarifying their functional importance in the
context of evolution. Information will be conveyed through an outreach project
with public gardens. In collaboration with the Longwood Garden (Philadelphia,
PA) and the Missouri Botanic Garden (St. Louis, MO), the genome of the Longwood
Hybrid water lily will be sequenced, and the resulting information will
contribute to a public garden exhibit that connects genetics to evolution in
this group of early-diverging flowering plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims
of this project are to identify the key evolutionary events underlying the
origin of 21 and 24nt phased, secondary, small interfering RNAs particularly in
the monocots. Interestingly, a duplication event led to the presence of a
monocot-specific Dicer-like protein, DCL5. Transcriptome sequencing of meiotic
anthers across diverse groups of monocots will be used to carefully pinpoint the
phylogenetic placement of the duplication event that led to the divergence of
Dicer-like 3 (DCL3) and Dicer-like 5 (DCL5) in the monocots. After identifying
this duplication event, a phylogenetically diverse subset of DCL5 genes will be
transformed into the maize male-sterile DCL5 knockout to attempt to rescue
function. Simultaneously, in situ hybridization and immunolocalizations will be
performed across phylogenetically diverse monocots to identify potential changes
in protein localization in the anther, further clarifying function during
reproductive development.