* 1611090
* BRAIN EAGER: A Nanophotonic Platform for Multisite Optical Activation in the Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Adam Kepecs, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A technology that could provide a path towards the holy grail of systems
neuroscience - gain a level of understanding about the dynamics of neural
circuits - is proposed. The technology is based on nano photonics - optical
elements that are nanometer in size and can be massively integrated into small
chips that could then be inserted into the animal brain. This platform would
enable light to be delivered to thousands of different locations in the brain
and would enable stimulation of neurons with arbitrary dynamical patterns. This
proposed approach is expected to provide a critical stepping stone towards one
of the greatest challenges facing science today - the understanding how the
brain works. It will not only enable a new class of experiments to advance basic
biological knowledge but could eventually contribute to an understanding of
neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical
stimulation and silencing of neural activity is a powerful technique for
elucidating the structure and function of neural circuitry, however in most in
vivo optogenetic experiments, light is delivered into the brain through a single
optical fiber limiting illumination to a large, fixed volume of the brain. A
novel nanophotonic platform is proposed to allow massively parallel, multi-site
stimulation through a single waveguide. Recent advances in nanophotonics enable
the proposed optical probe platform which routes input light to an arbitrary
excitation spot. The proposed platform is designed to be compatible with
standard silicon probes for electrophysiological recordings. The proposed
platform is based on nanowaveguides that consist of Silicon Nitride (SiN) wires
with ~0.5 micrometers in diameter embedded in SiO2, that just like fibers, are
transparent to light of wavelengths from the UV down to the mid-IR, and can be
centimeters long. When compared to fibers, however, they are much smaller and
enable light to be emitted from the nano-waveguides forming multiple beams at
arbitrary locations. A first-generation probe will be fabricated, tested and
then integrated with a state of art electrical probe for neural validation. This
integrated device will then be used in mouse cortex to demonstrate the ability
of waveguides to provide sufficient light for ChR2 activation and selective
activation across cortical layers.