* 1611782
* Supporting Chemistry Learning with Adaptive Support for Connection Making Between Graphical Representations in a Cognitive Tutoring System
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martina Rau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 593,795.00

Success in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) depends on
the ability to learn with graphical representations that use visual features to
depict information. Many instructors assume that visuals help students learn,
but they can be confusing if students do not know how the visuals show
information. The goal of this project is to design and study the effectiveness
of an educational technology called Chem Tutor to help college chemistry
students learn with visuals. The project will determine how Chem Tutor
technology can help students learn about visuals in a way that enhances their
ability to learn from visuals about complex chemistry knowledge. Specifically,
the project will focus on supporting two representation skills: the ability to
make sense of how particular visual features illustrate concepts (sense-making)
and perceptual fluency with visuals (akin to fluency in a language). The project
will investigate how best to combine supports for these two skills in learning
about representations, and the technology will also be designed to adapt to
individual student's learning progress. This project will be conducted in the
context of undergraduate chemistry learning at two-year and four-year colleges,
including Madison Area Technical College and the University of Wisconsin -
Madison, and is also expected to inform the development of educational
technologies for other STEM disciplines.

The goal of this NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) project
is to help chemistry students acquire the important representation skills of
sense-making and perceptual fluency in using graphical representations without
mental effort. This will be accomplished by designing and studying the Chem
Tutor intelligent tutoring system that will adapt to individual student's
learning progress. The development of Chem Tutor will rely on user-centered
design techniques to create an effective educational technology for
undergraduate chemistry students. A series of experiments will then be conducted
to investigate how sense-making and perceptual-fluency skills interact, how
support for these skills should be combined, and whether adaptive support for
enhancing representation skills is an effective pathway to improve learning
outcomes in chemistry. Further, the project will investigate effects on gender
equality. Thus, the project will contribute to educational psychology and
chemistry education research regarding the role of graphical representations in
students' learning; yield principles for the design of adaptive educational
technologies that support representation skills; and contribute to undergraduate
chemistry education by freely disseminating the final version of Chem Tutor to
students at two-year and four-year colleges.