* 1611333
* Data-Driven Dynamic Reliability Assessment of Lithium-Ion Battery Considering Degradation Mechanisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Shan Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this project is to create a dynamic reliability assessment
platform for lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery. Real-time diagnostics/prognostics and
predictive maintenance/control of Li-ion battery are essential for reliable and
safe battery operation in a wide-range of battery-powered applications, from
hybrid and electric vehicles (HEVs/EVs) and medical devices, to the emerging
smart grid and all electric airplanes. The proposed platform enables a battery
management system (BMS) to develop predictive maintenance/control of a Li-ion
battery through concurrently analyzing degradation mechanisms and anticipating
failure modes. Successful execution of this research will advance our
understanding of how to extend life and prevent catastrophic failure of Li-ion
batteries, and will potentially lead to development of battery-powered devices
that are more durable and safer than current devices. This project will
disseminate research findings to battery industry by demonstrating the platform
with a Li-ion battery in an implantable application, through collaboration with
a leading industry partner. The project will offer a wide range of education and
outreach programs, including 1) incorporating research findings into the
Reliability Engineering curriculum, 2) leveraging university research programs
to attract undergraduate and K-12 students to engineering career, and 3)
organizing paper sessions and panels on Design for Failure Prevention of Li-Ion
Battery in major conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, real-time
diagnostics/prognostics of Li-ion battery has been exploited only empirically
and largely in isolation with the underlying degradation mechanisms. This may be
attributed to the lack of cognizance of the causal relationship between
degradation mechanisms and failure modes. This project will bridge the gap
between physical mechanisms and functional failures by creating a dynamic
reliability assessment platform that facilitates a synergistic integration of
physics-based modeling and sensor-based prognostics. The platform will allow
for: 1) identification and quantitative analysis of multiple degradation
mechanisms through online estimation of the degradation parameters; and 2)
anticipation of the failure modes through online prediction of their remaining
useful lives (RULs). The creation of the platform involves three research
thrusts: 1) validation of multiphysics models, which updates multiphysics
battery models using high precision charge-discharge cycling data; 2) training
of health estimators, which adopts machine learning to quantitatively analyze
multiple degradation mechanisms from a single measurement of charge curve; and
3) prognostics of failure modes, which leverages the quantitative degradation
analysis for prediction of failure mode RULs. The platform provides the methods
and tools needed to leverage prognostics and prognostics-informed predictive
maintenance/control for achieving the failure prevention capability of BMS.
Although this project focuses on the specific case of dynamically updating
battery reliability with measured electrical data, the methodology will be
applicable to other engineering cases in which measured data are used to
dynamically update reliability estimates that support maintenance/control
decision making.