* 1611908
* Pair Programming as a Pedagogical Approach for Promoting Success and Equity in Computer Science Coursework
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Alberto Segre, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 299,904.00

Most economic forecasts foresee a shortage of qualified computer scientists and
engineers by the year 2020, leading to growing interest in computer science
courses at many universities. Yet the usual first course for computer science
majors typically consists of learning to program, and necessarily involves at
least several challenging programming assignments, which can lead to poor
student engagement and eventual disenchantment. Growing enrollments only
exacerbate the challenges inherent in these courses, which often have low
retention rates and are particularly unpopular among female students. One
promising technique to improve engagement and retention is to allow students to
work on programming assignments in pairs, i.e., pair programming. Pair
programming is not a new concept itself, but quantitative measures of the
resulting student learning are few. The significance of this award is a cluster-
randomized control trial on the effectiveness of pair programming in the
introductory computer science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consider differential effects for female and male students across different
introductory computing courses using 2,000 undergraduates. Outcomes of interest
include level of programming skill, attitudes toward computing, course attrition
rates, course grades, selection of and performance in subsequent computational
coursework, and changes in undergraduate major. The project investigation will
study the effects of pair programming on student short-term and long-term
programming skills, computing attitudes, academic achievement, and persistence
in computer science, particularly paying attention to female students.