* 1611672
* Engaged student learning - Exploration and Design: Small group learning in  engineering systems and control education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Laura Ray, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,416.00

Collaborative learning is based on the view that knowledge is a social
construct. Research shows that educational experiences that are active and
social lead to deeper learning, higher level thinking and an increase in
understanding of diverse perspectives. The Small Group Learning in Engineering
Systems and Control Education project addresses barriers to the adoption of
collaborative learning methods by engineering instructors through the
development of small group learning activities and associated instructional
materials. The learning activities will be developed collectively by a faculty
from diverse institutions of higher education. The intellectual merit of this
project is threefold: it develops small-group classroom activities that enable
students to visualize abstract concepts; it conducts a cross-sectional case
study and provides associated data for several colleges and universities that
allows us to study educational outcomes of small-group learning in the
engineering classroom; and it identifies and addresses the problems that
instructors face regarding limited resources and time required to revamp
classroom pedagogy.

The project will develop and disseminate classroom instructional activities that
complement didactic instruction through workshops, evaluation of activities over
course offerings across many different colleges and universities by faculty
participants, assessing outcomes, and planning for broader dissemination of
approaches through the engineering curriculum. Workshop participants are
engineering faculty representing colleges and universities whose undergraduate
programs serve and include a mix of traditional students, non-traditional
students (older students with families and jobs), underrepresented minorities,
women, or students who plan to enter military service. As such, the activities
and outcomes will impact a large cross-section of students through the
engineering education offered by these colleges. Materials developed through
project activities will be disseminated as open-source documents, designs,
instructions, videos, and lesson plans for using small group activities within
the classroom to generate impact beyond the participants' institutions.