* 1611507
* First-principles design of strongly anharmonic crystalline solids with ultra-low lattice thermal conductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Vidvuds Ozolins, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2020
* USD 309,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research and education to advance predictive modeling of thermal transport
properties of insulating and semiconducting materials. Fossil fuels (petroleum,
coal, and natural gas) account for the vast majority of the energy use in the
world. Less than 1/3 of the total energy content is used productively, while the
rest is rejected, mainly in the form of waste heat. In the US alone, the amount
of this wasted energy is roughly equivalent to that contained in 400 billion
gallons of gasoline. Many technologies for improving energy efficiency, or
reusing the waste heat, depend on the availability of thermally insulating
ceramics and semiconductors. For instance, thermoelectrics convert heat into
electricity via a phenomenon called the Seebeck effect, which operates between a
hot and a cold electrode. High-performance thermoelectric devices require
materials that are poor conductors of heat but efficient conductors of
electricity. Currently, few such materials are known, which prevents a wider
adoption of this energy-saving technology. Similarly, better ceramic thermal
insulators would save energy by enabling increased operating temperatures in
combustion engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat in nonmetallic crystals is
conducted by atomic vibrations, such as sound waves. Conventional semiconductors
(e.g. silicon) are poor thermal insulators because these waves propagate
independently of each other and encounter little resistance. Empirical methods
for decreasing thermal conductivity aim to impede the forward movement of
vibrational waves. However, these approaches require complex preparation methods
and are often limited in efficiency. The PI and his group will design materials
that have intrinsically low thermal conductivity because the heat-carrying waves
of atomic vibrations scatter off of each other. In select solids, this
scattering can become so strong that the flow of heat reaches the lowest
possible value associated with glasses and amorphous solids. The project will
advance computational techniques and quantum mechanical concepts for identifying
and deliberately creating thermally insulating solids with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
are several-fold, involving broad dissemination of research results, education
of graduate students in a rich multidisciplinary environment, and introduction
of undergraduate students to modern computational methods. Successful completion
of this research program will contribute to the development of new thermally
insulating materials as thermoelectrics and coatings with potential benefits in
energy conservation. The calculated thermal properties will be disseminated to
the scientific and technical community by partnering with existing online
databases of computed materials data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education to
advance predictive modeling of thermal transport properties of crystalline
insulators and semiconductors via the development of computational methods and
theoretical concepts for lowering lattice thermal conductivity. The PI and his
group are mainly interested in strongly anharmonic solids where intrinsic
phonon-phonon interactions limit thermal conductivity to values near the
amorphous limit; such materials are of interest in energy conservation and
waste-heat recovery as ceramic coatings and thermoelectrics. The PI's quantum-
mechanics-based design strategy involves the use of lone-pair electrons that
host anharmonic bonds, oxides, and oxosulfides of transition-metals that host
strong p-d electronic hybridization effects, high-symmetry solids with ions near
electronic Jahn-Teller instabilities, and compounds with frustrated structural
coordination. These approaches are based on fundamental principles for enhancing
intrinsic phonon scattering in crystalline materials via a mechanism that is
independent of processing, impurities, and grain structure. This will allow the
attainment of minimal lattice thermal conductivity in bulk oxides and
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable accurate computation of thermal
properties, the group will pursue the following theoretical developments: (1)
compressive-sensing-based methods for building lattice dynamical Hamiltonians
for compositionally disordered materials, (2) efficient path integral molecular
dynamics techniques for calculating low-temperature thermal transport properties
of strongly anharmonic solids, and (3) electronic structure techniques for
treating adiabatic lattice dynamics of solids with competing orbital ordering
states in partially filled d-and f-electron shells. These methods will form a
comprehensive suite of computational techniques for first-principles studies of
thermal transport in anharmonic solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
is expected to improve fundamental understanding of the thermal transport
properties of strongly anharmonic materials, advance the theory and software
tools for modeling thermal transport properties of solids, and provide a
theoretical basis for rational design of materials with low thermal
conductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
are several-fold, involving broad dissemination of research results, education
of graduate students in a rich multidisciplinary environment, and introduction
of undergraduate students to modern computational methods. Successful completion
of this research program will contribute to the development of new thermally
insulating materials as thermoelectrics and coatings with potential benefits in
energy conservation. The calculated thermal properties will be disseminated to
the scientific and technical community by partnering with existing online
databases of computed materials data.