* 1611349
* Multi-Scale Analysis and Control of Smart Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Marco Levorato, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 260,332.00

One of the principal aspects of the SmartGrid is the introduction of
intrinsically stochastic and distributed renewable energy production, which
decreases the ability of semi-centralized controllers to effectively control the
system. To compensate for this effect, distributed communication, monitoring,
and control systems are introduced. The microgrid is the logical unit of
operations and interaction of these components, as well as the interface to the
utility grid. The complexity and multifaceted nature of the system even at the
local scale makes the analysis, prediction and control of the microgrid's
dynamics a challenging task. The project will conjugate power system control,
design and simulation with advanced theoretical analysis and control to an
innovative framework. The envisioned methodology will enable a number of novel
applications in smart energy systems ranging from system adaptation to user
behavior, user classification, and feedback to the consumer. The project will
engage undergraduate and graduate students in the research effort, and will
create new curriculum opportunities for UCI?s students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
complexity of the problem addressed in the project originated from the large
number of interconnected heterogeneous sub-systems interact and contribute to
the overall system behavior. This interaction manifests at different topological
scales and abstraction levels. The sub-systems interact at the physical level,
where the electrical signals travel through the physical interconnections.
However, significant temporal and inter-component interdependencies exist at the
logical state level, that is, a set of variables describing the current state of
microgrid components and influential factors. Control of the logical level
typically takes the form of scheduling and management frameworks. Most prior
work considers either the physical or the logical domain, without providing a
clear methodology to bridge these two interdependent domains. The project will
use advanced Dynamic Programming, graph theory, and estimation theory to create
a bidirectional flow of information and control between the physical and logical
systems, where learning algorithms are designed to map physical and logical
signals to higher level logical states.