* 1611036
* Temperature at the nanoscale: thermal transport and abrupt interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* BC Regan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 503,033.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Modern electronic devices contain millions of
transistors generating waste heat. Removing this heat has become an increasing
challenge. This is particularly important as the trend for both more and smaller
transistors on a chip continues. The Principal Investigator has developed a new
thermometry technique that allows the temperature of these nanoscale devices to
be measured. Fahrenheit's original mercury-in-glass thermometer inferred
temperature from the density changes of mercury. This technique does essentially
the same thing at the nanoscale. It infers temperature changes from the density
of the materials on the chip. The research team will use this new technique to
study how heat flows in wires and at interfaces. The students involved in this
project will receive training in state-of-the-art nanofabrication and microcopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;In this project a
new thermometry technique will be applied to the study of heat transport at very
small length scales, which is both poorly understood and extremely relevant to
modern electronics. The technique, plasmon energy expansion thermometry (PEET),
involves measuring a material's density very accurately, and then inferring the
corresponding temperature using knowledge of the material's thermal expansion.
This approach is based on the same principle as Fahrenheit's original mercury-
in-glass thermometer, which also infers temperature from density changes. The
key advance is that here the density can be mapped with nanoscale spatial
resolution, which allows the technique to produce temperature maps with
unprecedented resolution. The density is determined by measuring the material's
bulk plasmon energy using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) in a scanning
transmission electron microscope (STEM). As part of their training, students
will fabricate simple microelectronic devices. Then, using the electron
microscope, they will map the temperatures that result from electrically
activating the devices. By imaging the thermal gradients that result from the
electrical currents, it will be possible to directly connect atomic-scale
structures and interfaces to the effect they have on heat generation and
transport.