* 1611732
* Transforming Undergraduate Statistics Education at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions through Experiential Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Tracy Morris, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,972.00

This project will fund a student statistical consulting group, called SCHOLAR
(Statistical Consulting Help for Organizational Leaders and Academic
Researchers). SCHOLAR will give students the opportunity to study statistics
while participating in service learning or experiential education projects. It
will be an academic year program, staffed by undergraduate students who will
work collaboratively on interdisciplinary projects submitted by researchers at
the University of Central Oklahoma (UCO) or organizations in the community. Up
to 20 students will be directly involved with SCHOLAR each year and hundreds
indirectly through high school recruiting visits and project dissemination. High
school seniors and undergraduate students will be recruited from a variety of
majors and will enter the program in their freshman or sophomore years. The
goals of SCHOLAR are (1) to increase the number of undergraduate students
majoring or minoring in statistics or mathematics, especially those from
underrepresented groups in STEM (e.g. Native Americans and women) and first-
generation low-income students; (2) to teach undergraduate students, through
faculty and peer mentoring, how to conduct and report research, and to prepare
students for careers or graduate study in STEM fields; (3) to contribute to the
growing body of research concerning the effects of experiential statistics
education on undergraduate students; and (4) to provide statistical consulting
services to other faculty at UCO and the community at large.

SCHOLAR will significantly change the current methods of statistics instruction
and research, especially with respect to the involvement of recent high school
graduates and college underclassmen in experiential statistics education. It
will also contribute to the renewed call for improvement in STEM education by
providing undergraduate students access to real research and real data. SCHOLAR
students will meet with clients as consultants, collect and analyze data, and
provide written and oral summaries of their work. They will also be required to
present each year at a local and/or national conference. Other SCHOLAR features
include student mentoring by peers, faculty, and researchers; teaching
opportunities through student-led seminars; and early exposure to a variety of
research being conducted both on- and off-campus. The effects of SCHOLAR
activities on students will be tracked and evaluated and the outcomes will be
reported through publications and presentations at professional meetings.
SCHOLAR will be a model program for the use of experiential education to teach
statistics, especially at primarily undergraduate institutions. Future plans are
to expand the SCHOLAR model to other institutions, and to branch out to
incorporate other disciplines including mathematical biology, operations
research, and high-performance computing.