* 1611060
* High density capacitors: bridging the performance gap between conventional capacitors and electric double layer capacitors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Zhaoyang Fan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 355,573.00

The low capacitance density of electrolytic capacitors is becoming a limiting
factor on circuit board profile and circuit performance. The capacitance density
of the current generation of electric double layer supercapacitors is several
orders of magnitude higher, but they are limited to a charge-discharge rate of
about 1 second, or a characteristic frequency of 1 hertz, and thus not suitable
for those circuit applications requiring capacitors that must run in the
hundreds of hertz to kilohertz range. In other words, there exists a significant
performance gap, in terms of capacitance/frequency, between currently available
supercapacitor and traditional circuit capacitor technologies. The proposed
research addresses this performance gap through studies aimed at developing
ultrafast supercapacitors with novel nanostructured electrodes and a high
capacitance density that run in the hundreds of hertz to kilohertz range and are
suitable for circuit applications. This research, if successful, will bring
about disruptive change in capacitor design and ground-breaking applications in
crucial circuit functions like decoupling, timing, filtering, and power supply
and conditioning. The proposed nanostructured electrodes can additionally be
utilized in battery and electrocatalyst applications. Education and outreach
activities are integrated in this project for the training of undergraduate and
graduate students. In addition to supported Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program students, several undergraduate students will be involved
in the project through their Project Lab course work, to inspire their interest
in advanced studies. Attention will be paid to recruiting female and minority
students, particularly first-generation college students, to secure diversity
and broad participation. An outreach component on nanomaterials for energy
technologies will be developed to educate students who will serve as ambassadors
in subsequent outreach efforts coordinated by the T-STEM Center of Texas Tech
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will characterize and
demonstrate high-density capacitors running in the hundreds of hertz to
kilohertz frequency range. This represents a disruptive advance in capacitor
technology for compact and efficient ultrafast electric double layer capacitors
as discrete components, for line-frequency alternating current filtering, and
on-chip integrated high-density micro-capacitor needs. The proposed electrode is
based on perpendicularly edge-oriented multilayer graphene grown on a cellulose
nanofiber scaffold. This novel material has a shallow, straight forward, wide-
open pore structure that ensures high frequency response while its large
specific surface area and especially high density of fully exposed graphene
edges offer the possibility of large capacitance. Edge-oriented multilayer
graphene growth and cellulose fiber carbonization into carbon nanofiber are
implemented in a process that requires only a few minutes' time. The ultrafast
electric double layer capacitors based on this new material could allow at least
two orders of volume reduction compared to low-voltage aluminum electrolytic
capacitors for filtering. The resulting freestanding electrodes can also be
transferred to a substrate or an integrated circuit chip for in-package or on-
chip capacitor integration. This project comprises comprehensive nanomaterial
and charge storage studies, device modeling, fabrication and performance
testing. If successful, it will ultimately bridge the frequency/capacitance gap
between existing circuit capacitors and supercapacitors. The outcomes of this
study will in addition enhance understanding in the areas of related materials
and devices.