* 1611881
* RAPID: Characterizing El Nino Runoff And Sedimentation In Small Drainage Basins: A Geoarchaeological Study
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Jeffrey Quilter, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,333.00

It is now well known by the general public that El Niños have dramatic impacts
world wide yet, in many ways there is still much to learn about these events and
their effects. This project will help us to better understand past El Niños so
that one can better prepare for them in the future. El Niños occur when warm
waters from the South Pacific travel eastwards and override the cold waters of
the Humboldt Current that flows from south to north along the coast of Peru.
This produces rains on the normally arid Peruvian coast and droughts in the
highlands but also affects the weather in Mexico, the Caribbean, the United
States, and even Western Europe. El Niño-induced weather is radically different
from normal variations in these areas and usually results in severe impacts to
economies and human lives. Knowing when El Niños occurred in the past, their
intensities, and frequencies thus are important to help us understand El Niños
in general and to learn how to avoid or mitigate their impacts.

Dr. Jeffrey Quilter of Harvard University will direct a small research team to
focus on a specific aspect of El Niños on the coast of Peru that will produce
important data and information. In the 15th century, ancient Peruvians built
earthen aqueducts in their extensive canal systems. These aqueducts cut across
the mouths of side canyons in larger valleys, thus creating dams for any water
flowing through them during El Niño events. Over time, sediments from El Niño
events were built up behind these aqueduct-dams. While el Nino related sediments
can be identified in relevant deposits it is not possible to determine rates
associated with individual el Nino events. This award will permit measuring
devices to be installed in areas behind multiple dams to determine sediment
buildup resulting from heavy rainfall predicted to occur during the upcoming el
Nino season. These deposits can then be analyzed to better understand earlier
strata and the El Niños that deposited them. This work will be done in
cooperation with Peruvian authorities who will monitor the events via drone
technology as they happen.