* 1611457
* Thermal Conductivity and Grain Boundary Energy of Interfaces in Multiphase Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Martha Mecartney, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 490,973.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The properties of many components can be improved by
making composites containing more than one type of material. For example,
stronger ceramics can be made by using a mixture of three different types of
ceramics rather than just one. For technical applications where the transport of
heat through a material is important, boundaries (interfaces), where the
different types of ceramics touch, may block the flow of heat. This research
studies how the interfaces between different types of ceramics change the flow
of heat. The goal of this project is to help design better thermal insulation
and better cooling systems, for improved energy efficiency and reduced cost.
Graduate students and undergraduates will participate in this research, and high
school students from low-income underrepresented backgrounds will spend each
summer in the lab with engineering students and faculty as part of the pipeline
program "Breakthrough to Engineering".&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The goal of this project is to understand how interfaces between dissimilar
ceramics affect the thermal conductivity of multiphase oxide materials. While
the addition of discrete second and third phases can improve mechanical
strength, enhance thermal conductivity, and increase thermal shock resistance in
ceramics, recent reports suggest that the intrinsic thermal resistance (Kapitza
resistance) of grain boundaries due to phonon scattering may limit thermal
conductivity at small grain sizes. This research studies the grain size range
below which the thermal conductivity is significantly decreased for multiphase
oxide ceramics compared to single phase oxides, and evaluates the energy of
interfaces and characterizes the chemical/structural disorder between phases to
determine correlation with Kapitza resistances using polycrystalline materials
and bicrystals. This research provides new insights into thermal transport in
multiphase oxides based on the influence of the structure, chemistry, and
relative energy of grain boundaries and interfaces. Computational modeling that
includes grain boundary specific properties is used to better predict the
thermal conductivity of multiphase oxide materials. The results of this research
offer improved design strategies for applications of ceramics where thermal
conductivity is paramount. Students are also trained on new thermal
characterization methods such as the 3-omega technique, and new atomic
resolution advanced transmission electron microscopy techniques.