* 1611801
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Joelle Labastide, Labastide               Joelle         A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Joelle A. Labastide

Proposal Number: 000705861

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Joelle A. Labastide is "Super-
resolution Tracking of Position and Orientation During Cargo-Motor Transport."
The host institution for this fellowship is the University of Massachusetts-
Amherst, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jennifer Ross.

This research involves the development and implementation of a novel technique
that will greatly improve understanding of how cells transport molecules such as
proteins. Cells, the building blocks of all living organisms, are complex,
dynamic microsystems that perform tasks necessary for life. The essential
activities of cells require robust mechanisms for transporting vital elements -
called cargoes - into, out of, and within the cell. From previous research,
intracellular transport consists of the cell's internal network, the
cytoskeleton, which is made up of microtubule and actin filaments that act as
tracks, and motor proteins that move along the tracks, carrying cargoes. Some of
the most important of these active transport processes are cell division and
nervous system function. Without intracellular transport, the most vital of
life-sustaining processes cannot occur. Due to the experimental limitations of
traditional microscopy, remarkably little is known about the mechanism by which
motor proteins navigate the types of complex and dense microtubule networks that
are found in cells. The Fellow is designing and implementing a new microscopic
technique capable of extracting highly resolved space, time, and orientation
information for cargo-carrying kinesin-1 motor proteins as they navigate
increasingly complex microtubule networks. The Fellow is using Polarization-
Enhanced Super Resolution Imaging to construct a complete mechanistic picture of
motor transport within cells. This represents a broadly applicable new imaging
technique that promises many cross-disciplinary applications.

The Fellow is receiving interdisciplinary training that draws upon concepts in
materials science, engineering, physics, and chemistry to develop new tools for
improved studies of complicated biological systems, thereby broadening the
experimental and technological resources available to all of these fields. Such
interdisciplinary research is needed as the scientific community tackles the
increasing complexity of biological issues of societal importance. The Fellow's
training is providing her with a deep understanding of the relationship between
physical and biological scientific disciplines, allowing her to become an
effective leader and mentor to future generations of interdisciplinary
scientists. To increase the participation of under-represented groups in
biology, the Fellow is creating environments in the research laboratory and in
the classroom that foster intellectual and cultural diversity, and emphasize the
value of this diversity to the broader scientific community. The Fellow is
developing a magazine that is authored, produced, and published by students and
is focused on the intersection between science and cultural identity. This
provides a unique opportunity for a diverse group of undergraduates, graduates,
postdocs and faculty members to identify the ways in which their personal
experiences and identities can serve as assets, not drawbacks, in scientific
endeavors, and learn to communicate these findings to the broader university
community. The personal growth opportunities provided to faculty educators and
administrators through this format will be beneficial for all involved, and will
increase understanding between previously disparate groups.