* 1611019
* RET Site: Collaborative Multidisciplinary Engineering Design Experiences for Teachers (CoMET)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Hyoung Jin Cho, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 595,702.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, entitled, Collaborative Multidisciplinary Engineering Design Experiences
for Teachers (CoMET), hosted by the University of Central Florida (UCF), will
provide K-12 STEM teachers with a hands-on engineering design experience
covering all aspects of the Internet of Things (IoT), from the manufacturing of
a sensor, to the hardware and software that allows it to connect to the
internet. The traditional view of the internet is a collection of interconnected
computers, tablets, and smartphones by which users can access information
through browsers and other programs. However, the recent emergence of IoT
radically changes this concept. Now the connected devices are not just computers
but also home appliances, wearable health monitors and a very large number of
small sensors that can talk to each other. This innovation is rapidly changing
the landscape of our daily life. The teacher participants will gain a new
insight into this cutting-edge engineering research through the application of
scientific knowledge and hands-on experiments, and develop their teaching
modules, which will enrich their classroom teaching. The trained teachers will
be able to peak students' interest in the practical use of science in modern
technologies that are truly relevant to their daily use of networked devices.
This cascading educational impact will become the catalyst for seeding
scientific interest in young minds through K-12 science classes and raising
future scientists and engineers who can advance the IoT digital revolution
further. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, thirty K-12 STEM
teachers, serving underrepresented populations in the Seminole, Orange and
Brevard county public school districts, in which there are over 20,000 teachers
and 310,000 students, will be recruited and participate in an eight week summer
research program and a one week Train-the-Trainer workshop in the following
summer. This program will create competent teacher trainers who will ensure
quality pre-service and in-service teacher education, by providing
multidisciplinary experiences that are relevant to the current technical
development in IoT devices and systems. The Train-the-Trainer model will be
implemented by which teachers will become effective mentors and facilitate
knowledge acquisition and application in K-12 educational settings for other
teachers. To bolster the Train-the-Trainer model the "Universal Design for
Learning", a framework for the design and implementation of instructional
materials will be utilized, meeting the needs of individuals by proactively
circumventing curriculum barriers. The participants will rotate to four
different laboratories, where they will learn about the practice of engineering
in various disciplines under the guidance of faculty mentors. Teachers will
develop teaching modules to deploy in the classroom in the form of lecture
notes, demonstration kits and prototypes. This RET program will give teachers
learning opportunities to explore the practical use of science for engineering
applications, and provide a context in which students in their classroom can
test their own scientific knowledge as they recognize the interplay among
science, engineering and technology. The program findings will be presented at
regional, national, and international conferences, and published in educational
journals.