* 1611033
* Porphyrin monolayers as platforms for the supramolecular organization of fullerenes at interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Hopkins, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project 'Porphyrin Monolayers as Platforms for the
Supramolecular Organization of Fullerenes at Interfaces' by Professor Michael D.
Hopkins, a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Chicago. Fullerenes are molecules comprised of a specific number of carbon atoms
(i.e., 60, 70, 84, etc.) that are widely studied for their potential
technological applications, such as in electronics and solar energy conversion.
The goal of this project is to develop a general method for creating specific
patterns of fullerenes on flat surfaces, which will allow their technologically
relevant properties to be controlled and provide a means to connect these
nanometer-scale materials to conventional- scale electronics. The project
provides interdisciplinary training for graduate students at the intersection of
chemical synthesis, surface science, and materials science. Undergraduate
students are also routinely involved in research projects in the PI's
laboratory. Professor Hopkins is involved in organizing an outreach
clearinghouse for doctoral students in the physical sciences at the university
that will connect them with STEM-focused broader-impacts activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An impediment to the development of technological
applications of fullerenes is the lack of general methods for spatially
organizing them into arrays with controllable patterns and dimensions at an
addressable interface. This project investigates whether 5-coordinate gallium-
porphyrin monolayers on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite will template the
self- assembly of fullerenes into organized arrays at the interface. Porphyrins
containing axial ligands that coordinate fullerenes via noncovalent interactions
(e.g., polycyclic aromatics) are synthesized, and their surface chemistry in the
absence and presence of fullerenes (especially C60) are investigated via
scanning-probe microscopy. These studies aim to elucidate the fundamental
relationships between fullerene patterning and: 1) the electronic and structural
characteristics of the axial ligands; 2) the lattice dimensions and steric
properties of the underlying porphyrin monolayers; and 3) the presence of
capping porphyrins that could encapsulate the particles. These relationships
will allow elucidation of design principles for this class of materials. The PI
also leads the continued development of an internal portal that has proven
successful in connecting physical-sciences graduate students with K-12
educational outreach opportunities in surrounding neighborhoods.