* 1611824
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Karen O'Connell, O'Connell               Karen          E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Karen O?Connell

Proposal number 1611824

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Karen O'Connell is
'Understanding mating and reproduction of salt-tolerant algae in collections to
optimize biofuel production.' The host institution for this fellowship is North
Carolina State University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Amy Grunden.

The goal of this research is to understand the mating system of Dunaliella, a
type of marine algae that is a potential source of biofuels. Using unicellular
microalgae to produce biofuels can be efficient relative to producing oils from
plants such as corn, because algae grow quickly. So far, most research on fuel
production by algae has focused on freshwater species that are prone to
contamination by bacteria and are grown in expensive enclosed facilities.
Dunaliella has evolved in high-salt environments (e.g., the Dead Sea and the
Great Salt Lake) where many bacteria and fungi do not successfully grow. The
Fellow is using modern sequencing technologies to 'fingerprint' Dunaliella
isolates from several biological collections. Dunaliella from these collections
have been shown to mate to reproduce, but their mating types have not been
defined. The Fellow is establishing lab protocols that promote reproduction in
Dunaliella to enable breeding, which can be used to optimize biofuel production,
in much the same way as plant breeding has led to more productive crops. The
Fellow's research leverages the natural genetic variation found in Dunaliella in
biological collections.

The Fellow is learning new skills such as culturing techniques and genome
sequencing. She is also implementing a new outreach program involving Dunaliella
for students in a Microbiology class at Wake Technical Community College. These
students are not typically exposed to long-term research projects as a
supplement to their coursework. The Fellow's research provides a valuable
resource to the research community by providing a standardized genetic signature
or 'fingerprint' for isolates in collections and by potentially unlocking a
valuable source of biofuels that is currently residing biological living stocks.