* 1611519
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Impacts of the Flipped Classroom Environment on Student Learning and Motivation in Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jack Barbera, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,055.00

In recent years, the instructional model referred to as "flipped" has become
very popular, with a steady rise in faculty adopting the model to teach college
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses. This project
defines flipped instruction as involving video lectures viewed by students
outside of class time as the main mode of content delivery, and the
implementation of facilitated problem solving and other active group activities
during class time. Such flipped learning environments have been shown to improve
students' performance in some studies. However, the evidence base related to
this teaching model is currently quite limited. Therefore, this project seeks to
better understand the connections between flipped learning environments, student
learning outcomes and various aspects of students' academic motivation in the
context of general chemistry courses at different types of colleges and
universities. Since flipped learning relies on students' self-directed
behaviors, in particular acquiring content knowledge outside of class in
preparation for participation in active group learning environments,
investigating how personal and course-related factors may support student
motivation is paramount to understanding the potential of flipped classroom
environments for enhanced undergraduate STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) collaborative project,
led by a chemistry education researcher and an educational psychologist, will
apply the expectancy-value model of achievement motivation to examine the
complex dynamic between flipped learning environments and student motivation
within general chemistry classrooms at multiple institutions of higher learning.
In addition to measuring the changes in student expectancies and task-related
values over a term of exposure to flipped chemistry learning, these
investigations will account for variables such as a students' incoming self-
regulation and their perception of autonomy in the learning environments. Since
the flipped learning model allows instructors flexibility in structuring their
courses, phase one will investigate a variety of flipped general chemistry
courses at a range of institutions, with the goal of identifying common features
of flipped chemistry courses and how these affect students' motivation and
learning. Data sources will include classroom observations and artifacts,
teacher and student interviews, pre- and post-motivation surveys, and
assessments of students' learning of chemistry. The results of phase one
regarding the combination of elements shown to support student motivation and
learning will then be used to select a smaller set of institutions and
instructors to conduct within and across course comparisons of student learning
and motivation. During this phase, the project team will also investigate the
equity of impacts for students underrepresented in STEM and across different
institution types. Thus, the project is expected to significantly enhance the
evidence base with respect to the use of flipped classroom environments in
undergraduate STEM education and provide guidance regarding effective
implementation for the many STEM educators who use flipped instructional models
now and in the future.