* 1611170
* Unique Electrochemistry and Optical Properties of Metal Nanoparticle Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Francis Zamborini, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 12/31/2020
* USD 438,605.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Francis P. Zamborini of the
University of Louisville and his team study the oxidation of small gold
nanoparticles using a combination of chemical characterization techniques.
Nanoparticles are tiny particles that contain thousands of atoms. While they are
much larger than chemical molecules, which contain only a few atoms, they are
still much smaller than solid materials that are large enough to see with the
naked eye, containing trillions of atoms. Nanoscale materials are unique because
they have sizes intermediate between molecules and solids, but sometimes have
properties not easily predicted by averaging the two size extremes. The aim of
the research is to understand the unusual electrochemical reactivity of metal
nanoparticles smaller than 2 nm and of alloy nanostructure composition,
arrangement, and reactivity. The aim is to develop new analytical tools for
metal nanostructures, and also uncover unique properties, reactivity, and
applications. The project impacts the education of students at all levels
through research training and wider incorporation of nanotechnology into the
undergraduate curriculum. A yearly one-day symposium highlights research by
women of all ages from middle school up to academic and industrial
professionals. The goal of this symposium is to inspire more young female
students to pursue a long term career in science. These activities impact the
education and economy in Kentucky and beyond through broad dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to correlate the specific size with the
oxidation potential for nanospheres below 2 nm, which show unusual
electrochemical reactivity that change dramatically as a function of size. The
project also addresses the atomic arrangement of metals in two-component alloy
nanospheres by determining electrochemical oxidation behavior. This method
allows the sensitive detection of transformations that occur during heating or
catalytic reactions. Another focus of the project is the size-selective
electrochemical deposition of negatively-charged gold nanospheres onto
electrodes. This process has potential for the design of highly active supported
electrocatalysts. The research team also uses gold nanoplate-nanosphere dimer
structures as a platform for sensitive molecular detection by surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS). Images of the structures are directly correlated to
the SERS signal. A unique trimer structure is used to study catalytic reactions
on non-SERS active metals. The well-controlled nanoplate-nanosphere dimer and
trimer assemblies aid in better understanding and controlling SERS detection for
the study of reactions at the single molecule level.