* 1611570
* Magnetic Skyrmion for Nonvolatile Low-Power Spin-Orbitronics Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

This proposal aims to resolve the challenging issues related to the scaling of
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS): power dissipation and
variability. To achieve this goal, the proposed research explores the
possibilities to build magnetic memory devices based on magnetic skyrmions for
room-temperature applications featuring in nonvolatile, high density and low-
power consumption. A magnetic skyrmion is a particle-like, topologically
protected magnetic domain. As a nonvolatile information carrier, each individual
skyrmion in a memory device can enable high-density, low-power operations due to
the small size, the low driving current density and the extra topological
protection. The proposed research will establish a framework for magnetic memory
devices using topologically protected spin texture as the information carrier.
The impact will be transformative and thus enables the construction of novel
magnetic memory. The high-density memory will help accelerate the progress of
the big data and internet-of-things era. Meanwhile, when integrated with the
CMOS semiconductor technology, it potentially resolves the energy dissipation
challenge and thus further advances the technology node. Additionally, this
interdisciplinary research also has a vast educational impact, as the new
knowledge from the spin orbit coupling engineering will have emerging
educational meaning for new students. Students with education level from high
school to undergraduate/graduate students, and postdocs (including women and
minorities) will be exposed and trained in this inter- and multi-disciplinary
and emerging fields of physical science and engineering as well as computer
science through PI's participation of the high school and freshman outreach
programs at UCLA. The training of students in these emerging disciplines will
provide diverse human capital, versed in scientific method and experienced in
the applications. The educational impact is further amplified by current
outreach programs through the California NanoSystems and the NSF-ERC on
Translational Applications of Nanoscale Multiferroic Systems.

Although skyrmions can intrinsically exist in a group of so-called helimagnetic
materials (B-20) compounds, skyrmions in magnetic multilayers or interfaces will
be more compatible with existing magnetic recording/memory technologies. Thus,
the proposed project focuses on the study of skyrmion creation, manipulation and
detection in ferromagnetic layer/heavy-material (FM/HM) thin-film systems. This
system provides the possibility to furthest adjust and tune the skyrmion
properties for application purposes. The creation and annihilation of single,
individual skyrmions will be experimentally realized and theoretically analyzed
dynamically and statically. The manipulation of skyrmions can be controlled by
currents via spin-orbit torque coming from the relativistic spin-orbit coupling
(SOC). Each individual skyrmion can be detected using magnetoresistance effect
via magnetic tunnel junctions. Single spin textures of single Skyrmions will be
modeled via micromagnetic simulation. Knowledge and experience learnt from this
study will enable electrically encoding and decoding of information; the use of
commonly accessible thin film material systems with low-temperature process in
this research automatically ensures devices to be fully compatible with current
CMOS or magnetic recording technology. The proposed research is transformative
since it invokes many unique innovations from (1) interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in FM/HM heterostructures to create skyrmion with
controllable sizes; (2) effectively manipulation of skyrmion motion by the
current-induced spin-orbit torque at the FM/HM interface; (3) the use of high-
quality MTJ for information encoding and detection; (4) nanostructure
engineering and voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA).