* 1611356
* Exploring local confinement of ultrafast light to enable nondestructive acoustic metrology at the nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Oluwaseyi Balogun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2020
* USD 329,453.00

This project will explore light focusing schemes to confine light at the
nanoscale and develop a novel instrumentation that will enable detection of
nanoscale structural defects in modern electronic devices. The proposed approach
is nondestructive and noninvasive and relies on a combination of optical and
elastic wave propagation. Acoustic imaging methods are well established methods
for visualizing interior regions of a solid material using elastic waves.
Acoustic imaging is commonly used for failure analysis and assessment of process
conditions in semiconductor manufacturing. Unfortunately, the spatial resolution
of acoustic imaging methods is limited to the micrometer scale due to
diffraction, which is a major short coming that this project seeks to address.
In order to overcome the limited resolution, photonic metamaterials will be
explored to create an array of bright nanoscale optical probes that will be used
to detect high frequency (0.3 -1 THz) elastic waves. Waves in this frequency
range have wavelengths of a few tens of nanometers, and are extremely sensitive
to the presence of nanoscale defects like voids, cracks, and inclusions. The
proposed scheme will provide access to extreme spatial resolution (&lt; 20 nm)
and temporal resolution (~ 1 picosecond) for probing elastic wave propagation,
and will provide parallel detection capabilities to facilitate rapid imaging of
micro- and nano-electronic structures. Furthermore, the optical detection
approach can be applied broadly beyond semiconductor imaging. These applications
include molecular imaging and biochemical sensing for medical therapy and drug
development. The project will create opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to participate in multidisciplinary research in the areas of
nanomechanics and near-field optics. The research outputs of the project will be
used to design an inquiry based nanotechnology applet on nanomechanics for use
in a high-school physics classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address technical barriers in conventional acoustic imaging methods for sensing
and nanometrology of semiconductor electronic devices through the development of
novel instrumentation that integrates plasmonic metasurfaces with picosecond
laser-based ultrasonics. The ultrasonic approach relies on the use of a
femtosecond pump laser source for generation of ultrashort (bandwidth of up to 1
THz) elastic wave pulses. The elastic pulses will be monitored with picoseconds
time-resolution using the pump-and-probe time-domain spectroscopy approach. The
metasurface which is comprised of a two dimensional array of plasmonic
nanoantenna dimers will enable efficient confinement of a femtosecond probe
laser on a subwavelength scale, by exploiting electromagnetic wave resonances
within the nanometer sized dimer gaps. Each dimer will serve as a nanoscale
optical probe for detection of elastic waves on the sample surface. Towards this
end, three specific research tasks will be addressed: (1) investigation of the
influence of transient mechanical deformations (elastic waves and vibrations) at
picoseconds timescales on the nano-confinement and enhancement in the plasmonic
nanoantennas, (2) design and implementation of locally addressable arrays of
nanoantennas to enable parallel detection of elastic waves on nanoscale areas
without probe-scanning, and (3) investigation and implementation of ultrafast
laser generation and detection of elastic waves in model electronic devices with
high aspect ratio nanostructures for detection of buried nanoscale defects.
Furthermore, an inverse model based on the time-reversal technique will be
developed for defect identification, localization, and sizing. These tasks will
advance existing understanding of the local interaction of ultrafast light and
ultrahigh frequency (THz) elastic waves in semiconductor devices. Ultimately,
these undertakings will facilitate the development of a nanometrology and
imaging approach that permits noninvasive measurements in semiconductor devices
that cannot be achieved using current technologies.