* 1611560
* OP: Application-Aware Reconfigurable Silicon-Photonic Interconnected Computing Systems for Energy-Efficient and Scalable Data Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* S.J.Ben Yoo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 340,000.00

This project addresses energy efficiency and scalability of datacenters and
computing systems, which form the core of our cyber-infrastructures. As our
everyday lives are critically dependent on these large-scale computing systems,
and the amount of data that need to be processed is increasing exponentially,
the project impact is two-fold: (a) scalability improvement far beyond what
possible today due to the limited power efficiency of current systems relying on
electrical interconnects and switching, and (b) significant reduction of the
overall power consumption of these large-scale systems with benefits for the
energy and environment sectors around the world. In addition, by adopting
innovative silicon photonic interconnect technologies, the project promotes a
new technology sector that can drive transformative changes in the way we access
and process data. Integration of research and education will be carried out
throughout this project, which offers a rich platform for cross-disciplinary
interaction of optoelectronics, networking, and computer science. The proposed
project will allow students and researchers to gain comprehensive insight into
future data center networking technologies from diverse perspectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will pursue scalable, high-throughput
and energy-efficient computing systems by incorporating high-radix silicon
photonic switches in Multi-Socket Blades (MSBs) which are optically
interconnected through an application-aware reconfigurable network.
Specifically, the project will pursue the following key research tasks: (1)
design/fabrication/testing of athermal silicon photonic switches for high-radix,
all-to-all interconnects; (2) design/fabrication/testing of optical multi-socket
boards with Electro-Optic Printed Circuit Boards (EO-PCBs); (3) development of a
simulation framework to evaluate energy efficiency, performance and scalability
of the proposed application-aware optically-reconfigurable data center
architecture under realistic traffic; (4) system-wide benchmarking studies for
topology reconfiguration and resource allocation; (5) proof-of-concept physical
layer demonstration of intra and inter MSB communication through the fabricated
silicon photonic switches and EO-PCBs.