* 1611320
* Fundamental Studies of Near-field Enhancement in Thermionic Energy Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Keunhan Park, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2020
* USD 315,998.00

In 2014, the Unites States consumed more than 97 quadrillion BTU (British
thermal units) of energy. This is equivalent to the amount of energy in 3.5
billion tons of coal or 776 billion gallons (US) of gasoline. However, almost
59% of such energy consumption is being lost as waste heat. It is imperative to
find an innovative way of recycling energy from a waste heat source as an
emission-free and less-costly energy resource. The objective of the proposed
research is to explore the near-field enhancement of thermionic emission for
renewable energy recycling. Conventional thermionic energy conversion (TEC)
generally requires a high cathode temperature over 1500K to thermally excite
enough electrons from the cathode overcoming its binding potential, or work
function, for power generation. Low efficiency is another challenging issue in
TEC power generation. The research team will address this challenge by
implementing a low bandgap semiconducting material as a cathode and placing it
in a subwavelength distance away from a thermal emitter. The near-field
enhancement of thermionic emission can reduce the required thermal emitter
temperature by enhancing thermionic current generation with photoexcitation of
electrons in the cathode. In addition, the energy conversion efficiency will be
substantially improved because the most radiation absorbed in the cathode will
benefit thermionic emission, i.e., photoexcitation from the photon energy
slightly above the cathode bandgap and thermalization from the excess photon
energy and sub-bandgap photon energy. The success of this project will induce a
paradigm shift in thermionic energy conversion, and will spark the development
of novel energy recycling technologies based on thermionic emission. The project
will promote training and learning by involving students in micro/
nanofabrication, thermal and infrared characterization of nanodevices, nanoscale
heat-transfer measurements, and nanoscale instrumentations. In addition, a new
course focuses on Nanoscale Metrology and Experimentation will be developed and
offered to students in an effort to broaden nanotechnology education. The
research team will also pursue outreach to K-12 students to promote scientific
learning in younger generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-field enhanced
thermionic energy conversion will be examined by (1) experimentally validating
the enhancement of near-field thermal radiation between plane structures within
sub-micron gap distances; (2) establishing a theoretical framework for the near-
field enhanced thermionic energy conversion; and (3) experimentally
investigating the enhancement of thermionic emission in the near field. The
researchers will thoroughly test the hypothesis that photoexcited electrons due
to the absorbed near-field thermal radiation can significantly enhance
thermionic current generation. They will also investigate the material
properties critical for thermionic power generation, including the gap-
dependence of space charge buildup, the reduction of the work function, and the
high-temperature stability of low-bandgap semiconducting materials. This
research will provide, for the first time, quantitative measurements of near-
field thermal radiation between two macro plates within sub-100 nm gap
distances. The experimental design will enable the precision plane-plane gap
control with a nanometer resolution and near-field thermal radiation measurement
at high temperature over 1000K. In addition, this project is the first attempt
to combine near-field thermophotovoltaic and thermionic effects into a single
energy conversion process. The research team will provide theoretical and
experimental background for the feasibility of enhancing photo-thermionic
emission with near-field thermal radiation. With the local probing of photo-
thermionic electron tunneling, it will be possible to better understand the
photothermoelectric behaviors of low-bandgap semiconductor materials at high
temperatures, which have not been well understood to date. The accomplishments
of this project will constitute a fundamental stepping-stone for the realization
of a novel, thermionic-based energy recycling technology.