* 1611149
* Investigating the Competition Between Exciton Delocalization and Radiative Recombination in 1D Semiconductor Quantum Wires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Richard Loomis, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 416,798.00

Nontechnical Description: One-dimensional semiconductor wires with lengths
longer than micrometers can efficiently absorb light that in turn generates
mobile charge carriers within the semiconductor. When the diameters of these
materials become small, on the order of nanometers to tens of nanometers, both
the colors of the light that are preferentially absorbed and the energies of the
charge carriers within the semiconductor material can be manipulated. These one-
dimensional materials are called semiconductor nanowires, and they represent the
smallest structures that can efficiently generate and transport charges along
specific directions. The main goal of this interdisciplinary research project is
to characterize the efficiency of semiconductor nanowires in terms of charge-
carrier generation and transport. An emphasis is placed on optimizing the
chemical and physical properties of semiconductor nanowires so their viability
in application designs can be evaluated. The research uses both traditional
optical spectroscopy and advanced laser techniques to probe the energies of the
charge carriers within the nanowires and to characterize the fate of these
charge carriers as a function of time and position along single nanowire.
Particular attention is given to measuring how well the charge carriers are
transported along the length of the nanowires. Another focus of this project is
on training the next generation of scientists, especially those from
underrepresented backgrounds with diverse expertise in materials science,
chemistry, and physics.

Technical Description: This research is focused on optimizing the properties of
semiconductor quantum wires synthesized by using the solution-liquid-solid
strategy with a particular focus on cadmium telluride and cadmium selenide
quantum wires. The research team is performing absorbance and photoluminescence
spectroscopy experiments to characterize the energies of charge carriers photo-
generated within them as well as the photoluminescence quantum yields of the
these nanostructures. The dynamics of the electrons, holes, and excitons within
the quantum wires are characterized by performing photoluminescence lifetime and
transient absorption spectroscopy experiments. Specific goals include: 1)
characterization of the exciton lifetime dependences on photoluminescence
quantum yield, surface passivation and structural quality of the quantum wires;
2) measurement of exciton diffusion length along single quantum wires and its
dependence on photoluminescence quantum yield, surface passivation and quantum
wire structural quality; and 3) investigation of the apparent competition
between efficient exciton diffusion and the probability for radiative
recombination within the quantum wires.