* 1611088
* 3D C-NEMS Based Aptasensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Chunlei Wang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2021
* USD 282,945.00

Title: 3D C-NEMS Based Aptasensors

Brief description of project Goals: Design, fabricate, evaluate and optimize
three dimensional on-chip electrochemical aptasensors based on Carbon-
NanoElectroMechanical Systems (C-NEMS).

Nontechnical Abstract: The increased amount of proteins such as platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) can be observed in the early tumorigenesis as well
as cancer progression. The PI will focus on developing on-chip capacitive
aptasensors employing aptamers as recognition element using unique three
dimensional graphene based micropillar arrays, which could deliver high
sensitivity, good stability and low detection limits. The miniaturized
reconfigurable electrode design is geared to take advantage from the scalable
relationship between the interfacial area and overall volume. This project will
contribute to the research, education, and diversity goals and strongly support
FIUBeyondPossible2020 strategic plan. It will broaden the participation of
minority students and women in science and engineering, and foster
interdisciplinary interactions. Beyond the impact on the microfabrication
research community, this project will have broader impact on cancer diagnosis.
The knowledge generated and the key issues identified in this project will
impact a broad area of sensor fabrication and development.

Technical Abstract: The increased amount of proteins such as platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) can be observed in the early tumorigenesis as well as
cancer progression. In this project, the PI will focus on developing on-chip
aptasensors employing aptamers as recognition element based on unique 3D C-MEMS
(Carbon-MicroElectroMechanical Systems) and C-NEMS (Carbon-NanoElectroMechanical
Systems) platforms. The goal of this project is to design, fabricate, evaluate
and optimize the 3D C-NEMS based on-chip electrochemical aptasensors that
deliver superior performance (i.e., high sensitivity, good stability, low
detection limits).The PI plans to (1) fabricate 3D high-aspect-ratio
microelectrode arrays with interdigital fingers by C-MEMS technique; (2) deposit
carbon based nanomaterials onto the C-MEMS using electrostatic spray deposition
and electrophoretic deposition; (3) functionalize the whole-carbon platform with
active chemical groups for efficient and stable immobilization of aptamers; (4)
develop and evaluate an electrochemical label-free aptasensor for PDGF protein
detection based on characterizing electrochemical impedance and capacitive
behaviors. 3D C-NEMS platform will have great advantages and is one of the best
solutions to achieve high-sensitivity biosensors. Employing unique C-NEMS
technique aptasensors can be fabricated repeatedly with desired dimensions,
structures, and material properties. The miniaturized electrode design is geared
to take advantage from the scalable relationship between the interfacial area
and overall volume. This project will contribute to the research, education, and
diversity goals and strongly support FIUBeyondPossible2020 strategic plan. It
will broaden the participation of minority students and women in science and
engineering. The newly developed technique will be highlighted in the PI's
graduate/undergraduate courses. Beyond the impact on the MEMS and NEMS community
in academia, the proposed research will have broader impact on cancer diagnosis.
The knowledge generated and the key issues identified in this project will
impact a broad area of sensor fabrication and development. It is anticipated
that the successful implementation of this device in the clinical arena will
have significant impact on the early detection, morbidity, and mortality for the
large number of patients with cancers, as well as establishing an innovative
realm of biomedical technology.