* 1611072
* GOALI: Carbon dots and squarylium dyes for sensing, screening, and separations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Christa Colyer, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the National
Science Foundation's Chemistry Division, Professor Christa Colyer of Wake Forest
University is developing new strategies for enhanced drug screening. This
project uses the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
program to support an academic - industry partnership with Dr. Greg McIntire of
Ameritox, Ltd.. This research project also includes an international component,
that involves student travel opportunities to engage with Japanese
collaborators. Thus, this work is also supported by the Office of International
Science and Engineering. The work responds to the emergence of designer drugs
such as "bath salts" as well as to recent legislative changes at the state
level. Basic research is translated into analytical tools capable of addressing
these market-driven and socially-relevant issues facing the forensic testing,
law enforcement, and medication monitoring industries. Within this context,
advances in the areas of nanomaterials development, fluorescence sensing, and
high-resolution molecular separations, are being pursued. The research project
includes: (i) a genuine partnership between industry (Ameritox, Ltd.) and
academia (Wake Forest University), enabled by close proximity and successful
prior institutional interactions; (ii) exposure of students to industry
practices and standards as a path to career readiness to complement their
undergraduate and Ph.D. chemistry training; and (iii) enhanced international
collaborations (with Osaka Prefecture and Saitama Universities in Japan),
offering expertise in ligand development and fluorescent dye synthesis. These
activities accelerate the proposed research while providing opportunities for
the development of increased global and cultural competencies of the involved
students. The broader impacts of this research include an international study
and cultural sensitivity for global scientific collaboration, case study
development for a flipped analytical chemistry classroom, and laboratory
curriculum development in the area of instrument design and fabrication by
additive manufacturing for the provision of low-cost analytical tools to public
schools for enhanced education.

To provide enhanced drug screening through an academic - industrial partnership,
this research project employs the focusing effects characteristic of transient
isotachophoresis to provide enhanced sensitivity and resolution in free
solution, capillary-based electroseparations. Advances include on-column
labeling with novel, functionalized squarylium dye design, and improved analyte
discrimination based on multiple discriminant analysis. These components
facilitate selective determination of drug and drug metabolites (such as
synthetic cathinones and glucuronide metabolites) in complex sample matrices, as
required by confirmation testing in the medication monitoring industry.
Furthermore, the ability to rapidly discover functional ligands in the form of
DNA aptamers, capable of screening for drug targets, represents an alternative
to the ubiquitous use of enzyme immunoassay screening procedures. This research
employs carbon dots to both fluorescently tag and modify the mobility of unbound
DNA library members, thus enabling expedited DNA aptamer discovery for specific
targets.