* 1611860
* Improved STEM education for 21st century environmental scientists through stratified mentoring and professional networking
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Vanessa Lougheed, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2020
* USD 298,431.00

Providing students with meaningful hands-on experiences, especially place- and
culturally-based experiences and close mentoring, is key to producing a
professional workforce capable of effectively studying, interpreting, and
communicating the impacts of anthropogenic and natural change on the Earth's
systems. This project will establish and implement a stratified mentoring model
to enhance recruitment, retention, and training of Hispanic students in the
Environmental Sciences in the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), and to
better prepare 21st century environmental scientists for academic and technical
STEM workforces. This program will produce a significant number of well-trained
Hispanic environmental scientists, thus positively contributing to the national
pipeline of STEM workers, and helping to narrow the underrepresentation gap.
Equally important, this project will disseminate and explore the transferability
of this innovative strategy to other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of the proposed program will be to develop an interdisciplinary
stratified mentoring approach to environmental science studies. The structure of
the stratified mentoring team is innovative, where multiple faculty from UTEP,
and professionals from federal, state and local agencies, industry, private
sectors and academia will collectively and collaboratively mentor senior
undergraduates through interdisciplinary, hands-on research projects, and in
turn, these seniors will supervise sophomore undergraduate students. This goal
will be achieved by curriculum reform, where senior students will be exposed to
three consecutive semesters of research experience including summer internships.
These changes will allow for closer interactions among environmental science
majors, and between students, faculty, and their future employers. Taking
advantage of the region's "educational closed-loop", seniors will further
improve communication and collaboration skills through service-learning and
community outreach, thus aiding in the recruitment of new majors. A formal
evaluation will be used to quantify the impact of the proposed activities, and
assess the effectiveness of the stratified mentoring approach. This stratified
mentoring approach will serve as an instructional model for other institutions.