* 1611926
* Polar (NSF 15-114): Using Polar Science Data in the Undergraduate Classroom
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Cohen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 340,779.00

This award supports efforts to leverage the extensive National Science
Foundation investment in polar sciences, polar infrastructure, and science
education research and development to promote an informed citizenry and the next
generation of polar scientists. It responds to the objectives outlined in DCL
15-114.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Delaware (UD), will convert the
Spring offering of an existing large-enrollment, non-major environmental science
course into a course that is polar-focused, student-centered and employs a data-
intensive active-learning pedagogy. The Fall offering of this course will
continue to be a traditional lecture course. In the Spring course offering,
students will work directly with polar data in an introductory R-based
programing framework and use these data to evaluate media claims about polar
regions. Students will also experience the human dimension of polar research
through interactions with a range of polar scientists. Over the course of the
project, ~170 non-major students will be immersed in polar science through this
data-driven course. The impact of this project will extend well beyond the award
period through continued offerings at UD and through development of at least
twenty data visualizations and three Problem-Based-Learning (PBL) problems. The
course will be delivered three times over three years, with yearly revision
based on assessments of student learning, faculty performance, and workshops
with a cohort of UD polar scientists and active-learning researchers. They will
compare student learning using the active-learning pedagogy to student learning
via the traditional lecture course. Results will be disseminated to a broad
network of educators and researchers through a collaborative polar science
outreach network and through active-learning databases, e.g., PBL Clearinghouse,
Science Education Resource Center (SERC), and the National Center for Case Study
Teaching in Science.