* 1611276
* Collaborative Research: A New Optical Instrument to Provide Follow-Up Observations for Large Synoptic Survey Telescope Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Zoran Ninkov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,219,793.00

1. Astronomers are currently building the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST)
in northern Chile. It will provide a flood of astronomical data when it goes
into operation in 2019. This will greatly increase demand for spectroscopic
studies of many interesting targets. Spacecraft observations will contribute
tremendous numbers of additional targets. To meet these demands, the
Investigators will construct a novel spectrograph for the SOAR telescope in the
southern hemisphere. This instrument will use many tiny mirrors to steer light
from small patches of the sky into either the spectrograph or an imaging
channel. The Intellectual Merit of the project comes from its ability to provide
rapid follow-up observations of LSST discoveries. It will also enable studies in
very crowded regions of the sky, such as the central bulge of our own Milky Way
Galaxy. This project serves the national interest by advancing the quality and
type of science we can acquire about the Milky Way galaxy and other discoveries
made with the LSST. The Broader Impacts of the project include the involvement
of graduate students in all phases of the project. This will contribute strongly
to STEM education in the important area of instrument development. The
Investigators will also explain their research results to the public through
press releases and the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. When the LSST comes
into operation in 2019, there will be enormous pressure on 4-meter-class
telescopes to carry out immediate follow-up observations as well as long-term
monitoring of LSST discoveries. In addition, there will be a need for
spectroscopic observations in crowded fields such as globular clusters, the
Galactic Bulge, and the Magellanic Clouds. To help meet these demands, the
Investigators will construct a novel spectrograph for the SOAR 4.1-meter
telescope in the southern hemisphere. The SOAR Adaptive Module Optical
Spectrograph (SAMOS) will employ a digital micromirror device as a slit-
selection mechanism. Each randomly addressable mirror can be tilted to redirect
light either to the primary spectrograph channel or to a parallel imaging
channel. The Intellectual Merit of the project is that, as an adaptive-optics
instrument, SAMOS will be able to respond to demand for observations in very
rich fields - such as are needed, for example, for HST or JWST follow-up
investigations - as well as for studying LSST targtes. A Broader Impact
highlighted by the proposers is that opportunities for remote observations with
SAMOS will make the instrument available to faculty, staff, and students at
institutions with limited budgets. In addition, graduate students at all three
participating institutions will be involved in all phases of the project, and
research results will be made available to the general public through press
releases and the internet.