* 1611880
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Emily Meineke, Meineke                 Emily          K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 177,120.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Emily Meineke&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1611880&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Interdisciplinary Research Using Biological
Collections The fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow
to take transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ
biological collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan
for this fellowship to Emily Meineke is "Using museum specimens to explore if
climate change has increased insect pest damage to forests." The host
institution for this fellowship is the University of Copenhagen, and the
sponsoring scientists are Aimee Classen and Nathan Sanders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the fundamental question of how
climate change driven by humans affect herbivore species that damage plant
species on which humans rely. Global climate change has already led to higher
outbreak frequencies in insect herbivores. However, less is known about how
chronic, non-outbreak herbivores respond to climate. In particular, little is
known about resident, native insects that live on plants for the duration of
their lives and historically have caused no or minor damage to plants. Chronic
herbivores and their damage are often unintentionally preserved on or in
herbarium specimens, i.e. plant specimens preserved in museums. The Fellow is
using herbarium specimens to track chronic herbivory over centuries and across
Europe, taking advantage of northern Europe's expansive collection of forest
tree specimens. She is also expanding this project using an existing citizen
science platform to collect this same data from North American and Australian
specimens. Because the Fellow's research contributes to the understanding of how
climate has affected insect pests, it will also inform how insect pest damage
might change in other systems on which we depend, including agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is expanding her scientific training in four
key ways: (1) expanding her research program to include international (European)
sites, (2) using modeling frameworks she used in her dissertation research but
over much larger scales of space and time, (3) cultivating an international
network of collaborators, and (4) creating and executing a unique, international
citizen science project that generates continental-scale data. This project
allows the public to participate in global change research and, in doing so,
fosters connections between two US citizen science efforts, Notes from Nature
and Your Wild Life, and a globally renowned European research institution, the
University of Copenhagen. The Fellow is creating products for citizen scientist,
such as online, interactive maps and figure, which allow the public to interact
with data. With Your Wild Life, the Fellow is designing and evaluating our
advertising efforts to maximize participation by groups underrepresented in
biology.