* 1611598
* Many-Body Ultrafast Light-Matter Interactions in Two-Dimensional Graphene Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 403,124.00

Non-technical description: The recent discovery of graphene, a material of
single atomic thickness, has spurred remarkable advances in condensed matter
physics as well as, nanometer-scale device applications covering electronic,
thermal and mechanical domains. In chip-scale optoelectronics and optical
physics, graphene has a unique optical absorption defined solely by the
interaction between light and electrons. This project examines and advances the
many-body light-matter interactions in graphene towards optoelectronics,
particularly for ultrafast optics, for multi-electron current generation in
photodetectors, and for next-generation optical switches and modulators. The
research involves laser-material interactions, nonlinear optics, material
characterization, and synchronized material-device physics. In parallel and
leveraging the fundamental science advanced, the education activity involves
outreach to East Los Angeles minority-heavy high-schools and teachers,
partnership with the Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity for low-
income underrepresented first-generation college-bound youth, and a new
graduate/undergraduate course on solid-state optoelectronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The unique linear and massless band
structure of graphene, in a purely two-dimensional Dirac fermionic structure,
has enabled an optical sheet conductivity that is remarkably frequency-
independent, with broadband optical character spanning from visible to mid-
infrared wavelengths. The underlying interband optical transitions can be tuned
significantly via electric gating near the Dirac point, with a tunable charge-
density-based Fermi level due to the low density of sp2-hybridized two-
dimensional states. In this project the principal investigator examines the
many-body light-matter interactions in graphene optoelectronics covering the
electron-electron, electron-phonon, electron-photon scattering mechanisms and
dynamics. These interactions are targeted towards device physics and
applications in ultrafast optics (first thrust), multi-carrier photocurrent
dynamics (second thrust), and electro-optics (third thrust). The first thrust
examines all-optical nonlinearities such as four-wave mixing and nonlinear
dynamics in graphene: this involves continuous-wave and pulsed measurements,
with the gate-tunable Fermi levels in graphene and carrier dynamics. The second
thrust examines optoelectronic photocurrent generation in graphene-silicon
structures: this involves photocurrent mapping and comparison with monolithic
silicon structures, gated-bias carrier dynamics, and hot carrier multiplication
in electronic transport. The third thrust examines high-speed electro-optic
modulators through interband and intraband transitions: this involves working
with carrier frequencies in excess of 100 GHz to even the THz level, supported
by Raman characterization and surface phonon engineering. Fermi level tuning,
nonlinear signal detection techniques, along with surface material control and
processing, are implemented to enable the unique device physics. The many-body
scattering dynamics - each at the sub-picosecond timecales - provide a fertile
ground for fundamental material and atomic layer engineering studies in
graphene-based next-generation optoelectronics.