* 1611102
* High Speed DNA-based Motors for Chemical Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Khalid Salaita, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program of
the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation. Professor Khalid
Salaita of Emory University is developing a new approach for chemical sensing
that is based on detecting the motion of DNA-based motors. Chemical sensing is
broadly important for fields ranging from point of care diagnostics to
agriculture and environmental sustainability. Sensing in biological systems
typically occurs in conditions that are far-from-equilibrium, yet most chemical
assays are performed at or near equilibrium conditions. Given the extraordinary
sensitivity of biological sensing, it is desirable to consider approaches to
sensing under conditions that are far-from-equilibrium. There are inherent
challenges in pursuing well-controlled reactions that operate out of equilibrium
and that can be harnessed for sophisticated chemical measurements. The funded
project addresses these challenges and potentially improves current approaches
in analytical chemistry. The broader impacts include educational and outreach
goals focused on developing new undergraduate and graduate courses that use 3D
printing as a tool for the chemical sciences. The course is tailored toward
first-year graduate students and undergraduates and enhances their ability to
leverage 3D printing in their own research efforts.

Professor Salaita's laboratory has examined a new class of synthetic DNA-based
motors that move at a speed that is 1000 times faster than current DNA based
machines. These motors transport 5-micron particles distances of up to one
millimeter. Because the mechanism of motor transport depends on a multistep
reaction that involves Watson-Crick base-pairing and catalytic hydrolysis of
RNA, the speed of the motor can be used as a reporter of analyte concentration.
This assay is optimized for DNA sensing using automated image analysis. The
focus is on testing the specificity of the assay by measuring particle speed in
response to single nucleotide polymorphism of the target oligonucleotide. The
work investigates functional oligonucleotides, thus expanding the scope of
motion-based sensing to detect heavy metals and small molecule analytes.