* 1611376
* SusChEM: Exploring Physical Properties of Epoxy Resins Containing Multifunctional Biobased Components
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Megan Robertson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, the majority of polymers
are derived from petroleum feedstocks. The development of sustainable,
alternative resources for polymers is an open societal challenge. Epoxy resins
are an important commercial class of polymer used in a variety of applications
such as structural applications, advanced adhesives, aerospace and automotive
components, and wind turbine blades. Epoxy resins are derived predominantly from
petrochemicals. Additionally, these polymers cannot be recycled after the useful
lifetime of the material. Plastic waste which is not recycled resides in
landfills, and sometimes in unintentional locations such as waterways. This
project will develop new epoxy resins with a reduced environmental impact
through implementation of sustainable sources and enhancing the biodegradability
of the materials. Two plant-based resources will be examined: vegetable oils and
phenolic acids (found in many fruit and vegetable byproducts). Chemical routes
will be developed for preparation of these materials, and their physical
performance will be investigated. This project will also cultivate knowledge in
students, educators and the general public on the impact of polymers on the
environment, through the following activities: expansion of the Materials Day at
UH program for local K-12 students, development of modules for the Houston
Energy Day and Houston Earth Day celebrations, and participation of graduate and
undergraduate students in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop new
epoxy resins which contain sustainable, biodegradable, and non-toxic components,
yet maintain the advantageous properties of conventional, petroleum-sourced
materials. The research plan is structured around three specific aims. In the
first aim, synthetic strategies will be established for epoxy resins containing
biobased components. Plant-sourced phenolic acids will be employed to impart
desirable mechanical behavior to the epoxy resins (due to the presence of
aromatic rings) and soybean oil will be employed to impart biodegradability to
the epoxy resins (due to the presence of ester linkages). In the second aim, a
detailed understanding of structure-property-function relationships in
sustainable epoxy resins will be developed. The functionality of the starting
components is expected to have a great impact on the structural parameters of
the epoxy network and ultimate macroscopic mechanical properties. The design of
multicomponent epoxy resins will be leveraged to develop microphase separated
thermoset blends with advantageous properties. In the third aim, hydrolytic
degradation and biodegradation of epoxy resins containing soybean oil will be
investigated. A key premise of the proposed work is that epoxy resins derived
from soybean oil will maintain their properties during the useful lifetime of
the products they are utilized in, yet can undergo biodegradation in a compost
environment. The expected outcomes from this study are synthetic pathways to
epoxy resins from non-traditional sources, characterization of the thermal and
mechanical behavior of the newly derived epoxy resins, morphological
investigation of microphase separated multicomponent epoxy resins, and
hydrolytic and biodegradation mechanisms of epoxy resins which contain ester
linkages.