* 1611663
* Testing a Model for Transforming STEM General Education at Liberal Arts Schools
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jacqueline Roberts, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 288,990.00

This project's goal is to test an integrated bottom-up/top-down model of
institutional reform within a college of liberal art's STEM division. The broad
strategy is to provide momentum to fuel a transition from an active
"mobilization" stage of this faculty-driven initiative to subsequent stages:
"implementation" and then "institutionalization." Initial grassroots efforts
have led to base-level support for division-wide engagement of this goal. This
model of change is focused on moving the STEM faculty towards significant course
transformation reflective of the growing evidence base indicating "what works"
while simultaneously developing a productive STEM learning community. This will
be accomplished partly through curriculum reform awards that would be made to
individuals or faculty teams to redesign their courses or to develop new, team-
taught interdisciplinary courses. Linked to the awards are "best practices"
pedagogical workshops that also engage interdisciplinary faculty teams from
other institutions.

This project is building on the work of Ann Austin [Promoting evidence-based
change in undergraduate science education. Paper presented at the Fourth
Committee Meeting on Status, Contributions, and Future Directions of Discipline-
Based Education Research, 2011] and Susan Elrod and Adrianna Kezar [Facilitating
interdisciplinary learning: Lessons learned from Project Kaleidoscope. Change:
The Magazine of Higher Learning, Jan-Feb 2012]. The institution itself will add
additional diversity to the group of institutions supported by EHR grants
working to achieve institutional transformation.