* 1611868
* Development of a Suite of Assessment Tools for Measuring Students' Experimental Modeling Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 259,905.00

Laboratory courses offer significant opportunities for engagement in the
practices and core ideas of science. Laboratory course environments typically
have extensive lab equipment, flexible classroom arrangements, low
student/teacher ratios, and opportunities for collaborative work. All of these
characteristics help promote students' engagement in a range of scientific
practices (e.g., asking questions, designing and carrying out experiments,
analyzing data, developing and refining models, and presenting results to
peers). Despite the abundant opportunities and resources in many laboratory
courses, concerns are frequently raised about how effective such courses are at
fulfilling their potential. Many recent efforts have attempted to improve the
learning experience for students in lab courses. This important project will
support these efforts across the country by developing easy-to-implement
assessments for measuring students' ability in modeling of experiments, one of
the core scientific practices. The assessment instruments will give instructors
and education researchers a way to measure the impact of instruction, and thus
allow for evaluation and refinements of different educational pedagogies in lab
courses.

This project will develop, validate, and support an easily implementable and
interpretable assessment for experimental modeling skills in upper-division lab
courses. The project will follow the theoretical model of Classical Test Theory
to guide the development of two coupled multiple-response assessment
instruments. These instruments will measure students' ability to construct,
test, and refine models of experimental systems and measurement apparatus at the
upper-division level. The two assessments will focus on two common content areas
in upper-division physics labs, analog electronics and optics. The products of
the project will not only give instructors actionable evidence to help them
refine their courses, but also give researchers insight into how students
develop the modeling skills required for any experimental investigation in
physics.