* 1611704
* ADVANCE IT-Catalyst: Transforming Faculty Gender Diversity  at Florida Atlantic University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nurgun Erdol, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 249,519.00

Florida Atlantic University (FAU) will implement an ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation-Catalyst (IT-Catalyst) project to undertake institutional self-
assessment activities and pilot best practices from ADVANCE institutions. FAU is
an urban, minority-serving institution that has faced challenges in recruiting
and retaining women faculty, particularly those from URM groups. FAU will
administer baseline and follow-up surveys of tenure track and non-tenure track
faculty, conduct an institutional policy review, review ADVANCE best practices,
choose practices to pilot, and evaluate these strategies using institutional and
survey data.

FAU's team aims to leverage two existing initiatives, broadening their foci to
include women and URM STEM faculty: a research mentoring program in which senior
faculty are paired with junior faculty to develop proposals, and a leadership
development program which will also now include training for department heads on
recruiting and retaining women and URM faculty. An on-campus AWIS taskforce will
also visit other ADVANCE institutions to learn about best practices and will
also sponsor AWIS workshops. FAU's administrative and institutional leaders have
communicated their commitment to the project and to the adoption of ADVANCE best
practices.

The ADVANCE program is focused on developing systemic approaches to increase the
participation, retention, and advancement of women in academic STEM careers. The
IT-Catalyst track funds projects that aim to conduct institutional self-
assessments and implement ADVANCE strategies that have been shown to be
effective to address gendered issues for STEM faculty.