* 1611308
* Size Effect on the Evolution of Kirkendall Pores in Ti-Coated Ni Wires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 02/28/2021
* USD 396,789.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal shape memory alloys (SMAs)
are an interesting type of material that can be deformed and recover their
initial shape upon heating. In particular, one of the most commonly known SMAs
is Nitinol, which is an alloy with a near 1:1 ratio of nickel and titanium (i.e.
NiTi). Because of this shape recovery behavior, Nitinol is commonly used for
applications such as actuators or switches. Additionally, NiTi is a
biocompatible material and, hence, can be used for a variety of biomedical
applications from stents to bone implants. While traditional bulk Nitinol has
proven very useful thus far, it can be further improved by introducing open
porosity to enhance the properties in a variety of ways. For example, by
including open porosity, the surface area to volume ratio increases, thereby
increasing the heating and cooling efficiency leading to faster response times
of the thermal shape memory effect. Another example from the biomedical
perspective is that the open porosity allows for ingrowth of bone aiding in the
integration of the NiTi implant. However, manufacturing such NiTi structures
with open porosity is challenging due to the high melting point and reactive
nature of NiTi. One way to overcome this issue is to fabricate porous structures
from pure Ni and then deposit Ti on them such that, once homogenized, NiTi
structures with shape memory behavior will be formed. This research will focus
on transforming pure Ni wires into three-dimensional NiTi wire-woven structures.
This project will provide various outreach opportunities including at local
elementary schools, demonstrating the shape memory behavior of NiTi to introduce
students to the discipline of materials science. We will also be creating a
series of YouTube videos that will discuss the processing and shape recovery
properties of NiTi structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porous NiTi structures offer a combination of
shape-memory behavior, low stiffness, and high surface area useful for
applications such as actuators, bone implants, and dampers. The most common
synthesis method for porous NiTi - self-propagating high-temperature synthesis
where mixed Ni and Ti powders are reacted uncontrollably - resulting in
undesirable intermetallic phases and uncontrolled Kirkendall pores. We seek to
investigate a novel approach where controlled interdiffusion in Ti-coated Ni
wires forms near equiatomic NiTi alloys with shape-memory or superelastic
behavior. This project aims at understanding the wire size effect on the Ni-Ti
interdiffusion behavior and Kirkendall pore evolution. Specifically, as the wire
diameter (i.e. its volume-to-surface ratio) decreases, we expect a transition
from (i) numerous Kirkendall pores in the cross-section (bulk behavior) for
large wires, to (ii) a single pore in the cross-section for thinner wires, to
(iii) no pores for very thin wires, as vacancies diffuse to the surface instead
of forming pores. To this end, we will be conducting a systematic study that
explores the mechanisms and kinetics of Ni-Ti interdiffusion and Kirkendall pore
evolution as a function of wire diameter, ranging from 10 to 200 Âµm. Pure Ni
wires will be coated with Ti via pack cementation and subsequently homogenized
while capturing the evolution (size, fraction, location) of the various
intermediate and final phases (NiTi2, NiTi, Ni3Ti) and the Kirkendall pores.
Wires will be characterized using both ex situ metallographic techniques and in
situ X-ray tomography. Knowledge gained from these experiments will be applied
to the fabrication of NiTi (1D) wires, (2D) springs, and (3D) woven scaffolds.
For verification of the experimental results and eventual prediction of
optimized interdiffusion parameters, a phase-field model will be developed to
predict the microstructural evolution (phases and pores) during coating and
homogenization. Also, finite-element models based on tomographic data will be
developed to investigate the effect of Kirkendall pores on mechanical (shape-
memory and superelastic) behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various researchers have
demonstrated that Kirkendall pores can be harnessed to produce hollow
structures. However, there has not yet been a systematic investigation on the
effect of sample size and spatial confinement on the Kirkendall porosity
formation and stability. A fundamental understanding of the sample size effect
(linked to the ratio of vacancy diffusion distance to wire diameter) on Ni-Ti
interdiffusion behavior and Kirkendall porosity will serve as a guideline for
choosing appropriate processing conditions for production of porous NiTi
structures. It will also provide more general insight into the mechanisms and
optimization of using the Kirkendall effect for creating such hollow structures
in other metallic systems. Moreover, the experiments performed and models
developed in this project will enable manufacturing of wire- or spring-based
micro-architectured NiTi structures with unique shape-recovery properties, which
are impossible to produce at such small length scales via current wire drawing
and weaving methods. Such woven structures will be suitable for actuation,
damping, and biomedical applications, taking advantage of improved permeability,
increased surface area, lower stiffness and high shape memory and
superelasticity.