* 1611146
* Fundamental Mass Spectrometry Measurements of Electrosprayed and Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorbed Ions Using an Improved Superconducting Tunnel Junction Detector
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Mark Bier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 464,000.00

Professor Mark E. Bier and his students at Carnegie Mellon University are
supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program of the Division
of Chemistry at the NSF to conduct fundamental studies targeting improved
detectors for mass spectrometry (MS, a major tool for characterizing chemicals
and biochemicals). Recent advances in data and detector technologies have
enabled improvements in both the speed of response and energy resolution
attainable when detecting ions during MS analysis. The Bier group is
investigating whether measurement of the energy deposited when an ion impacts a
detector can be related to the structure of the ion - information critical for
understanding how molecules function. This could enable, for example, improved
chemical analysis of macromolecular complexes such as virus particles and
synthetic nanoparticles. Possible applications span many disciplines, including
chemistry, biology, physics, polymer science, medicine and materials science,
making the new detector potentially attractive for commercialization. Students
involved are exposed to multidisciplinary research, including training in low-
temperature physics at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable these gas phase ion chemistry measurements,
superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) cryodetectors are being improved by
increasing the size and number of pixels, resulting in a 10X larger detection
area. Both tantalum-STJs and niobium-STJs are being investigated. The detectors
are being combined with advanced high-speed electronics to improve arrival time
and energy measurements, and tested on two mass spectrometers: a time-of-flight
analyzer equipped with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) and a
high m/z ion trap equipped with both MALDI and electrospray ionization (ESI).
This should enable generation of mass spectra based on metastable fragmentation.
The research is exploring whether the energy response has additional analytical
utility in the measurement of shape (e.g., of native proteins) and density
(e.g., for gold nanoparticles). The improved energy resolution of STJs and their
ability to analyze larger macromolecules could result in a paradigm shift for MS
measurements, especially in the fields of polymer and small and large
nanoparticle research. New fundamental knowledge about ESI and MALDI should
ensue, providing better insight into the respective high m/z limits.