* 1611623
* Examining Planets around Other Stars through Very Precise Infrared Imaging at the Keck Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Dimitri Mawet, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 02/29/2020
* USD 763,116.00

To get the sharpest images of planets, stars and galaxies, astronomers must use
innovative techniques that correct for the blurring of images caused by
turbulence in the earth's atmosphere. One of the most exciting uses of this
technology is imaging planets around nearby stars. This team aims to build a
device that works using infrared light from the host star (the star that the
planet orbits). The device will be used on one of the world's largest
telescopes, the Keck II telescope on Maunakea, Hawaii. The system works by
rapidly changing the shape of mirrors inside the instrument to counteract the
effect of "ripples" in the earth's atmosphere. The principal investigator, along
with a postdoctoral researcher, summer interns, and graduate and undergraduate
students from Hawaii and California, will search for planets around 150 small
"dwarf" stars. Their results will be made available to the broader science
community through the Keck Data Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by the
scientific desire to study young planetary systems around low-mass M-dwarfs, and
the practical need to develop near-infrared (NIR) wavefront sensing and adaptive
optics (AO) capabilities for the upcoming generation of 30 meter class
segmented-mirror telescopes, the proposers seek to produce a system that
operates in the L-band for the Keck observatory. The IR detector technology
needed for such a system now exists (in large part through funding by NSF) and
will be used by the proposers to build a near-IR, high-order, pyramid wavefront
sensor for the Keck II telescope. This system will then be used to conduct an
L-band (3 micron) coronagraphic imaging survey of ~150 M dwarfs with the Keck
facility instrument, NIRC2. The team will conduct follow-up low-resolution slit
spectroscopy observations of any exoplanet candidates found in the L-band
survey. Note that M-dwarfs are too faint to observe with sufficient contrast and
spatial resolution to detect (even massive) exoplanets with existing optical AO
systems. The development of the proposed NIR wavefront sensing system at Keck
may be viewed as an enabling technology that could lead to the fabrication of
similar units at other, publicly available observatories. It should also be
noted that NIR wavefront sensing can be used to extend the performance of
natural guide star AO systems to fainter targets, and to increase the sky
coverage to regions where only optically obscured or very red guide stars are
available.