* 1611638
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Matthew McCary, McCary                  Matthew        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Matthew A. McCary

Proposal Number: 1611638

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Matthew A. McCary is "Understanding how resource
subsidies alter aboveground-belowground interactions in different terrestrial
ecosystems." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Claudio Gratton,
Anthony Ives, and Randall Jackson.

The goal of this research is to understand how resource subsidies from aquatic
habitats affect interactions between aboveground and belowground communities on
land. Resource subsidies, i.e., fluxes of resources to an ecosystem from outside
of its boundaries, can have important effects in recipient ecosystems. However,
it is unknown how nutrient subsidies affect aboveground-belowground interactions
that occur within different types of recipient ecosystems. Because aboveground
and belowground communities are intrinsically linked, feedbacks between these
two subsystems have major implications for ecosystem dynamics. The Fellow is
testing the hypothesis that characteristics of the recipient ecosystem,
particularly plant productivity and structure, will influence how resource
subsidies alter aboveground-belowground interactions. The study system, Lake
MÃ½vatn in northeastern Iceland, is known for its high rate of production of
aquatic insects (midges), which emerge, mate and die on land, thereby providing
a resource subsidy to the surrounding terrestrial landscape. Because resource
subsidies are widespread, testing this hypothesis is critical to building a
general theory of ecosystem structure and functioning. The Fellow is pursuing
two objectives: (1) to determine how the structure of recipient plant
communities directs midge resources to either the aboveground or belowground
food web; and (2) to compare the subsequent changes to aboveground-belowground
interactions once resource subsidies have entered the detritus-based food web in
recipient ecosystems of low versus high plant productivity.

The Fellow is being trained to master techniques in plant ecology, food-web
interactions, and statistical modeling to evaluate ecosystem-level processes.
The Fellow is broadening the participation of underrepresented groups by
recruiting Native American, African American, and Hispanic students via an
undergraduate Summer Research Internship program at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison (UW) that specifically supports research experiences for undergraduate
students in Iceland. Furthermore, the fellow will re-start UW's dormant chapter
of SEEDS (the Ecological Society of America's Strategies for Ecology Education,
Diversity and Sustainability), a program to stimulate involvement of
underrepresented students (particularly undergraduates) in ecological research.