* 1611997
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Maria Rosa, Rosa                    Maria
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Mar√≠a Rosa

Proposal Number: 1611997

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Maria Rosa is 'Flexibility in modes of gaining
nutrition in early life stages of suspension-feeding molluscs.' The host
institution for this fellowship is Stony Brook University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Dianna K. Padilla.

The goal of this study is to determine the flexibility and relative importance
of different feeding modes used by early life stages of suspension-feeding
molluscs. Suspension-feeding molluscs collect particles from the water column,
and include bivalves such as mussels, clams and oysters. Many species are
economically important as food sources for humans, and play important roles in
ecosystems by stabilizing shorelines and clearing particles from water columns.
Although we know a great deal about suspension feeding in adult bivalves, we
know very little about young life stages. Most bivalves have a microscopic
larval stage that swims in the water column and has specialized structures for
capturing algal food. These structures are shed once the larvae transition to
juvenile stages and live on the bottom. Juveniles can take up to a year to
develop adult structures for feeding. The Fellow's research focuses on early
life stages, and life stage transitions, and examines links between juvenile
performance and adult morphology. Understanding the feeding mechanisms of young
suspension-feeders is critical, because for most species, survival of these
early life stages is the greatest bottleneck determining survival to the adult
stage.

This project provides a rich training opportunity to a Hispanic female,
including expanded training in functional morphology, advanced statistical
methodology, and microscopy. It is also allowing the Fellow to expand her
knowledge and research capabilities in evolutionary biology, functional
morphology, and the ecology of early life stages. The Fellow is also developing
skills in formal and informal education, assisting with classes for both
graduate and undergraduate students, and receiving mentoring by a specialist in
education research. To broaden participation of underrepresented groups, the
Fellow is mentoring and serving as a role model for undergraduate and high
school students in research, particularly those from groups underrepresented in
STEM fields. The Fellow is implementing a range of outreach opportunities,
including presentations to local groups interested in marine conservation and
protection, and to managers and legislators. This links the outreach to the
research because many of the species included in this research are commercially
and/or ecologically important.