* 1611044
* Light-controlled viral gene delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Junghae Suh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Viruses have the natural capacity to deliver DNA into
host cells - a powerful ability that is currently being leveraged for a variety
of gene therapy applications, including for the treatment of cancer, Alzheimer's
disease, and a variety of pediatric genetic diseases. The safety and efficacy of
these gene therapies ultimately rely on the ability of viruses to deliver the
DNA to the correct tissues and to the appropriate levels without hitting non-
target organs. This targeted and controlled delivery of therapeutic DNA by
viruses is a tremendous hurdle that, once overcome, will enable the clinical
translation of a greater number of life-saving cures. The NSF project aims to
approach this overarching goal by developing viruses that can be controlled by
safe, externally applied light. Using light as the "on" signal, the infectivity
of therapeutic viruses will be carefully controlled in order to deliver the DNA
to the desired tissues and to the therapeutically appropriate levels. The
associated educational activities will broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities in science and technology. Specifically,
predominantly African-American high school students from a critically
underserved community in Houston, Texas will be introduced to scientific
research and provided career mentorship. Undergraduate students will also be
trained to conduct primary scientific research in the Principal Investigator's
(PI's) lab. Finally, graduate students in the PI's lab will be highly encouraged
to partake in the numerous outreach activities available to them through the
PI's lab as well as other Rice University organizations. By training the next
generation of scientific leaders to become conscientious of issues relating to
gender and/or race, the PI hopes to contribute to our collective future where
gender and race are no longer issues to be dealt with in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Viruses have evolved to deliver genetic
information into host cells, a key property currently being exploited for
applications ranging from fundamental discovery studies to human gene therapy.
However, more advances are required to transform naturally occurring viruses
into well-controlled and predictable nanodevices. To this end, this NSF project
will place viral gene delivery under the control of an externally applied
stimulus, specifically light, such that transgene expression may exhibit more
tunable intensity, controlled onset/duration, and spatial patterning.
Importantly, results obtained from the work will help uncover new design rules
for creating stimulus-responsive viral nanoparticles. Promising pilot data
demonstrates successful generation of a prototypic light-activatable virus (LAV)
platform. To overcome some of the deficiencies with the prototype platform that
would hinder its translation to real world settings, this NSF project aims to
generate second generation LAVs. The LAV candidates will be characterized for
various structural and functional properties, enabling the further
identification of design rules that may help inform future design modifications
to the LAV platform. As part of the educational plan, the PI proposes to develop
a STEM mentorship program between Rice University Institute of Biosciences and
Bioengineering and a high school located in one of the lowest income areas in
the City of Houston, Texas. Additionally, undergraduate students will be
recruited to the PI's laboratory to conduct research, and graduate students in
the PI's lab will be trained as future leaders conscientious of gender and race
issues in STEM fields. The students participating in the research will be
trained at the unique interface of virus engineering and synthetic photobiology.
The knowledge gained from the work will be widely disseminated through
presentations at international conferences and publications in peer-reviewed
journals.