* 1611606
* Real-Time Survey for Rapid Source Variability in Astronomical Objects using the Very Large Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Casey Law, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,404,611.00

The study of sources showing rapidly time variability is one of last frontiers
of astronomy. This covers a wide range of wavelengths. In the radio range,
variations had been found for our Sun in the 1940s. In the 1960s, slow time
variations of astronomical sources were discovered. Later, radio sources
emitting regular pulses were found. In the last few years, non-repeating,
bursting sources have been found. One group of the most energetic radio sources
is Fast Radio Bursts, or FRBs. FRBs are a rare phenomenon. The study of FRBs is
a new one, and their distance and exact location is an open question. If the
FRBs are located in other galaxies, the energy of such outbursts would reach the
limits of possible emission mechanisms. The appeal of transient phenomena should
provide wide public interest. There will be student in topics such as time
variable astrophysics, high performance computing and efficient algorithms.

This project will construct a system to search for transient phenomena during
scheduled imaging observations made with the Very Large Array (VLA). Images are
produced from the average of data over many hours. However, the evidence for
rapid variations is lost in the averaging process. This project will construct a
system designed to search the data for variability on time scales from 50
milliseconds to minutes, in parallel with scheduled astronomical programs. These
searches will be carried out in real time. With the real-time system, only those
samples showing significant bursts of radio energy would be stored. This system
will be in use at all times when standard scientific programs are carried out,
that is, a commensal system. In this, the data stream from the VLA will be
searched for significant, short term bursts of radio energy with a powerful,
especially designed system. This will not affect the normal scientific
observations made with the VLA. The VLA can easily provide FRB positions that
have errors smaller than 1 arc second, allowing optical identifications. This
system will take advantage of the large amount of observing time available at
the VLA, including the 6000 hours to be allocated to the already-planned VLA Sky
Survey. This project is a precursor for larger facilities planned for the
future, such as the Square Kilometer Array. There will be many opportunities for
student training in the algorithms used to search for transient events in large
data sets, and there will be outreach at the website of the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory.