* 1611382
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Stochastic Electronic Structure Approaches Applied to Study Low-Dimensional Black-Phosphorene Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 06/30/2019
* USD 511,646.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The National Science Foundation and the United States -- Israel Binational
Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this collaboration between a US-based
researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF Divisions of Materials
Research and Chemistry fund this award jointly. The award supports computational
research and education on the mechanical and electronic properties of black
phosphorene. Black phosphorene is a material composed of elemental phosphorous
that has been discovered and synthesized only recently. It is very similar to
graphene, it forms a two-dimensional sheet, but it offers a significant
advantage in that it behaves as a semiconductor: it exhibits a sizeable energy
gap while supporting at the same time high-mobility charge carriers. In
addition, it turns out that the electronic properties of black phosphorene can
be readily tuned by applying mechanical stress and other methods. Therefore,
just as silicon emerged as an ideal material for three-dimensional electronics,
black phosphorene seems to emerge as the ideal infrastructure material for two-
dimensional electronics technology.

The principal goal of this project is to study, understand, and eventually
predict the properties of black phosphorene and its derivatives using
theoretical and computational methods. Because of the way two-dimensional black
phosphorene responds to mechanical stresses and to chemical perturbations,
studying its properties using conventional computational methods is a highly
challenging task, requiring the simulation of exceedingly large systems.
Therefore, the first challenge the project will need to overcome is to build a
computational tool that tackles large electronic systems containing thousands of
atoms, and apply it to the study of black phosphorene. This challenge can be met
by using methodologies developed by the PIs that can generally be described as
stochastic computational techniques. These approaches are akin to statistical
methods used in polling, and make it possible to accurately simulate material
properties for much larger systems than is possible with traditional, non-
stochastic approaches. Once the tools are developed, the PIs will use them to
study realistic two-dimensional black-phosphorene sheets, providing a
theoretical framework for fundamental understanding and for guiding future
experiments on this material.

The theoretical tools developed and used in this project will be made available
to the community, with an aim to increase access to the developed methodology.
The educational component of the project emphasizes the use of computational
tools relevant for the research for the training and education of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. Undergraduate and high school students will
be involved in the research, especially in the running of large-scale
simulations. All will benefit from close interactions with the Israeli
collaborators.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The National Science Foundation and the United States -- Israel Binational
Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this collaboration between a US-based
researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF Divisions of Materials
Research and Chemistry fund this award jointly. The award supports computational
research and education on the mechanical and electronic properties of black
phosphorene. Traditional large-scale simulations of these properties are
prohibitively expensive either for accurate density functional theory with exact
exchange (DFT), or for highly accurate electronic structure methods based on
Green's function (GW). This project will explore hitherto inaccessible regimes
using the stochastic formulations of traditional DFT and GW. The stochastic
formulations replace some, or all of the multitude of summations over orbitals
inherent in electronics structure methods with a stochastic sampling of
combinations of these orbitals. The stochastic approaches are designed to
calculate from first principles the atomic and electronic structure of systems
containing 10,000 atoms or more. Sizes of that magnitude are necessary for
establishing realistic environments, which enable the study of anisotropic
properties. Such capability allows the construction of a theoretical framework
for fundamental understanding of black phosphorene, which in turn will help in
guiding experiments and synthetic efforts by pointing out possible directions to
achieve desired properties.

The unique ability to accurately simulate large black-phosphorene systems allows
the exploration of electronic structure under a variety of experimental
conditions, which include temperature, strain, and optical excitation. Using a
combination of stochastic DFT and Langevin dynamics, the structure and phonon
dispersion curves of large, layered black-phosphorene nanoribbons and nanotubes
will be investigated, with and without mechanical stress. The structure of
defects and adsorbates on the surface and perimeters will be studied as well.

The theoretical tools developed and used in this project will be made available
to the community, with an aim to increase access to the developed methodology.
The educational component of the project emphasizes the use of computational
tools relevant for the research for the training and education of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. Undergraduate and high school students will
be involved in the research, especially in the running of large-scale
simulations. All will benefit from close interactions with the Israeli
collaborators.