* 1611616
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Delia Shelton, Shelton                 Delia          S
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Delia Shelton

Proposal number: 1611616

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016,
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Delia S. Shelton is "Developing Groups and their
response to Anthropogenic Change." The host institutions for this fellowship are
University of Windsor and Humboldt University, and the sponsoring scientists are
Drs. Dennis Higgs (Windsor) and Jens Krause (Humboldt).

The goal of this research is to examine how human-induced rapid environmental
change affects the formation of social groups of animals. Human-induced
environmental change likely has profound effects on biodiversity at multiple
levels of organization, but effects on social groups are relatively unexplored.
Like individuals or species, some groups will be able to respond effectively,
whereas others will perish in response to anthropogenic change. By studying how
groups develop, we can learn more about successful and endangered group
organizations, and ultimately predict which groups are (or are not) resilient to
anthropogenic change. The Fellow?s research merges a powerful combination of
modeling and empirical techniques to understand the social organization of
groups, how they develop, and how they remain resilient against anthropogenic
change. Results from this study may provide tools for policy makers and
scientists to develop early detection systems and intervention plans to prevent
further degradation of at-risk groups.

Training and career advancement activities are preparing the Fellow for a
research career in animal behavior through development of proficiencies in
multiple contemporary techniques, including social network analyses, agent-based
modeling, and measures of fish physiology. The Fellow is enhancing the
participation of groups under-represented in biology through educational
outreach directed at increasing inclusion and retention at local and global
scales. Locally, through the 4Winds STEM Native Outreach, first-nation students
are being exposed to agent-based modeling and social network analysis through
public talks and workshops. For global efforts, the Fellow is developing a
communal mentoring program through the Animal Behavior Society?s Charles H.
Turner initiative, a program designed to increase representation of
undergraduates from under-represented groups at the society?s annual meeting.