* 1611738
* Adapting the Next Generation Physical Science and Everyday Thinking curriculum for a lecture-laboratory format (Adapting Next Gen PET)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 211,399.00

This Exploration and Design for Engaged Student Learning project seeks to
address two persistent problems in undergraduate education: the challenge of
effective teaching resulting in useful learning in large lecture formats and the
challenge of developing scientific understanding of physics principles by pre-
service elementary teacher candidates. Adapting Next Gen PET strives to improve
physics learning for future teachers while empowering faculty to implement
education research in their physics courses by providing a well-tested and
refined version of the curriculum that fits the most widely used general
education science class model (lecture and lab) and can make full use of the
rich supporting faculty resources developed for Physics and Everyday Thinking
and Learning Physical Science. The Next Generation Physical Science and Everyday
Thinking (Next Gen PET) grew from Physics and Everyday Thinking (PET), which has
been shown to significantly affect both future teacher content knowledge and
understanding of how students learn science. It has been taught at two-year and
four-year institutions, adapted for science methods courses, and offered as a
workshop for practicing elementary teachers. And yet, it does not fit the common
lecture/lab format that fulfills general education requirements at most
colleges. This project will develop an implementation outline of existing
materials to support the lecture/lab model and add the one science practice
which is currently unsupported: Planning and Carrying Out Investigations. Upon
completion, a national workshop will be advertised to the Physics Teacher
Education Coalition (PhysTEC) institutions and to all physics departments in the
U.S. This project will not only provide a course appropriate for adoption by
PhysTEC institutions, but also one that could serve as a general education
natural science lab course for a broad range of non-STEM majors. Outcomes of
this project will be the development of undergraduate students with an increased
understanding of how scientists discover and build knowledge, learn science
themselves, and learn how to better teach science to others (for example,
elementary school students). The materials would be designed to support faculty
in implementing research-based instructional practices, which could catalyze
faculty transition to using these effective methods more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Adapting Next Gen PET project builds upon prior work
and will: develop instructional activities and an investigation practice
assessment instrument; infuse the materials into a current course and validate
the new assessment instrument with pre-service elementary teacher candidates;
and enter into a reiterative process of revision and implementation based on the
student and faculty instructor feedback and project evaluation. This project
will carefully map and test an implementation schedule that utilizes existing
materials with additional activities focusing on the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS) practices least well covered by the current curricula,
particularly Planning and Carrying Out Investigations. The careful mapping to
maximize coherent story lines will also identify where in the course the best
opportunities for enhancing experimental design may exist. Several large-class-
setting lessons, as well as a complementary laboratory component, will be added.
Testing will ensure that no loss of learning or attitude improvement compared to
the existing materials result from the new structure. Additionally, the
assessment process will lead to more appropriate instruments for measuring
students' knowledge of the Planning and Carrying Out Investigations practice,
which is critically important to pre-service teachers' pedagogical disciplinary
knowledge. The knowledge and skills pre-service teachers learn and practice in
the course will help them become effective teachers of science. Designed from
both the constructivist and social-cultural theoretical perspectives and built
on a conceptual change framework, this project has the potential to influence
future elementary teachers, as well as future high school teachers assisting in
the course, and it will afford the opportunity to introduce more faculty to
research-based curricula and pedagogy. As the course supports will not be too
far removed from traditional instruction and will not require that faculty
rewrite curriculum, faculty will have the opportunity to explore and practice
using interactive pedagogy that allows for student construction of ideas,
possibly supporting faculty transition to and advocacy for research-based
instructional practices.