* 1611392
* Physics of Non-Fermi Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Qimiao Si, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in the many-body physics of strongly correlated
electrons. For common solids such as silicon or aluminum, their electronic
properties are well described by a theory that is based on an assumption of
essentially independent electrons. In the recent past, an increasing number of
materials have been found to contain electrons that in fact interact strongly
with each other. These interactions between electrons give rise to a variety of
possible ways in which the electrons can be organized in the material, and
create the possibility of phase transitions. These phase transitions are the
quantum analogues of familiar phase transitions such as ice melting into water.
The PI will develop theoretical methods to i) study the collective behavior of
electrons in such settings, ii) understand how novel electronic states can
arise, such as superconductivity, in which electrons conduct electricity without
experiencing any resistive loss of energy, and iii) explore what happens when
the electrons are put under the influence of an external driving force, such as
electromagnetic radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
opportunities to train graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge
theoretical methods, including opportunities for training in an international
setting through the PI's collaborations with experimentalists worldwide. The
project will contribute to the understanding of modern materials that may be
important for future energy and information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education in the many-body physics of
strongly correlated electrons. The textbook description of electrons in solids
is based on a theory in which electrons only interact weakly with each other.
When electron correlations are strong, new theoretical frameworks are needed. A
very general effect of electron correlations is to induce transitions between
distinct phases of matter at zero temperature. When such quantum phase
transitions are continuous, quantum criticality develops and influences physical
properties over a wide range of parameters and temperatures. Heavy-fermion
systems represent a prototype case where the physics of quantum criticality can
be systematically studied. The proposed research concerns the nature of quantum
criticality that develops near antiferromagnetic and other types of ground
states, as well as new instabilities that develop in the quantum critical
regime. Four specific research directions will be
pursued:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) The PI will analyze the instabilities of heavy-
fermion metals near an antiferromagnetic order. A particular focus of the
proposed work is to study the unconventional superconductivity that may develop
when the quantum criticality is "beyond-Landau", as characterized by the notion
of Kondo destruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii) Quantum criticality that involves
quadrupolar degrees of freedom will be studied, with a goal of understanding
some fascinating experiments that are emerging in several heavy-fermion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iii) The PI will explore quantum criticality at
the border of a Kondo insulator, in order to shed light on the interplay between
Kondo-singlet formation and antiferromagnetic order in a new
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iv) The PI will address quantum criticality under
an external drive. The proposed research aims to gain new insights into the
physics of out-of-equilibrium quantum criticality using simplified models in low
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to amplify the impact of the PI's
theoretical research and expand the educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the PI's research program, the PI intends to
continue existing and successful collaborations, and initiate new ones with
experimental groups worldwide in this area. The proposed research, while
fundamental in nature, will contribute to the understanding of modern materials
that may be important for future technologies in energy and information.