* 1611547
* A New Instrument to Remove the Effects of Interstellar Dust Masking Faint Radiation in the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 936,649.00

Theories of the early Universe predict a very weak polarization signal in the
cosmic microwave background radiation. However, stronger signals from
interstellar clouds and magnetic fields in our Milky Way Galaxy prevent
scientists from measuring that faint signal. The space between the stars
contains many such clouds of gas and dust. Dramatic astronomical images reveal
them - for example, the Great Nebula in the constellation Orion or the famous
Eagle Nebula. Dust grains in the interstellar clouds also polarize reflected
starlight weakly. Astronomers can measure this weak polarization in order to
find the interstellar clouds. In this project, the Investigators will construct
a novel instrument to measure the optical polarization produced by interstellar
dust clouds. Using these measurements with spacecraft data, they will map the
locations of Galactic clouds and magnetic fields. Scientists can then separate
their signals from the cosmic microwave background radiation. This project
serves the national interest by increasing our knowledge of the early Universe.
The Investigators will involve an international team of undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs in all aspects of this project, giving it strong Broader
Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigators will design and build a novel
wide-area linear optical polarimeter (WALOP) and will use the instrument to
measure polarization caused by interstellar dust and to map the distribution of
dust in the Milky Way Galaxy. With a 30 x 30 arcminute field of view, the
polarimeter will form four simultaneous images of each star, enabling
determinations of the magnitude, fractional polarization, and polarization angle
for each object. It will be deployed on a 1-meter telescope at the South African
Astronomical Observatory (SAAO). Combined with distance measurements from the
GAIA spacecraft, the polarization data will enable 3D tomography of the
interstellar medium, providing information that may enable scientists to extract
the very weak polarization signal expected from the cosmic microwave background
(CMB). The Intellectual Merit of the work derives primarily from the fact that
improved mapping of the dust distribution in the Galaxy may enable astronomers
to detect a predicted weak polarization signal (the so-called "B-mode" signal)
in CMB radiation, significantly improving cosmologists' understanding of the
very early Universe. The observations also will improve
astronomers'understanding of dust formation, evolution, composition, and
alignment by magnetic fields in the Galaxy. The investigators plan strong
programs aimed at undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs at Caltech, at
IUCAA in India, at the SAAO, and at the University of Crete in Greece, combining
instrument development with cutting-edge astrophysics and cosmology programs and
including reciprocal visits among the partner institutions.