* 1611301
* Microgrid Interconnections Control via Voltage Angle Droop Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Prasad Enjeti, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This project proposes a novel system configuration for a future distribution
grid in which multiple microgrids are coupled through distribution lines and
present themselves as individual controllable entities. Built upon the
innovations on sensors (micro-synchrophasors) and actuators (power electronic
interfaces), we envision a future distribution grid to be comprised of many
microgrid clusters, each interfacing through points of common coupling with
little or no inertia. It is anticipated that the results of this project will
help many communities (such as rural and developing regions) to leapfrog the
century-old distribution grid through an envisioned clean slate approach to
integrating a much deeper level of renewable resources at a much higher level of
reliability. The project will provide a fresh perspective on inspiring students
to engineer a qualitatively different electricity delivery system that is
tailored for the paradigm shift in both sensing and control technologies. Housed
at one of the largest university power/energy programs in the U.S., this team
will introduce new course modules on the topic of the future distribution grid,
which closely integrates power electronics and power systems background
knowledge for more than 200 undergraduate and graduate students currently
enrolled in power courses at Texas A&amp;M. This team will continue a strong
track record of engaging undergraduate students for research, in particular
underrepresented groups. The prototype and simulation visualization will be
presented at the annual "Discover ECE" event, which attracts more than 300 high
school students and parents annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective of this project is to investigate novel power electronic interfaces,
as well as the control of microgrid clusters for ensuring dynamic security at
the distribution grid level. The project will address the following questions:
a) how should an all-DC or AC microgrid interact with distribution systems
through an appropriately designed power electronics interface; and b) what would
be a control architecture that leverages advances from power electronics and
sensors, and achieves provable dynamical performance. This project puts forward
a truly interdisciplinary research agenda to leverage power electronics and
control for advancing the distribution grid sciences. The cross-fertilization of
power systems and power electronics will provide fresh perspectives for the
future distribution grid. The intellectual merit of this project is four fold.
First, the research team will investigate the possibility of guaranteeing
distribution system-level transient stability via distributed droop management.
This difficult problem will draw upon the structure of the closed-loop microgrid
module dynamics, which, in turn, lends the distribution grid transient model as
a Lur'e system with time invariant sector bounded memoryless nonlinearities.
Second, the project will introduce a multiple points of common coupling (PCC)
control of a microgrid when it has multiple connections with distribution
systems. This will allow for decomposing an MW-level inverter into multiple
lower rating inverters with much lower cost and increase in reliability. Third,
for the case of DC microgrids with MWs of capacity, a closed loop iterative
process of adjusting the output voltage and phase angle for voltage source
inverters with finite LC output filter impedance will be will introduced and
tested. Fourth, for the case of AC microgrids, an optimal power electronic
transformer topology (with fault tolerant features) will be developed to achieve
the wide range of voltage magnitude and angle adjustments at fast response as
required by the microgrid angle droop dynamic control approach enabled by modern
micro-synchrophasors. Prior art methods for voltage/angle adjustment are both
slow in response and limited in range, rendering them unsuitable for the
proposed control architecture.