* 1611268
* Elucidating the Impact of Electrostatic Interactions and Number of Layers on the Mechanisms of Ion Intercalation on Graphene Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Joaquin Rodriguez Lopez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 510,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Graphene is an atomically-thin material with
emerging electrochemical properties. With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this project studies the impact of its thickness,
and the unique materials interactions it enables, on graphene's ability for
inserting ions into its structure for applications in electrical energy storage.
The scientific impact of this project consists of generating new knowledge that
enables the use of simple chemical effects to improve the energy density and
stability of battery electrodes. The integrated research, educational and
outreach plan addresses learning opportunities for undergraduate and K-12
students. Activities include the modernization of electrochemical instruction
and its diffusion through social media, direct laboratory instruction on energy
materials through the "electrochemical bootcamp," and outreach activities
organized through student organizations. The research team makes use of its
identification with the Hispanic population and research group diversity to make
an impact in the education, inclusion and retention of underrepresented groups
in scientific disciplines. These groups will be exposed to cutting-edge science,
using state-of-the-art characterization facilities and advanced computational
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The research activity
aims at elucidating the impact of graphene's atomic thickness in determining the
mechanisms of ion intercalation, and to explore how native and external
electrostatic interactions across its thin bulk modify the energetics and rate
of intercalation processes. This project contemplates the following goals and
approaches: (1) implementing the first electrochemical systematic study of non-
aqueous ion intercalation on well-defined graphene electrodes by controlling the
number of layers and interfacial electrostatic interactions via micro- and
nanofabrication, (2) using in situ neutron reflectometry, transmission electron
microscopy, and electrochemical microscopy methods to yield new insights into
the intercalation mechanisms of alkaline ions on few layer graphene and the
effects of surface modifications, and (3) using density functional theory for
understanding quantitatively the energetic components of the electrostatic and
electronic interactions and its coupling to innovative force field terms. The
knowledge generated by this activity enables the use of simple electrostatic
effects for tuning the energetics of ion insertion, potentially improving
conditions for electrical energy storage, and establishing broad correlations
between electrostatic effects and ionic interfacial and bulk reaction mechanisms
that are extendable to other 2D-materials.