* 1611047
* Charge Localization and Transport at Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Aaron Massari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 480,072.00

Nontechnical Description: Carbon-based (organic) electronics are light-weight
and relatively inexpensive, but have been more difficult to realize
commercially. Their electrical performance depends crucially on how spread out
electrical charges become at the interfaces between different materials.
However, the most common analyses report on properties through the bulk,
overlooking the underlying reasons for both good and bad electrical behaviors.
This project employs a measurement technique that delivers information about how
molecules are arranged at material interfaces and the number of molecules over
which electrical charges are shared. The project focuses on materials that work
well and then introduces defects that diminish their performance, monitoring the
effect of these defects on conductivity and the number of molecules on which
charges reside. In parallel with these research directions, the research team
designs and leads the chemistry activities at an annual three-day outreach event
called University on the Prairie. This program hosts 60 students (grades 6-11)
from rural communities in the Midwest and introduces many of them to the role of
chemistry in agriculture, energy conversion, and in many cases, begins the
process by which they envision themselves studying science at a college level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The extent of
localization of electrical charges at material interfaces has an enormous
influence on their mobility, yet there are few characterization methods applied
to organic electronic films that are interface specific. Of these surface
specific approaches, only vibrational sum frequency generation has the ability
to simultaneously report the molecular ordering and orientation as well as the
extent of charge localization. This project seeks to directly measure the
influence of molecular packing and charge localization on the efficiency of
charge transport at organic material interfaces. The research team applies
vibrational sum frequency generation spectroscopy to field-effect transistors
constructed with a family of perylene diimide molecular films and observes the
changes in interfacial structure, mobility, and localization as the molecular
structure is varied. They also introduce planar thickness gradients of
dielectric materials between charge donor and acceptor layers to progressively
decrease the extent of localization, while carrying out the same spectroscopic
analysis. Finally, photoinduced charge transfer is used to prepare charge
delocalized states while vibrational sum frequency generation is performed.
Overall, the project identifies the role of charge localization in transport at
organic thin film interfaces.