* 1611250
* RUI: Liquid Crystalline Zwitterionic Derivatives of closo-Boranes for Display Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Piotr Kaszynski, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 340,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this research team will take a multi-disciplinary
and international approach to materials chemistry that trains undergraduate
students to synthesize and characterize liquid crystals (LCs) in the context of
display applications (LCD). Liquid crystalline materials are liquids or soft
wax-like substances in which molecules exhibit some degree of ordering and
organization; they uniquely combine fluidity of liquids and molecular ordering
found in solid crystals. If molecules forming such materials are polar (have a
permanent dipole moment), they can undergo realignment in an electric field
resulting in switching of optical properties of the material. Such an electro-
optical effect is at the heart of modern liquid crystal display industry, which
demands improvements in resolution and speed of switching between screen images.
This, in turn, motivates the search for new LC materials, such as those
investigated in this project. Thus, a team comprised of the principal
investigator (PI), co-PI, an international technical expert and undergraduate
co-workers design, synthesize and fully characterize new polar liquid crystals
derived from boron clusters. Among the main goals of the project is the
development of extensive structure-property relationships in this class of
materials, preparation of materials for practical applications, and training of
undergraduate students for careers in materials
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This basic research
project tests the hypothesis that rationally-designed zwitterionic derivatives
of inorganic boron clusters, [closo-1-CB9H10]- and [closo-1-CB12H12]- anions,
form liquid crystalline phases and are suitable materials for display
applications. In this context, a series of zwitterions is synthesized and
investigated for their spectroscopic, structural, thermal and dielectric
properties using a broad selection of research tools. The experimental work is
augmented with theoretical methods that allow the researchers to formulate a
detailed understanding of structure-property relationships and to explain the
observed results. The detailed multi-dimensional analysis of specific
derivatives is expected to contribute to the understanding of the impact of the
molecular structure on properties, materials performance, and to the fundamental
chemistry and science of liquid crystals.