* 1611651
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Alyssa-Lois Gehman, Gehman                  Alyssa-Lois    M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Alyssa-Lois Madden Gehman

Proposal Number: 1611651

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Alyssa-Lois Madden
Gehman is "Past and present effects of multiple stressors on host-parasite
interactions." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
British Columbia and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Christopher Harley.

This project uses museum collections to address how environmental change
fundamentally alters species interactions over several decades. Specifically,
the Fellow is evaluating the effect of changing temperature and ocean
acidification conditions on host-parasite interactions, using mussel-
cyanobacteria interactions as a model system. Shell boring parasites, such as
endolithic cyanobacteria, are unique in that they leave traces of their
infection in preserved host shells. Mussels can be infected by shell boring
parasites, and analysis of shell chemistry can estimate the ocean conditions at
the time the mussels were alive. To accomplish the research goals, the Fellow is
identifying endolithic cyanobacterial species and ichnospecies (a way of
identifying the cyanobacteria parasite based on shell boring pattern), and
measuring endolithic cyanobacterial growth and host defense using museum
specimens from the Beaty Biodiversity Museum and the California Academy of
Sciences. The Fellow is also conducting field sampling and experiments to
confirm correlative patterns from collections.

In terms of training goals, the Fellow is gaining expertise in 1)
paleontological methods of ichnospecies identification, 2) genetic techniques
for identifying extant species, 3) stable isotope analysis, 4) biomechanical
measurements and 5) conducting ocean acidification experiments. The Fellow is
also integrating research with an outreach program that encourages community
environmental awareness, leadership, diversity, self-confidence, and knowledge
of the outdoors. To support this mission, the outreach program includes
collaboration with a student-led outdoor education program associated with the
public high schools in Seattle, WA. The Fellow is engaging students in hands-on
field ecology, including the development of a coastal field trip during which
the students aid with the field components of the Fellow's research. An
additional aspect of the outreach program includes communicating with local,
national and international media, both through traditional radio and newspaper
reporting and through more modern avenues such as blogs and podcasts.