* 1611608
* RUI:  SusChEM:  Mechanisms of Nanoparticle Aggregation and Corresponding Effects on Metal Sorption, Desorption, and Incorporation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christopher Kim, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, Professor Christopher
Kim of Chapman University is performing research that involves detailed
characterization of iron oxyhydroxide nanoparticle aggregates. These
characterization studies include batch and real-time metal ion
adsorption/desorption experiments and synchrotron-based X-ray spectroscopic
methods to improve predictive modeling of metal uptake/retention to nanoscale
iron oxyhydroxides. Nanoparticles of inorganic mineral phases are widespread in
water-based environmental systems. Natural and synthetic nanoparticles are
highly effective in remediation strategies for contaminated waters, such as
those that result from metal ore mining activities. This research develops
models to predict metal fate and transport in natural waterways. These studies
maximize metal retention and reduce metal mobility in contaminated systems.
Broader impacts of this work include the creation of independent research
opportunities for undergraduate, community college, and high school students
(targeting females, under-represented minorities, and low-income populations),
providing students with experiences using national synchrotron user facilities,
and incorporating new findings in nanoparticle research to the undergraduate
curricula in environmental and inorganic chemistry. High school chemistry and
environmental science teachers are engaged in the research methods and outcomes
through on-campus visits and lesson development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fate
and speciation of metal ion species sorbed to aggregated nanoparticles are
largely unknown. Metal sorption to nanoaggregates serves as an important means
of natural attenuation and provides considerable potential for the effective
remediation of metal-contaminated surface aqueous systems. Specifically, with
increasing aggregation state, salinity, and time, metal uptake declines due to
loss of reactive surface area but metal retention may increase due to trapping
of sorbed ions onto/into the more complex confined aggregate structures. This
project advances our understanding of the fundamental processes that control the
retention and sequestration of metal ions onto nanoscale iron oxyhydroxide
particles and their aggregates. The research impacts the emerging field of
environmental nanoscience, particularly the role that nanoscale particles play
in the remediation of metal-contaminated sites.