* 1611913
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Emily Lescak, Lescak                  Emily
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Emily Lescak

Proposal number: 1611913

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Dr. Emily Lescak is "Effects of Chronic Exposure to
Low Levels of Antibiotics on Development of Threespine Stickleback Fish." The
host institution for this fellowship is the University of Alaska Anchorage, and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Milligan-Myhre.

The goal of this project is to study short- and long-term effects of chronic
exposure to low levels of antibiotics on microbial community diversity and host
development in a genetically variable fish species, threespine stickleback
(Gasterosteus aculeatus), a model organism for understanding the impact of
environmental contaminants on vertebrate physiology. Vertebrate host/microbe
interactions are crucial for nutrient absorption, somatic growth, and immune
system development. Disruptions to the microbiota, such as those caused by
antibiotics, can therefore have both immediate and long-term effects on host
physiology. Low levels of more than a dozen types of antibiotics have been
detected in waterways in the United States and Europe. However, little is known
about how chronic exposure impacts host-microbe interactions in aquatic
vertebrates, like fish, or how host genetic background influences the response
of the microbiota to disruption. The Fellow is testing the hypotheses that 1)
the levels of antibiotics found in the environment are sufficient to disrupt
microbial community composition, which will result in changes to timing of organ
development, growth, behavior, and inflammatory state, and 2) that there will be
individualized responses to antibiotic exposure due to differences in host
genetic background. The Fellow is rearing stickleback from two genetically
distinct populations at low levels of antibiotics and in a control (untreated
water). Microbial diversity, inflammatory state, and physiological and
behavioral development are being compared at a series of key developmental time
points until reproductive maturity is reached. Results will help elucidate how
gut microbial communities respond to chronic disturbances, how critical aspects
of vertebrate physiology may be disrupted by antibiotic exposure in the
environment, and how host genetic background influences susceptibility to short-
and long-term changes in microbial diversity and development.

In terms of training, the Fellow is 1) learning new techniques in
bioinformatics, histology, and microbiology; 2) developing immune response
assays; 3) mentoring students. The Fellow is giving presentations on her
research and career training to K-12 students in Anchorage, Alaska. Furthermore,
she is training high school students through the Anchorage School District's
mentorship program and identifying undergraduate and graduate trainees through
the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program and BUILD EXITO. By
establishing the University of Alaska Anchorage's first postdoctoral
association, the Fellow is organizing professional development for postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students. Thus, the Fellow is engaging trainees of all
levels from diverse backgrounds in research important to ecosystem health.