* 1611380
* High Strength and High Ductility Martensitic Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Karl Hartwig, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "martensite" phase of steel is
very strong, but is notorious for poor deformability. There is scattered
evidence that shows certain forms of martensite may be ductile, but the
mechanisms of enhanced ductility are unclear. Ductile martensite could satisfy a
long term industry and government need for high-strength high-ductility steel
for automobiles and other transportation vehicles, and a host of nuclear,
aerospace and petrochemical applications. This project has the potential to
significantly advance the design and discovery of high strength and ductile
martensitic steels. In this project, a modified 9% Chromium-1% Molybdenum steel
is selected as the test material because it has broad applications in the
petrochemical and nuclear industries. The Principal Investigators' (PI's) recent
studies show ductile martensite may exist in this steel. The PIs have long
lasting history of collaboration and their expertise on processing and
microscopy/nano-mechanics is nicely complementary. Graduate students will visit
the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies (CINT) at Los Alamos National
Laboratory to access their advanced microscopy facilities. The knowledge derived
from this project will be incorporated into curricula at Texas A&amp;M
University and Purdue University. The PIs will endeavor to recruit minority
graduate students through the Pathway to Doctoral Program at Texas A&amp;M
University, and from surrounding minority institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to understand, at a fundamental level, the impact of alloy
chemistry, microstructure, and thermo-mechanical treatment (TMT) on the
properties of ductile martensitic steel. The long term goal is to accomplish
high strength and high tensile ductility in ferritic/martensitic (F/M) steel. To
achieve this goal, the PIs will accomplish the following tasks: (1) tailor the
carbon concentration in martensite and control the volume fraction of retained
austenite by using the quench-partitioning (Q-P) approach; (2) combine TMT
(including hot rolling and equal channel angular extrusion) with the Q-P method
to achieve grain refinement and control the morphology of the martensite; (3)
investigate the influence of retained austenite films on the deformation
mechanisms in T91 steel. Micropillar compression experiments will be used to
investigate the shearing response along the austenite/martensite interface to
understand its role on ductility of F/M steel. In addition, they will use in
situ nanoindentation in a transmission electron microscope and in situ neutron
scattering (at a DoE National Laboratory through a user project) to study the
influence of austenite/martensite interfaces on absorption of dislocations in
martensite during deformation. A successful project will enable design of
ductile martensitic steels with mechanical properties that far exceed those of
advanced structural steels available today.