* 1611161
* Novel phases of quantum matter in numerical simulations, field theory and materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at improving our understanding of the
collective motion of an infinite sea of electrons when they are cooled close to
the absolute zero of temperature. The complexity of this "quantum many-body
problem" arises both because there is a large number of electrons that influence
each other and also because at such low temperatures the unfamiliar to everyday
experience laws of quantum mechanics become operative. Our understanding of
theories to describe the physical phenomena involved finds important
applications in describing the properties of a wide range of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The range of phenomena that quantum many-body
systems can display is wide and more are being constantly discovered. Small
changes in the conditions of the electrons can produce dramatic changes in their
behavior. An important class of phenomena where this is evident is found in
quantum magnetism, which encompasses the study of patterns of internal magnetic
fields that develop spontaneously in materials. In the last century, advances in
experimental techniques have resulted in the discovery of hundreds of materials
with unusual magnetic behavior. Linking the measured magnetic behavior to the
nature of the atoms that form the materials is an important challenge, both for
our fundamental understanding of nature and for potential applications of novel
magnets in technology. Computer simulations have emerged as a powerful tool to
solve such problems. A major component of this project will be the development
and application of novel computer algorithms to tackle unsolved problems in
quantum magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the project
will contribute to the training and education of undergraduate and graduate
students in the fields of condensed matter physics and advanced computational
methods, opening up a broad spectrum of career opportunities for them after
graduation. The PI will also reach outside the University of Kentucky, by
visiting various liberal arts colleges in the state of Kentucky (including
Centre College and Berea College), giving popular-level lectures on quantum
physics and leading discussions with students on future opportunities in
graduate school. Summer research opportunities will also be offered to students
at neighboring liberal arts colleges. The PI will work to forge collaborations
and connections between the nuclear and particle theory community and the
condensed matter community though the organization of conferences and symposia
at national and international venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education in the field of strongly correlated quantum condensed
matter physics, combining large-scale numerical simulations and field theoretic
studies. The numerical research will involve both the development of new
algorithms to study strongly correlated systems as well as their application to
a number of problems of interest. Some of the major topics to be studied
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) spin-liquid phases in non-bipartite quantum
spin models,&lt;br/&gt;(2) quantum-spin-ice-like emergent electrodynamics in
spin models,&lt;br/&gt;(3) quantum criticality in spin systems with
disorder,&lt;br/&gt;(4) simulations of lattice fermion models with quadratic
band touching in two and three dimensions with applications to bilayer graphene
and the pyrochlore iridates,&lt;br/&gt;(5) the effect of interactions on Dirac
fermions in two and three dimensions, with applications to various strongly
correlated systems,&lt;br/&gt;(6) deconfined criticality of two-dimensional spin
models,&lt;br/&gt;(7) improvement of our understanding of the "sign problem" of
QMC and broadening the class of sign-problem-free
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme is to identify new phenomena
that essentially involve strong electron-electron interactions and which cannot
be analyzed by perturbative methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
research, the project will contribute to the training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of condensed matter physics
and advanced computational methods, opening up a broad spectrum of career
opportunities for them after graduation. The PI will also reach outside the
University of Kentucky, by visiting various liberal arts colleges in the state
of Kentucky (including Centre College and Berea College), giving popular-level
lectures on quantum physics and leading discussions with students on future
opportunities in graduate school. Summer research opportunities will also be
offered to students at neighboring liberal arts colleges. The PI will work to
forge collaborations and connections between the nuclear and particle theory
community and the condensed matter community though the organization of
conferences and symposia at national and international venues.