* 1611642
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* William Kuhn, Kuhn                    William        R
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

William R. Kuhn

Proposal Number: 1611642

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to William R. Kuhn is
"Leveraging face-detection methods to identify insects from field photos,
automatically." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
Tennessee (Knoxville), and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Mongi Abidi.

This work aims to automate the identification of species, thereby helping to
alleviate the 'taxonomic impediment,' i.e., an urgent need for more taxonomy
from fewer taxonomists. The impetus for doing this research is that although
understanding Earth's species is one of the grand challenges of the twenty-first
century, training and funding for the field of taxonomy (identifying and
describing species) has declined markedly over the past several decades. The
Fellow is integrating existing computer vision and machine-learning methods to
build an automatic system for identifying species from photographs of them in
their habitat. The Fellow has three main research objectives: (1) develop and
train a model to locate the subjects in images by modifying an existing method
for detecting human faces in photographs; (2) characterize the images based on
the appearance of the subjects' body parts by adapting an algorithm for
describing the key features of an image; and (3) predict species identity by
comparing features from unknown images to those of known species, utilizing a
robust machine-learning framework. The Fellow is developing a system to identify
dragonfly and damselfly (Odonata) species, but the underlying code will allow
researchers to train systems for other organisms. The Fellow is utilizing
citizen scientist data on OdonataCentral (odonatacentral.org), a digital
collection of species records and imagery of Odonata from the Western
Hemisphere. Images of the 600+ species included in this digital collection are
being used to train the most taxonomically-broad automatic identification system
ever created, and the ability of this software to accept field-based images
makes it extremely versatile.

The Fellow is receiving advanced training in image analysis, computer vision,
and machine learning, and becoming proficient in software design and
programming. The Fellow will be able use these skills to solve problems in
biology in the future, when he is running his own lab. The Fellow is also
developing his skills as a mentor and scientific communicator. He is mentoring
two undergraduates and one graduate student in computer science, encouraging
them to focus on solving biological problems. The odonate identification system
is being integrated into OdonataCentral as well the mobile app that it powers,
Dragonfly ID. This will allows both researchers and citizen scientists to make
rapid identifications in the field, for applications such as assessing
biodiversity and monitoring water quality. Ultimately this research will benefit
taxonomists studying other organisms, since the Fellow is releasing his source
code, allowing others to train and implement their own automatic identification
systems.