* 1611180
* Fundamental Study of Low-Cycle-Fatigue Behavior of High-Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Peter Liaw, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study low-cycle-
fatigue behavior of a new class of multi-component alloys called high-entropy
alloys. These alloys have attracted huge attention in recent five years for
their unique mechanical properties. The transformative potential of the present
work is represented as a systematic and innovative investigation for structural
characterization experiments, thus revealing the deformation mechanisms under
cyclic loading and integrating the design, fabrication, verification,
improvement, and prediction components, which can be applied for the studies of
other advanced materials in the future. Students and researchers involved in
this project will have opportunities to experience the state-of-the-art research
equipment at the national laboratories. The outreach activities will include the
K-12 science education, minority involvement, and efforts to engage the public.
The results of the project will be disseminated through avenues accessible to
the scientific community and to the general public with an emphasis on middle-
and high-school students, as well as women and minority students. Appropriate
aspects of the research results will be incorporated into the principal
investigator's (PI's) graduate and undergraduate course materials to introduce
students to modern interdisciplinary materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to (1) study the low-cycle fatigue (LCF) behavior of high-entropy
alloys (HEAs) by varying the structures (e.g., controlling the Al content), (2)
clarify the deformation mechanisms of HEAs during LCF using state-of-art
characterization methods (e.g., advanced microscopy and in-situ neutron
diffraction), and (3) based on the fundamental understanding of the deformation
behavior obtained from the present work, design and develop innovative HEAs with
excellent LCF properties. HEAs attract huge attention in recent five years for
their unique and excellent mechanical properties. Even though extensive studies
have been devoted to the mechanical behavior,most of these research activities
are for monotonic tests and almost none has focused on the fatigue properties,
especially LCF. The mechanism of fatigue behavior must be examined carefully
before HEAs can indeed be introduced in practical applications. The critical
issues, thus, become obvious: (1) how do the multi-principal elements affect
structures, and further, fatigue properties; (2) how does the high-entropy
configuration influence the deformation mechanism; and (3) if the above two
aspects have positive effects on the fatigue resistance, what are the
fundamental contributing factors. Accordingly, a hypothesis is proposed and to
be tested in the present work that HEAs with some specific compositions (i.e.,
structures) will show superior fatigue resistance over traditional alloys due to
(1) great tendency to form twins, (2) solute atoms and large distortion from the
element-size mismatch to pin dislocations, and (3) the interaction between
dislocation and twinning, before fatigue-crack initiation and during crack
propagation at room and elevated temperatures, and their long-term performance
can be modulated and further improved by cold or hot treatment (e.g., cold
rolling to control grain size). It is expected that the mechanism of LCF
behavior could be revealed by a combination of the proposed experimental,
theoretical, and modeling efforts, thus providing the fundamental understanding
of the deformation behavior for single- and multiple-phase HEAs.