* 1611760
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate: Greater Philadelphia Region Cohort XIV Project - University of Delaware
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree.

The University of Delaware (UD), within a National Science Foundation (NSF)
designated Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), is
the host site for the 2016-2018 BD program for the Greater Philadelphia Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation under the leadership of Drexel
University. The program supports a graduate student cohort of 12
underrepresented minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP campuses across
the nation. The BD Activity provides extensive training in specific STEM
disciplines as well as professional development and guidance that promote peer
mentoring and leadership in the scientific community. Students receive rigorous
academic and research training experiences that support completion of the Ph.D.
and the transition to a competitive career in academia and industry.

Over the duration of the project and beyond, the BD program at UD serves to
increase the number and quality of students from underrepresented groups
completing STEM Ph.D. degrees and entering the professoriate. Evaluation
research from the project's implementation has the potential to address the
following questions: (1) Beyond Bridge to the Doctorate funded program
activities, what are the different methods being used by specific graduate STEM
departments and why are certain ones more effective than others in increasing
the capacity of specific graduate STEM departments to produce more readily well-
qualified underrepresented minority doctoral STEM degree recipients? (2) How
will engaging the faculty research advisors of the fellows as a collective group
on a regular basis to review scholarly productivity of the individual fellows
have an impact on the mentoring experience of the participants and their
progression to doctoral completion?

The long-term impact of the BD activity is reflected in America's STEM
workforce, both in academia and in industrial research and development. By
nurturing the future professoriate, as well as the scientific workforce, the
value added is seen in the visibility of minorities in science and engineering,
increasing representation and providing role models and motivation for the next
generation.