* 1611272
* Liquid Crystals of Nanonucleic Acids: Hierarchical Self-Assembly as a Route to Prebiotic Selection, Templating, and Autocatalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of Colorado Boulder is to develop a
chemical process, which is referred to in the proposal as "liquid crystal
autocatalysis." This project explores as the mechanism for the appearance of
nucleic acids in the prebiotic era. This proposal is expected to develop the
understanding on how a "Liquid Crystal (LC) World" preceded the nucleic acid
world by providing its basic molecular design and feedstock. Within the liquid
crystal phase, duplex-forming nano-nucleic acids are held in end-to-end contact
to a structure that catalytically promotes their chemical ligation, and this
forms the basis for an autocatalytic feedback loop. The outcomes from these
studies could have potential in offering new tools for in situ synthesis of
nucleic acid-based nanotechnology, and potentially leading to a whole new
platform for nano-controlled nucleic acid, and assembly/disassembly of nucleic
acids for different applications such as drug/gene delivery, bioderived motors,
etc. The proposed educational broader impact activities will help to inspire
high school students in STEM, and would provide valuable undergraduate research
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: The proposed
research program will be focusing on exploring the features of this ancient
Liquid Crystal (LC) World and especially its capacity for providing the
molecular feedstock for the nucleic acids (NAs) world. The research will
diversify the input chemical stock for starting the LC World by exploring liquid
crystal autocatalysis under successively more primitive and diverse initial
conditions, beginning with ultra-short duplexing NAs down to single bases, and
evolving to mixtures of homologs made with proposed prebiotic synthetic or
chemical degradation schemes, with the goal of understanding the robustness of
liquid crystal autocatalysis in the presence of chemical noise. This award will
develop the ability of liquid crystal autocatalysis to narrow molecular
diversity to generate homogeneous polymer populations such as the nucleic acids.
This project will also explore the potential of the LC World for producing
nucleic acids with chemically and catalytically active secondary structures, by
feeding liquid crystal autocatalytic systems with mixtures of nanonucleic acids
that incorporate randomness in sequence and lengths. This approach will enable
development of strategies for making chains capable of adopting a secondary
structure. This project will investigate the evolution of nucleic acid
populations starting under varying conditions of randomness in thermal cycling
and ligation, searching for specific subpopulations of sequences or folding
motifs. Finally, new strategies will be explored for catalytic ligation and
chemical stabilization of self-assembled DNA. This path has definite potential
for technological novelty, offering new tools for in situ synthesis in the
hugely expanding field of NA-based nanotechnology, and potentially leading to a
whole new platform for nano-controlled NA chemistry.