* 1611482
* Creating a new assessment tool for quantitative critical thinking in introductory lab courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Carl Wieman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,176.00

A great deal of time and money is spent on science lab classes, but there is
little evidence they are providing good educational value, and some indication
that they are not. Currently, there are no accepted ways to measure whether or
not students are learning the desired skills from such classes. This significant
project will create a new way to measure students' learning of a particularly
important set of skills that such labs can teach: how students reason with
experimental data and test the validity of scientific models. These skills are
an essential part of all science and are also important in public policy
decisions and throughout the technical workforce. This test will be easy to
administer to students and will guide instructional improvement. It will provide
an essential first step for enabling the widespread improvement of the
educational effectiveness of lab courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators on
this project will develop and validate an easy-to-use assessment of quantitative
critical thinking skills in the context of introductory physics lab courses. The
concise and validated assessment tool will be critical to building evidence
about the effectiveness of laboratory instruction and to generate new knowledge
about student competencies and difficulties in critical thinking and scientific
decision making. The specific set of skills to be assessed include interpreting
and drawing conclusions from data with uncertainties, comparing and evaluating
models and data, and making decisions about improving the experimental design or
data acquisition. These skills were identified as key goals for an undergraduate
science curriculum and for which labs have unique affordances for teaching.
Development of the instrument will involve cycles of revisions through:
evaluating think-aloud interviews with students and experts; evaluating written
responses from a wide range of students enrolled in physics lab courses; and
through statistical tests of reliability and validity.