* 1611887
* Developing Undergraduate Scientists through Inquiry-Based Chemistry Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Judith Weinstein-Lloyd, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 296,189.00

The Department of Chemistry at State University of New York at Old Westbury
(SUNY-OW) will explore how undergraduate students can be motivated to work
independently and gain skills with inquiry-based laboratory experiences. This
project will bridge the gap between desired student learning outcomes and
current instructional practices. Compared to traditional cookbook-style
laboratory experiences, which leave many students unacquainted with scientific
methodology and argumentation, inquiry-based experiences provide a richer and
more meaningful learning experience. The project will also explore the impact of
team teaching on student engagement and learning progress. SUNY-OW accepts a
larger number of transfer students and will actively disseminate their findings
to their feeder community colleges and other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study creative approaches for improving
STEM learning and learning environments, with a focus on a research-rich and a
skills-rich chemistry laboratory curriculum. The goal is to improve
undergraduates' understanding of scientific methodology and argumentation via
inquiry-based laboratory teaching and argumentative writing. By integrating
students' self-designed projects into teaching laboratories, the project will
provide opportunities for students to work independently and to think critically
as scientists. Through guided argumentative writing, students' deep thinking
will be persistently focused on projects while their knowledge-based
understanding develops. The impact of instructor-guided and student-generated
inquiries on learning will be examined. This project will generate new evidence
regarding effective instruction in the chemistry laboratory, thus leading to a
better instructional design in undergraduate chemistry.