* 1611076
* CDS&amp;E: Organization and Dynamics of Charged Molecules in Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 314,998.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education on polymer electrolytes. Polymer
electrolytes are long chain-like molecules that contain charged units. They are
emerging materials for the production and the storage of clean energy in devices
such as fuel cell electric vehicles that emit water as exhaust and vehicles
powered by rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. Polymer electrolytes are ideal
candidates because they are flexible, lightweight, recyclable, and inexpensive.
However, polymer fuel cells and batteries have low efficiencies. In order to
optimize their efficiency, it is crucial to understand their structure, and how
electric charges, or ions, move across the polymer electrolyte material that
lies between the terminals and inside these devices. In this project the PI aims
to advance fundamental understanding of the complex interplay among different
polymer electrolyte phases and the distribution of ions and their motion inside
polymer electrolyte materials to enable the design of a nanoscale 'highway
system' for ions to travel inside higher performance batteries and fuel cells.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The formation of molecular-scale structures called
nanostructures within the material guides how ions move. Predictive theoretical
and computational tools that can describe and explain the complex behavior of
polyelectrolytes could help optimize transport of ions through materials to
increase efficiency of energy storage devices. The PI will build on a recently
developed approach to describe the effect of inhomogeneities in the polymer
electrolyte materials have on the ion motion and on the correlations in the
motions of the ions as they move through the materials. The PI aims to develop a
self-consistent description that takes into account how the complex distribution
of ions and their motions affect the polymer electrolyte material and how the
structure of the polymer electrolyte affects the distribution of ions and their
motions. Of particular interest is the use of molecular dynamics and other
computational methods to analyze ionic transport of charged units confined by
interfaces with different materials and their associated electric charges, an
important step toward a capability to design nanoscale 'highway systems' for
ions to travel inside high performance batteries and fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational tools developed through this project
to address problems that arise in materials design have more general
application, for example in biological systems and in industrial processes.
These tools will enable advances in understanding how molecular units that carry
electric charge are confined in small regions as a consequence of an environment
made of different materials with different electronic properties. This will help
stimulate innovative solutions for manipulating and designing materials for
energy storage, as well as nanofluidic devices. Among the impacts derived from
this project will be a set of studies compiled into publications and open access
programs to assist researchers working in related theoretical and computational
soft matter problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research, and education on polyelectrolyte blends and copolymers which have been
identified as suitable candidate materials for use in high-density energy
storage and generation devices. They combine the low volatility and high
flexibility of polymers with ion-selective conductivity of the charge-carrying
backbone. In polyelectrolyte blends and in neutral-charged copolymer melts,
ionic correlations can significantly reduce miscibility, inducing phase
separation into nanophases with different concentrations and ordering of ions
given that the dielectric constant is relatively low in these materials. Using a
hybrid of self-consistent field and liquid state theories, the PI will
investigate the nanophase structures formed by copolymer electrolytes, their
interfacial properties and ion conductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of
ionic correlations in polyelectrolyte copolymer melts determines the structure
at multiple length scales. The ion distribution depends on the dielectric
properties of the media and on the dielectric heterogeneities that developed due
to ionic correlations and to the degree of miscibility of the components. The PI
will develop models to account for these effects self-consistently. Nanophase
segregated structures as well as nanochannels where one dimension is comparable
to the Debye length, possess an electrostatic potential that can be
significantly modulated by the soft ionic structure inside the channel and by
the dielectric heterogeneity at the interface. The ionic concentrations and
structure of the nanochannels affect the mechanical and transport properties
dramatically. Present studies mainly deal with simple symmetric monovalent
electrolytes in aqueous solutions because it is a simple physical system that
can be understood by Poisson Boltzmann theory. However, real applications may
involve multivalent ion species as well as dielectric interfaces of materials
with low dielectric constants. It is therefore crucial to understand the effect
of correlations in the structure of charged-neutral copolymer melts, to
determine how ions transport through nanochannels. Important effects to
determine include the nanostructure symmetry and periodicity which is strongly
dependent on ion sizes, molecular weight, copolymer composition and charge
distribution along the chains. The PI will implement MD simulations that include
ion correlations, finite size of molecules and dielectric heterogeneities to
determine the structure of polyelectrolyte copolymer melts and ion
conductivities. These simulations, which are based on a true energy functional,
are versatile enough to treat the case of multiple and curved interfaces,
multivalent salts, and asymmetric ion sizes to study the dynamical evolution of
the soft ionic structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational tools developed
through this project to address problems that arise in materials design have
more general application, for example in biological systems and in industrial
processes. These tools will enable advances in understanding of charged soft
matter and polymeric materials and will help stimulate innovative solutions for
manipulating and designing materials for energy storage, soft electronics,
nanofluidic devices, and other application areas. Among the impacts derived from
this project will be a set of studies compiled into publications and open access
programs to assist researchers working in related theoretical and computational
soft matter problems.