* 1611988
* Polymer Chemistry: Cross-linking the Curriculum (PC3)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Brandon Quillian, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 279,297.00

The Department of Chemistry at Armstrong Atlantic State University will develop
"Polymer Chemistry: Crosslinking the Curriculum" (PC3). Natural and synthetic
polymers are important materials found in almost all biological systems and
durable products, and approximately half of all professional chemists work with
polymers at some point in their career. This project will allow students to
experience the interconnectedness of chemistry in the context of studying
polymers. It will develop new polymer-themed materials for existing courses and
laboratories, and develop new introductory and advanced polymer courses for
chemistry majors. Together, these efforts will intertwine a polymer paradigm
across multiple chemistry sub-disciplines and strengthen students' foundations
in polymer chemistry. PC3 will promote faculty collaboration and facilitate team
teaching by having multiple faculty members coordinate their instruction to
address a complicated topic in a coherent manner. The project will offer a
comprehensive curricular approach to meet the recently revised ACS Guidelines
and Evaluation Procedures for Bachelor's Degree
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PC3 will focus on two polymeric systems,
polyaspartic acid and ring opening metathesis. In these contexts, students will
be introduced to historically and industrially relevant polymer synthetic
procedures, and will learn modern polymer characterization techniques using gel
permeation chromatography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and infrared
spectroscopy. Incorporating problem based learning in the laboratory is expected
to improve students' competency in understanding the primary chemistry
literature, better prepare students for careers in local polymer-specialized
chemical industries, and increase student interest in and engagement with
chemistry. Working with a project evaluator, the investigators will study how
integration of polymer chemistry across the curriculum increases student
understanding of fundamental chemical principles, and how curriculum-wide
teaching reforms influence non-cognitive student outcomes.