* 1611423
* Distributed Continuous-time Optimization for Multi-agent Dynamical Systems under Realistic Challenges
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 376,000.00

Distributed motion coordination, where multiple agents achieve collective motion
patterns with only local information and interaction, has numerous applications.
Despite the important role of cooperative optimization, existing results on
distributed motion coordination seldom optimize a team objective function while
those on distributed optimization (primarily discrete-time algorithms) do not
explicitly account for continuous-time physical dynamics. Distributed
continuous-time optimization is of great significance in enabling multiple
physical agents to cooperatively achieve motion coordination and team
optimization with only local information and interaction. Despite a few recent
results on distributed continuous-time optimization, they are rather limited,
with restrictive assumptions posed on convex objective functions and not
addressing realistic challenges, namely, i) fully distributed design, ii)
finite-time convergence, iii) time-varying objective functions, and iv) physical
agent dynamics. The special assumptions limit the application domains while the
realistic challenges are relevant in, respectively, i) real-world implementation
of distributed algorithms, ii) time-critical missions, iii) applications
demanding response to real-time changes, and iv) real physical systems. Despite
their relevance and importance, each of the above issues is largely unexplored,
not to mention a combination. The proposed research aims at addressing these
realistic challenges. Numerous civilian, homeland security, and military
applications involving multi-agent systems and fields related to optimization
and networked systems will benefit from the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address
distributed continuous-time optimization for physical agents with local
information and interaction under realistic challenges, coupled with general
convex functions and directed graphs. The proposal consists five thrusts,
namely, 1) fully distributed continuous-time optimization, 2) finite-time
distributed continuous-time optimization, 3) distributed continuous-time
optimization with time-varying objective functions, 4) distributed continuous-
time optimization with physical agent dynamics, and 5) experimental validation.
In Thrust 1, the PI will design and analyze novel self-adaptive fully
distributed optimization algorithms, robust to topology changes and
addition/removal of agents in the team, with state-dependent diminishing gains.
In Thrust 2, the PI will design and analyze novel finite-time fully distributed
optimization algorithms without/with constraints by combining distributed
tracking and estimation with adaptive gains driven by a switching mechanism. In
Thrust 3, the PI will tackle issues such as relaxed conditions on changing rates
of time-varying objective functions, non-existence of Hessians, and incomplete
knowledge of local objective functions. In Thrust 4, the PI will design and
analyze novel distributed optimization algorithms accounting for Lagrange and
more general unknown nonlinear dynamics. In Thrust 5, distributed control laws
from Thrusts 1-4 will be experimentally validated on teams of autonomous robots.
The project will solve many open problems in distributed control and
optimization and significantly advance theory and applications in multi-agent
systems.