* 1611687
* Designing and measuring the impact of an asynchronous learning block model for socially-engaged design
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Today, engineers are at work devising new technologies aimed at solving problems
in every realm of life and in every corner of the world. From healthcare to
clean energy, from food security to transportation, from the environment to
economic development, the discoveries of engineers improve lives and transform
society. However, in the vast majority of cases, engineering students and
engineers are developing solutions for problems posed by others without asking
their own critical questions regarding the real need and the origin of the
problem. Engineering design, which is required of most engineering students,
must be taught in a context socially engaging the users and ecosystems that are
impacted by the engineered systems being designed. In this project, a new
educational approach called the learning block model will be designed,
implemented, and investigated. This model supports students' learning in the
context of socially engaged design, where designers integrate human, cultural,
economic, and environmental factors within the processes of designing
technology. Ultimately, the goal of this project is to enable engineers to
design technologies with a deep sense of social engagement in addressing
societal and environmental needs, while also maximizing the probability of
solution adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The learning block model combines the
convenience and scale of asynchronous online learning with the value of face-to-
face hands-on skills training and interactions. Skill development will be
facilitated in teaching socially engaged design through the development and
refinement of this model. Evidence will be collected to continuously improve the
design and successful implementation of the learning block model in ways that
scale up can be achieved at across engineering programs. Usability testing and
content evaluation, as well as rigorous methods from educational research, will
be used to assess the impact of the model on conceptions of and performance of
students during socially engaged design. This project will result in improving
student learning and skills around projects where stakeholders and context must
be integrated in decisions made throughout the design process. The project has
the potential to impact engineering design pedagogy and engineering design
content.