* 1611875
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Kevin Potter, Potter                  Kevin
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Kevin Potter is "Uncovering the transcriptional and
genomic dynamics of cytokinin signaling in rice". The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Joseph Kieber.

Cytokinins are plant hormones that are known to regulate various aspects of
growth and development and other physiological processes in plants. The
overarching goal of the project is to gain a deeper understanding into how
cytokinin regulates these processes by using an integrative transcriptomic and
genomic approach to build a dynamic model of the cytokinin response in rice.
These new insights may provide new effective strategies to engineer this
signaling pathway to modify various agronomical traits in rice needed to meet
the future food supply and demand. The broader impacts of the project consist of
training undergraduate and graduate students, assisting the Morehead Planetarium
and Science Center with a series of workshops designed for UNC graduate
students, and participating in the North Carolina DNA Day, which is an annual
event where North Carolina researchers from various institutions advocate
careers in science and biotechnology and give biology lessons to high schools
throughout North Carolina. Training objectives include acquiring expertise with
new transcriptomic and genomics methods, and bioinformatics tools.

This project seeks to: 1) kinetically characterize the transcriptional and open
chromatin profiles using RNA-Seq and formaldehyde-assisted isolation of
regulatory elements (FAIRE-seq), respectively, in response to cytokinins in
shoots and roots in rice; 2) integrate these datasets, build dynamic models for
the cytokinin response, and identify cis-acting regulatory elements by utilizing
a variety of bioinformatics tools; and 3) adapt assay for transposase accessible
chromatin followed by sequencing (ATAC-seq) for use in rice and then use this
method in conjunction with RNA-Seq to build dynamic tissue-specific cytokinin
response models in the shoot and root meristems in rice. These models will be
tested and validated in future studies by altering different modules and
components to ascertain their specific function in the cytokinin signaling
pathway and effects on agronomical traits in rice. The collected sequencing
datasets will be made available at the Sequence Read Archive at NCBI.