* 1611331
* Colloidal Atomic Layer Deposition (c-ALD): quest for atomic precision in nanomaterial synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,200.00

Nanomaterials, small particles consisting of only several thousand atoms and of
only a few billionths of a meter in diameter, offer many opportunities for
transformative science and technological applications. However, the lack of
atomic precision during fabrication of nanometer-sized crystals restricts the
ability to harness all the power of this broad and diverse class of materials.
For example, a collection of real nanoparticles is always non-uniform and
comprises particles with some variation in size within the group. Dr. Talapin is
investigating how to eliminate this size variation and enable atomic precision
in synthesis of nanoscale materials. Many practical applications, from flat-
panel televisions to photodetectors and solar cells, will benefit from highly
uniform, nearly atomically precise nanomaterials. Dr. Talapin is developing a
technique called colloidal atomic layer deposition (c-ALD) to control the
solution-based synthesis of nanomaterials using a sequence of two complementary
self-limiting surface reactions. This concept is inspired by the success of gas-
phase atomic layer deposition (ALD), which is widely used in microelectronics
and other fields. Dr. Talapin's research has broader societal impact since it is
directly relevant to the development of new technologically-relevant materials
and has the potential to solve a fundamental problem that limits the pace of
development for this broad class of materials. Dr. Talapin mentors undergraduate
and high school students by helping them gain research experience. An important
aspect of his outreach program focuses on education enrichment via science clubs
and science nights for the local underrepresented African-American and Hispanic
K-12 populations on Chicago's South Side. This project also supports the
development and distribution of nanoscience educational resources accessible to
the general public on the Talapin Lab website at the University of Chicago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Talapin of the University of Chicago is supported by
the Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop colloidal atomic
layer deposition (c-ALD) of nanoscaled materials with precise size dispersion.
The project aims to eliminate inhomogeneous ensemble broadening by growing
functional nanomaterials in a layer-by-layer fashion, starting from atomically
defined clusters of different technologically important materials. The
polydispersity of nanomaterials originates from a weak size dependence of the
free energy related to the addition or removal of individual atoms to/from a
nanoscale object. In this case, size distribution can only be controlled by
kinetic factors. Both theoretical modeling and numerous experimental studies
show that it would be difficult to improve homogeneity significantly by only
kinetically controlling reaction products. Dr. Talapin is working on a paradigm-
shifting approach for colloidal synthesis of nanomaterials with minimal, ideally
no, size distribution. The goal is to establish means to thermodynamically
control nanomaterials synthesis using a sequence of two complementary self-
limiting surface reactions. This concept is inspired by the success of gas-phase
atomic layer deposition (ALD) widely used in microelectronics and other fields.
Preliminary studies show that the ALD concept can be implemented in solution
and, when applied to colloidal nanomaterials, enables layer-by-layer growth of
crystalline lattices with close to atomic precision. Eliminating polydispersity
at the ensemble level is arguably one of the most important challenges in
nanomaterial synthesis. One can draw an analogy between size distribution of
nanomaterials and the polydispersity index (PDI) of polymers. The discovery of
advanced living polymerization techniques, which nearly eliminate chain
polydispersity, has been among the most important recent developments in
macromolecular chemistry. Dr. Talapin incorporates activities with broader
societal impact into his research program. He actively trains undergraduate and
high school students in his lab by giving them research experience
opportunities. He also develops course modules and nanoscience educational
resources applicable to K-12 students which are accessible to the general public
on the Talapin Lab website at the University of Chicago. These hands-on labs and
experiments are also used in outreach and education enrichment events for the
local underrepresented African-American and Hispanic K-12 populations in on
Chicago's South Side.