* 1611295
* CCSS: Programmable Mixed-Signal Vision Sensor for Continuous Mobile Vision
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lin Zhong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

The emergence of wearable devices has made it possible for computers to
continuously interpret the user environment, or continuous mobile vision. It can
extend a user's memory and attention, not only enabling previously impossible,
personalized services but also assisting people with vision or attention
impairment in an unprecedented way. While modern devices are capable of
capturing and interpreting what their users see, they face a daunting physical
barrier: energy efficiency. For example, performing continuous vision workloads
drains the battery of Google Glass in about 40 minutes. While process technology
and system-level optimization techniques may continue to improve the energy
efficiency of digital circuits, a recent measurement study has pointed to a
fundamental bottleneck to energy efficiency of computer vision: the image
sensor, especially its analog readout circuitry. The goal of this project is to
tackle this bottleneck by designing, prototyping and evaluating a novel vision
sensor architecture along with its optimization framework. By targeting computer
vision, this vision sensor architecture radically departs from existing image
sensor designs that are optimized for photography. Instead of producing high-
quality images, it outputs application-specific features by judiciously shifting
processing into the analog domain. In doing so, it promises better efficiency by
orders of magnitudes for computer vision workloads and relieves the privacy
concern with continuous mobile vision.

This project will pursue two complementary, interrelated directions toward the
above goal: First, the mixed-signal vision sensor design must provide sufficient
programmability under constrained complexity in the analog domain. The project
will exploit a novel hardware architecture that cyclically reuses analog modules
for a programmable dataflow. This architecture will employ a novel column-based
topology that exploits data locality to reduce interconnect complexity for data
access. The project will also investigate hardware mechanisms that allow
programmable tradeoffs between efficiency and accuracy of processing in the
analog domain. Second, vision workloads must be carefully partitioned into
analog and digital stages given the sensor architecture. The project shall
provide an optimization framework that leverages accurate energy models and
noise tolerance of vision workload. The project will further contribute novel
use cases of the proposed mixed-signal vision sensor with data privacy, energy
consumption, and task performance being the possible optimization constraints.