* 1611421
* Quantum Phase Transition in one-dimensional superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Andrey Rogachev, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 490,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
understand how superconductivity in nanowires is affected by their geometry,
material properties, and the presence of an external magnetic field. The
knowledge of how these factors influence the properties of the superconducting
nanowires is needed for improvement of nanowire-based single-photon detectors
and for downscaling of classical and quantum superconducting circuits. The
project is also important for fundamental science. Our team recently discovered
that, similar to classical water-ice phase transition, nanowires also undergo a
phase transition; because it occurs at zero temperature, however, it belongs to
the class of quantum phase transitions (QPT). One of the primary goals of the
project is to uncover the as yet unknown nature of this transition. One-
dimensional systems, of which superconducting nanowires are a representative
example, play a special role in physics since they often allow for easier
theoretical description than their counterparts in higher dimensions. Hence the
project has a potential to advance understanding physics of superconducting
films and other systems where QPTs occur, such as magnetic materials, liquid
crystals, and cold atomic gases. The educational component of the project
includes training of students in nanofabrication and precision electrical
instrumentation and service of a PI as a research adviser for undergraduate
female students participating in the University of Utah ACCESS program. The
public outreach includes oral and exhibit presentations on superconductivity and
nanoscience, carried out both at the University of Utah and at the Natural
History Museum of Utah, as a part of the NSF-funded Portal for the Public
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The team's research
is focused on four problems in 1D superconductivity. (i) The experimentally
determined suppression of critical temperature in superconducting nanowires is
100-fold stronger than the prediction from current theories. To resolve this
problem, the team will systematically study the effect of geometrical
confinement on critical temperature (by transport measurements), on
superconducting gap (by tunneling), and on superfluid density (by kinetic
inductance measurements) in MoGe and Al nanowires. The goal is to identify
leading mechanisms of the suppression and, in collaboration with theorists,
develop a correct fermionic theory for nanowires and films. (ii) Upon
application of a magnetic field, MoGe nanowires undergo a quantum phase
transition of yet unknown nature. To uncover the mechanism of this QPT, we will
carry out transport, tunneling and kinetic inductance measurements on nanowires
in a magnetic field. The combined scaling of the magnetoresistance of a series
of nanowires will be used to find constraints on the scaling function. (iii) A
series of nanowires with an intentionally inhomogeneous order parameter will be
fabricated and studied. The objective is to create a system where the physics of
the QPT is strongly dominated by bosonic processes (phase slips). (iv) A high-
frequency technique capable of the detection of individual phase slips will be
developed. The goal is to probe the regime of ultra-low phase slip rate (down to
1 Hz) and verify if there exist temporal correlations caused by phase-slip/anti-
phase-slip interactions and/or by phase-slip avalanches.