* 1611134
* Demonstration and Applications of Single Molecule Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy at Physiological Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Susumu Takahashi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging (CMI) and the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, &amp; Mechanisms - A (CSDM-A) Programs in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Susumu Takahashi and his group at the University of Southern
California are devising means of improving magnetic resonance (MR) techniques in
order to enable application of these powerful characterization tools to study
the structure and dynamics of biological molecules down to the level of single
molecules. Dr. Takahashi is also developing educational/training programs and
materials that will help explain these methods and the chemistry they help to
explain to USC graduate and undergraduate students, as well as to high school
and elementary school students in USC's neighborhood
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic resonance spectrometry techniques, such
as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR),
can provide detailed information about molecular structure and dynamics, but are
hampered by intrinsically low sensitivity. Recent technological advances,
particularly those utilizing a single nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond as
a sensor, have enabled detection of a single electron spin. Dr. Takahashi seeks
to demonstrate MR analysis of a few molecules under physiological conditions
using NV centers and high-frequency/high-field EPR. Success in the research work
will provide a promising pathway to enable EPR investigation of single
biological molecules containing either native electron spin centers or extrinsic
spin labels.