* 1611217
* Quantum Phases in spin-orbit coupled honeycomb magnets: beyond 4d and 5d transition metal ions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kathryn Ross, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Quantum phases of matter are based on entanglement
between electrons confined to crystal lattices. A familiar example of such a
phase is superconductivity; this once-exotic phenomenon has now matured and is
being used for technological applications such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI). Similarly, the new quantum phases of matter being explored in this
research on honeycomb lattice magnets (i.e., magnets built from a lattice
structure composed of hexagons) could provide dramatic technological
consequences. One predicted quantum phase, the Kitaev Honeycomb Quantum Spin
Liquid, supports special excited states that could form unusually robust
"qubits" for quantum computations. This research project aims to produce such
exotic phases in new honeycomb lattice materials, using previously unexplored
choices of magnetic ions. Undergraduate researchers, who prepare samples and
perform basic techniques for magnetic characterizations, carry out a large part
of the exploratory aspects of the research. Graduate students involved in this
project master techniques in single crystal growth, thermodynamic
characterization, and inelastic neutron scattering. This project heavily relies
on large-scale neutron science facilities in the United States.

Technical Abstract: This research is designed to produce new quantum phases of
matter using unconventional materials choices. Magnetic insulators with strong
spin-orbit coupling are ideal targets for exploring a wide variety of
interesting phases based on quantum entanglement, such as Quantum Spin Liquids.
These exotic phases host potentially useful quasi-particle excitations; one
example is the "anyon" excitation predicted for the Kitaev Honeycomb Quantum
Spin Liquid. Anyons, once they are successfully produced in a real material,
could be used for topologically protected quantum computations. The two key
ingredients for exotic phases like this are 1) anisotropic magnetic interactions
on the honeycomb lattice, obtainable from magnetic species with strong spin-
orbit coupling, and 2) quantum fluctuations, which are a natural feature of
correlated pseudo-spin Â½ magnetic moments. These ingredients have previously
been sought in honeycomb lattice materials based on 4d and 5d transition metal
ions. The current research project extends the search to unconventional choices
of magnetic species outside of these series, enabling a wider variety of
characterization techniques while opening a new arena of materials to be
explored. Solid-state synthesis methods, including intense crystal growth
efforts, are combined with detailed characterizations of materials using
thermodynamic probes and inelastic neutron scattering at temperatures as low as
50 mK. Undergraduate researchers, who prepare samples and perform basic
techniques for magnetic characterizations, carry out a large part of the
exploratory aspects of the research. Graduate students involved in this project
master techniques in single crystal growth, thermodynamic characterization, and
inelastic neutron scattering. This project heavily relies on large-scale neutron
science facilities in the US.