* 1611048
* High Frequency Transformer Winding Power Loss Reduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shuo Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

When electrical current flows through conventional transformer windings, the
current is not evenly distributed within the windings. High winding power losses
are generated where the current has high concentration and the winding is not
fully utilized where the current has low concentration. High current
concentration generates high winding power loss which leads to reduced energy
conversion efficiency and high temperature. High temperature reduces transformer
lifetime, so more windings must be used in transformer design to reduce power
loss. As a result, transformers are bulky and heavy which increases transformer
cost and cannot meet today's demand for highly compact designs. This research
pursues a fundamental solution to this problem. It has been preliminarily
discovered by the investigator that the current distribution within transformer
windings always reaches a minimum magnetic energy state. Based on this
discovery, a novel transformer winding design technique is being developed using
the relationship between the minimum magnetic energy state and power loss in the
windings. The technique can make current much more evenly distributed within
transformer windings than is possible with existing techniques. The technique
can greatly reduce transformer winding power loss, improve transformer energy
efficiency, improve transformer reliability, reduce transformer cost and improve
transformer power density. The technique can also be applied to other magnetic
components. Transformers and magnetic components are widely used in many
electronics and electrical application areas such as consumer electronics,
industry products and transportation systems. Thus this technique is expected to
bring significant scientific and economic impacts to society. The education plan
educates electrical engineering students and promotes diversity.

The goal of this research is to develop a novel transformer winding design
technique to minimize power loss in transformer windings. The researchers will
investigate the minimum magnetic energy state in transformer windings, explore
the relationship between the minimum magnetic energy state and winding current
distribution and develop a technique to find desired winding current or
magnetomotive force (MMF) profiles to minimize transformer winding power loss.
The relationship between the winding power loss and magnetic energy windings
will be first investigated. The PI has previously found that skin and proximity
effects which influence the current distribution within winding conductors and
the current sharing among parallel winding conductors comply with the minimum
magnetic energy theory. The relationship between the minimum magnetic energy
state and the winding current distribution or sharing in high frequency
transformer windings will be investigated. A technique to achieve the minimum
winding power loss by minimizing the magnetic energy among windings will be
explored. A method to solve for the desired MMF profile using the minimum
magnetic energy model will be developed. A technique to implement the desired
MMF to either series or parallel winding turns will be studied. The theory and
techniques to be developed in the research activity can be applied to any
transformers and to magnetic component design in many applications. Compared
with conventional extensive finite element analysis (FEA) or experiment-based
trial-and-error winding design methods, the research can reveal the fundamentals
of the winding current distribution and sharing in high frequency transformers.
The method should be capable of quickly and directly find the best transformer
winding design with the lowest winding power loss. The method should also
provide useful guidance in transformer winding design. The methodology will not
only help designers understand the current distribution and sharing within
transformer windings but also give designers capability to steer the currents
within transformer windings based on the desired current sharing profiles. With
this technique, the transformer's power losses in windings can be greatly
reduced and its power density can be greatly improved. Preliminary research
shows that compared with conventional fully interleaved winding structure,
33-41.5% winding power loss reduction should be achievable using the theory and
techniques to be developed.