* 1611279
* Resonant Tunnel Field Effect Transistors Based on Vertical 2D Crystal Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Wenjuan Zhu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 378,000.00

The proposed interdisciplinary research combines advances in two dimensional
(2D) materials, brain-inspired network computing, and resonant tunnel diodes
(RTDs), to create a new device concept: 2D resonant tunnel field-effect-
transistor (RTFET). RTFETs based on 2D crystals will solve the lattice
matching/dislocation issues of III-V semiconductor based RTDs. The strong
negative differential resistance and high frequency response in these devices
will be used to perform "comparison" functions, similar to synapses in neurons,
for image recognition applications. RTFET-based synapses can potentially reduce
energy consumption by more than ten times compared to the circuits based on
traditional complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS). The ultra-high
operating frequencies of RTFETs will enable their applications in high speed
wireless communication, THz imaging, and spectroscopy. In addition, RTFETs can
also serve as sensitive vehicles to probe 2D/2D interfaces, providing scientific
insights on the out-of-plane transport in 2D heterostructures. This research
project will not only advance the knowledge of quantum tunneling in 2D crystals,
resonant tunneling devices, and brain-like circuits, but also have direct
technology impact on image recognition, non-traditional computing, and high
frequency wireless communications. The integration of the proposed research with
after-school programs in elementary schools, new courses for
undergraduate/graduate students, and recruiting/retaining women students, will
foster students' interest in nanotechnology while broadening their knowledge
base, thus having a positive enduring impact on the education of a world-class
and diverse science and technology workforce.

The objective of this project is to understand the interlayer resonant tunneling
in 2D vertical heterostructures and demonstrate high speed RTFETs with
pronounced negative differential resistance at room temperatures for
neurosynaptic image recognition applications. The PI will pursue the following
four thrusts: (1) fabrication of a variety of 2D vertical heterostructures,
including black phosphorus/boron nitride/black phosphorus, tungsten
diselenide/molybdenum disulfide/tungsten diselenide heterostructures, with
precise control of rotation angles and layer numbers; (2) evaluate the impact of
rotation angle, band offsets, tunneling barrier thickness, and interface
qualities, on the resonant tunneling currents in the vertical 2D
heterostructures; (3) demonstrate high speed RTFETs with pronounced negative
differential resistance at room temperatures; (4) demonstrate synapses based on
2D RTFETs, as basic elements in neurosynaptic chips for image recognition
applications. The successful execution of this project will expand the knowledge
of resonant quantum tunneling in 2D heterostructures, resonant tunneling
devices, and neural-network computing. More specifically, this research will
elucidate the effect of rotation angle alignment, band extrema location,
bandgap, and band offsets on the interlayer resonant tunneling in RTFETs. This
will also provide insight into inelastic tunneling and scattering due to
interface traps and defects in RTFETs. The fundamental understanding of the
resonant tunneling in 2D heterostructures gained in this research project will
enable a new class of novel nanoscale electronic devices based on out-of-plane
transport instead of the traditional in-plane transport of 2D crystals. This
research will also pave the way for new functional devices beyond CMOS and
provide an experimental demonstration of neural-network circuits based on
RTFETs. The negative differential resistance and fast response in RTFETs can
potentially enable a new computing paradigm beyond the traditional von Neumann
architecture.