* 1611961
* Instrument Development to Assess Design Project Appropriateness for Domain Relatedness, Ambiguity Tolerance, and Genderedness
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Kathy Jackson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Industry-sponsored projects in the context of engineering design problems have
received attention and prominence in undergraduate engineering education, yet
the impacts of these experiences and learning gains for students is an important
area of investigation for engineering education scholars. This project focuses
on understanding the impact of three industry-sponsored project characteristics
on student learning, project domain relatedness, project ambiguity, and project
gender orientation. The goal of this project is to develop a new instrument to
gain insight into design project appropriateness for first-year engineering
students. Such findings are of significance not only to better design
engineering education experiences, but also to gain insight into the impacts of
such design experiences on student learning and their perceptions around
engineering epistemologies and issues of student engagement. At a time of
continued retention concerns in undergraduate engineering, results from this
project have the potential to offer critical information to engineering
educators around student engagement, project experiences, and impacts of
industry-sponsored design projects.

Although there is an extensive body of knowledge around engineering design
learning, there is limited knowledge on the appropriateness of industry-
sponsored design projects integrated into the first year curriculum. This
project adopts validated instruments on engineering student self-efficacy in
combination with new survey instruments to be developed in order to gain insight
into students' perceptions on the implications of an industry-sponsored design
projects around characteristics of project domain relatedness, project
ambiguity, and project genderness. With a large sample of data to be collected,
statistical analyses will involve exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory
factor analysis, as well as analysis of variance to isolate the significance of
study variables (i.e., project domain relatedness to a student's chosen
engineering major, project ambiguity, and project gender orientation). Knowledge
gains from this project are expected to support strengthened partnerships
between industry and academia, and to better understand the impacts of students'
learning when working on industry-sponsored design projects.