* 1611839
* Permutation-Equivariant Quantum K-Theory in Higher Genus
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alexander Givental, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 195,001.00

String theory, in the search for the ultimate laws of nature, places
mathematical objects known as algebraic curves at the center of the modern
framework of fundamental physics, generating new mathematical questions and
pointing to plausible answers with an amazing pace and persistence. Questions to
be investigated in this project lie at the crossroads of two major pathways in
mathematics of the past two centuries. One of them is the in-depth pursuit of
the intricate properties of algebraic curves, in the form inherited from works
of Gauss, Abel, Jacobi, Riemann, Klein, and Poincare. The other is the broad
conceptual landscape of mathematical physics, dictated by the progress of
classical, statistical, and quantum mechanics, and often associated with the
names of Hamilton, Maxwell, Gibbs, Poincare, Hilbert, Einstein, and Weyl. Some
of the questions under study are motivated by mathematical questions arising out
of string theory; in turn, the research is expected to provide feedback to
string theorists inspiring previously unanticipated directions of research.

The specific aim of this project is to develop a new chapter of the Gromov-
Witten theory, that is, the theory of topological invariants of phase spaces of
Hamiltonian systems, where the characters of permutation groups, acting by
renumbering of marked points on the Cech cohomology of coherent sheaves over
moduli spaces of stable maps of holomorphic curves to a target Kahler phase
space, are studied and computed. The ongoing and forthcoming research of such
permutation-equivariant K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants is to include: (a)
constructing these invariants and exploring their general properties; (b)
developing the symplectic loop-space quantization formalism for representing the
invariants by generating functions; (c) establishing the appropriate Quantum
Riemann-Roch Theorems to provide the complete adelic characterization of
permutation-equivariant K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants in terms of
cohomological Gromov-Witten invariants; (d) developing the fixed-point-
localization techniques for computing permutation-equivariant Gromov-Witten
invariants; (e) applying the techniques in order to obtain K-theoretic analogues
of the mirror formulas (i.e., to identify toric q-hypergeometric functions with
certain genus-0 permutation equivariant Gromov-Witten invariants of toric
manifolds); (f) introducing and studying the K-theoretic mirrors (i.e., complex
oscillatory representations of such q-hypergeometric functions, and the
corresponding D_q-modules); (g) elucidating the role of the groups of
q-difference operators acting by hidden symmetries in the permutation-
equivariant quantum K-theory, and exploiting these symmetries to reconstruct all
the genus-0 invariants of toric manifolds from the respective q-hypergeometric
functions; (h) expressing twisted permutation-equivariant K-theoretic Gromov-
Witten invariants in terms of the untwisted ones by combining the boson-fermion
correspondence with the adelic characterization in higher genus; and (i)
exploring the relationships between quantum K-theory of the point target space
and the q-analogues of the KdV-hierarchy of integrable systems, anticipated by
analogy with the Witten-Kontsevich theorem for cohomological Gromov-Witten
invariants of the point.