* 1611513
* Non-invasive, high-resolution, 3D imaging and sensing through highly scattering materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Todd Murray, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

This project explores and develops techniques to enable high-fidelity imaging
and light focusing inside and through turbid media such as biological tissue.
The methods investigated are non-invasive and combine optics and acoustics.
State-of-the-art high-resolution three-dimensional optical microscopy techniques
have already generated a strong impact in biological and biomedical
applications. Current commercial modalities include mature technologies such as
confocal microscopy, two-photon microscopy, and optical coherence tomography.
Unfortunately, a common shortcoming is the limited penetration into biological
tissue beyond a fraction of 1 mm, the problem at the core of this proposal.
High-resolution deep imaging in tissue would enable numerous biomedical research
and diagnosis tools such as imaging of blood oxygenation or improving
photodynamic therapy. The research will create opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students to join in collaborative interdisciplinary projects
associated with this proposal. The project will also enable broad educational
activities in biomedical optical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in adaptive wavefront shaping have made imaging through scattering environments
a possibility. By pre-compensating the optical wavefront, light propagation can
be controlled through and beyond scattering materials. Most existing techniques,
however, are limited by their need to generate a feedback signal from behind or
inside the scattering media with direct invasive access, something not possible
in the majority of biomedical imaging scenarios. This project emphasizes
fundamental developments that address the need for deep, high-resolution imaging
and focusing to tackle emerging applications. The photoacoustic effect, where
acoustic waves are generated in response to an optical field, offers a new
feedback mechanism for wavefront optimization because acoustic waves propagate
in tissue with little scattering. Hence by detecting the acoustic waves at the
surface of the scattering media, an effective and noninvasive feedback signal is
obtained to guide wavefront compensation. Furthermore, the spatially nonuniform
sensitivity of the acoustic transducer can be used to guide the light to a point
that is substantially smaller than the acoustic focal region. Nevertheless,
optical focusing and imaging through and within real biological materials
remains a challenge due to the fast rate of change of the speckle field from
blood flow and physiological motion and the fact that the speckle size deep in
biological tissue is on the order of a wavelength. In this project, fundamental
and experimental limitations on focusing in scattering media will be explored,
algorithms for wavefront compensation will be optimized for focusing speed and
fluence enhancement, and hardware developments for implementing wavefront
compensation at speeds sufficient to overcome speckle decorrelation in
biological media will be investigated.