* 1611821
* RUI: Proposal to Investigate  Coating and Substrate Thermal Noise for  Advanced and Next Generation Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

The detection of gravitational waves on 14 September 2015 was an historic
milestone in physics and astronomy. The detection was an important validation
for General Relativity in both its confirmation of the existence of
gravitational waves and in the accuracy of the predicted waveforms. The event
was also a breakthrough in astronomy with the first direct detection of a black
hole binary system. The era of gravitational wave astronomy has begun and with
it comes increased expectations for more observations at greater sensitivity.
The main obstacle to improved sensitivity is thermal noise in LIGO's mirror
coatings. LIGO senses gravitational waves using an interferometer, an L-shaped
detector with 4 km long arms. Identical light waves are sent from the vertex
down orthogonal arms to a mirror. When the reflected beams recombine at the
vertex the difference in phase corresponds to the arm length difference that can
arise, in part, from gravitational waves. Thus the detection of gravitational
waves depends on the precision detection of the surface of the end mirrors. LIGO
operates at room temperature or 300; above absolute zero. Therefore the mirrors
are relatively hot. That thermal energy is expressed as vibrations at the
mirror's resonant frequencies. Those frequencies are much higher than the
frequencies at which LIGO is designed to detect gravitational waves. If the
mirrors were composed of ideal elastic materials, these vibrations would be
ignored and of no concern. Indeed the special glass used for the mirror
substrates is a nearly ideal elastic material. However the highly reflective
mirror coating applied to the substrate has enough internal friction that it
shifts some of the mirror's vibrational energy down to gravitational wave
frequencies. That motion masks the gravitational wave signal and is termed
mirror coating thermal noise. The goal of this research project is to produce a
mirror coating with suffi;ciently reduced thermal noise in order to enable a
significant increase in LIGO's sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research to reduce coating thermal noise by lowering the dissipation,
or mechanical loss, in the coating materials. This dissipation occurs when an
oscillation in strain causes a state transition, such as a bond angle rotation,
that emits a photon or phonon at de-excitation. This two state model is known as
an asymmetric double-well potential. The dissipation is reduced by increasing
the energy asymmetry in the states and thus lowering the transition probability.
Annealing lowers dissipation by allowing the material to relax into its lowest
energy state. It also reduces density fluctuations thereby raising the
transition energy. But annealing is limited by low crystallization temperatures.
Amorphous coatings are mixtures of high-index metal-oxide dielectrics in which
the crystallization temperature is shifted above the effective annealing
temperature. Recent advanced in work on amorphous silicon coatings show that the
benefits of annealing can be obtained by depositing the coating on a heated
substrate. Because the coating surface molecules are less constrained, the
substrate temperatures are much less than the bulk annealing temperatures. The
group will test this process in amorphous metal-oxide coatings and will
investigate whether ion-assisted beam deposition might provide suffi;cient
energy to the surface layer to effectively anneal the coating without any
heating process. Finally, the group will continue work with Stanford's
researchers on conductive coatings to combat charging noise.