* 1611948
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Holly Lutz, Lutz                    Holly          L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Holly Lutz Proposal Number: 1611948

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Holly Lutz is "The Bat Microbiome Project." The host
institutions for this fellowship are the University of Chicago (primary),
Argonne National Laboratory, and the Field Museum of Natural History, and the
sponsoring scientists are Jack Gilbert and Bruce Patterson.

The goal of this research is to study the 'microbiome' of bats, i.e., microbes
that live in and on bats. The Fellow is focusing on microbial symbionts
(bacteria and viruses) of African bats, establishing baseline data for this
important and vulnerable group. The Fellow is combining these microbial data
with information about the evolutionary history and ecology of each bat species
to assess what factors drive patterns of bat-microbe associations. The Fellow is
also using information about the cutaneous microbiome of particular bat species
to examine whether microbes indirectly influence rates of malarial parasite
transmission by affecting the behavior of ectoparasitic vectors (e.g. bat
flies). By working closely with natural history museums, both in the US and
abroad, the Fellow's research is both relying on, and producing, data in the
form of vouchered specimens and cryogenically preserved materials derived from
bats.

The Fellow is receiving training in the latest metagenomic sequencing and
bioinformatic methods. The project is also fundamentally international and
collaborative in nature. One of the sponsoring institutions, the Field Museum of
Natural History (FMNH) in Chicago, has a long history of supporting scientific
capacity building in Africa, and the Fellow's Bat Microbiome Project involves
the participation and training of many undergraduate and graduate students from
African universities. Some of these students will receive advanced training in
the US at the FMNH, and will interact with high school and undergraduate
volunteers and interns at the museum. In summers, the Fellow is also mentoring
high school students from underrepresented groups who will work on some aspect
of the Bat Microbiome Project at the FMNH, thereby helping them prepare for
academic pursuits in STEM fields. Students are learning about the fundamentals
of host-microbe interactions through the lens of the Bat Microbiome Project, as
they develop and execute independent projects related to this research.