* 1611083
* Collaborative Research: Plasmonic Nanoantenna Electrode Arrays (NEAs) for Massively Multiplexed Identification of Stem-Cell Derived Cardiac Cells in Regenerative Therapies
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Pinar Zorlutuna, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 287,465.00

Collaborative Research: Plasmonic Nanoantenna Electrode Arrays (NEAs) for
Massively Multiplexed Identification of Stem-Cell Derived Cardiac Cells in
Regenerative Therapies

Nontechnical Abstract: Heart diseases are one of the leading causes of death in
the US. Stem cellbased regenerative therapies are among the most promising
treatment techniques. However, cells derived from stem cells are not uniform;
only some percentage of the initial cell culture develops into the cell type of
interest. Undifferentiated cells that remain within the cell population could
lead to tumor. Furthermore, immature cells or cells with over-sensitivity would
hinder the synchronous beating of the heart muscle cells, which can cause heart
failure. Current methods to examine the purity of stem-cell based heart cells
depend on cell surface markers, which is not a precise way to determine cellular
functionality. This proposal offers a high-throughput screening technique to
directly measure the functionality of differentiated heart muscle cells through
their specific membrane potential changes during contraction. The proposed
molecular-nanoplasmonic label-free voltage sensors will allow screening of
single cell membrane potentials within confluent cell cultures and provide an
accurate method for selecting and purifying functional cells from a mixed group.
Development of such a precise technique would present a remarkable technological
leap in stem cell-based research and strategies for cardiac regeneration. In
addition to scientific and technological advancements, this research program
will provide educational opportunities to underrepresented groups and
minorities, and enhance involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in
nanoscience and technology.

Technical Abstract: The objective of this research proposal is to introduce
ultrasensitive molecularplasmonic voltage probes for non-invasive, real-time and
subcellular precision mapping of cardiac cell membrane potentials. These
electrophysiological nanoprobes could have significant impact in differentiation
of stem cell derived cardiac cells through massively parallel and precise
mapping of single cell membrane potentials. Given the lack of experimental
electrophysiological techniques with high spatial and temporal precision
capabilities, this research program could significantly contribute to cardiac
cell studies and regenerative therapies. The specific objectives of this
research program are: (1) to develop molecular-plasmonic voltage sensors by
using electromagnetic simulations, high throughput fabrication and chemical
synthesis techniques, and optical/electrical characterization. (2) to realize
real time and label free detection of tiny potential variations at diffraction
limited spot sizes with microsecond temporal resolutions and high signal-to-
noise ratios. (3) to achieve non-destructive imaging of single cells in large
cell populations and distinguish individual cell characteristics in
-cultured/multiple cell state.

The proposed research program involves theoretical understanding and numerical
design of molecularplasmonic devices. Devices merging nano/micro-meter
components will be fabricated using state of lithography and synthesis
techniques. Fabricated devices will be tested using excitable cell populations
with varying densities and cell compositions. Furthermore, changes in the
membrane potentials of cardiomyocytes that are being differentiated from hiPSC
will be measured in real-time.