* 1611574
* Collaborative Research: Smarter Markets for a Smarter Grid: Pricing Randomness, Flexibility and Risk
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Electricity infrastructure is under-going an accelerated evolution. The
penetration of renewable energy is increasing and expected to reach 33% by 2020
in California. Uncertain nature of renewable energy generation is throwing up
new challenges to manage uncertainty on a scale never seen before. Existing
methods of managing uncertainty via adequate spinning reserves are uneconomical
at such a large scale. Demand response programs will provide some mitigation,
but will be inadequate. Any other solution deployed to manage this uncertainty
is unlikely to be adopted, unless it is consistent with the economic laws at
play. New market designs and pricing mechanisms have to be investigated that (i)
facilitate renewable energy integration and demand side management in the smart
grid and (ii) ensure sufficient grid stability margins. Towards this end, the
theory of market for random goods will be developed and studied in the project
where risk management policies, incentive structures for flexibility, and market
design is studied in tandem. The proposed research effort is an essential part
of developing the economics of the smart grid and a step towards renewable
energy integration. The project trains the next generation of engineers and
scientists to overcome challenges that the smart grid operators will encounter
with large uncertainty in renewable generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty
in renewable generation provides incentives for generators and load serving
entities to strategically distort prices in their favor. Thus, there is a need
to introduce market mechanisms to restrict the ability of market players to
distort prices. The key tools to designing a market for random goods are game
theory and mechanism design, coupled with advances in probability theory and
optimization/data science. New mechanisms will be developed by a three-pronged
approach: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Introduce a new perspective of viewing renewable energy
as a random good, i.e., a good that is only generated and delivered with some
probability. The market for aggregators is introduced and studied for (i)
designing market mechanisms for buying random goods that aggregators could sell
in wholesale markets; (ii) designing market mechanisms for selling random goods
that renewable generators could use; and (iii) designing market exchanges, where
renewable energy could be traded. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Devise appropriate formats for
expressing flexibility in demand and generation. This entails (i) designing
appropriate pricing mechanisms to induce consumers to express maximum
flexibility (this will be enforced and managed via the smart-meter
infrastructure that utilities plan to put in place in the next few years); and
(ii) designing mechanisms for economic dispatch wherein flexible generator
receive incentive payments for their flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Develop a
theory for risk mitigation and risk-awareness in economic dispatch. This entails
(i) investigating the role of virtual bidding in risk mitigation in multi-stage
markets; and (ii) rethinking risk-aware design for electricity markets from the
ground-up by formalizing a risk-aware economic dispatch framework. The above
research agenda requires foundational developments of new economic,
optimization, and control frameworks that incorporate randomness, flexibility,
and risk.