* 1611064
* Quantification of the Devitrification Process of Metallic Glasses through Simulation and Experiment
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Hongwei Sheng, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2021
* USD 345,602.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses are novel
engineering alloys in which the structure is disordered, with the atoms
occupying more-or-less random positions. Metallic glasses are important in many
applications, because they can be relatively resistant to fracture. The PI
proposes a practical approach to quantifying the glass-forming ability of
metallic materials, which has been a grand challenge in computational physics
and materials science. This work will study how metallic glasses are developed,
paving the way to new approaches toward quantitative metallurgy. The knowledge
gained through this project will greatly advance our understanding building on
existing theories on nucleation, glass transition, and the structure of glasses
in general. The proposed project provides an excellent platform for integrating
education, research, and outreach activities, and will help promote close
collaborations among multiple academic institutions in the greater Washington
D.C. area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The glass formation ability (GFA) of metallic
liquids concerns how new metallic glasses can be developed. Fundamental theories
about nucleation and growth, alloy formation, and to a greater extent, glass
transition, are currently insufficient to provide a parameter-free prediction of
the devitrification process of metallic liquids. The precise assessment of GFA
thus remains an unresolved problem in metals research. We are now positioned to
address this important problem through advanced computational modeling in
conjunction with state-of-the-art transmission electron microscopy experiments
for validation. The ultimate goal of this project is to provide reliable
parameter-free time-temperature-transformation curves for gauging the GFA ab
initio, which has hitherto been impossible. This will be achieved by integrating
computational approaches on multiple scales to simulate the nucleation and
crystal growth during the devitrification process of realistic metallic liquids
while addressing several key issues that are of scientific importance and have
practical implications, including the crystallization pathway, incipient
metastable phase, and critical cooling rate. Unique to this proposal is the
integration of new TEM techniques (ultrafast cooling and heating conditions by
passing nanosecond pulsed electric current) that create glass formation
(devitrification) conditions truly commensurate with computer simulation,
enabling a useful validation tool to examine the reliability of simulation. By
capitalizing on powerful and unique TEM characterization capabilities, the PI
will shed new light on the underlying mechanism of nucleation on the atomic
level so as to establish effective and accurate simulation protocols for GFA
prediction.