* 1611567
* Advancing Women in STEM through Institutional Transformation at Adams State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Frank Novotny, Adams State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,571.00

Adams State University (ASU) will implement an ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation-Catalyst (IT-Catalyst) project to undertake institutional self-
assessment activities and adapt ADVANCE best practices. During year one of the
project, ASU will collect institutional data, including a salary survey and
recruitment pool analysis, and workload assessment, and will also conduct
faculty surveys and focus groups. During year two, the team will visit ADVANCE
IT institutions to learn about best practices, hold meetings with key
stakeholders (faculty/chairs/administrators) to discuss data and best practices.
During year three, the university will work to implement changes and incorporate
them into the next iteration of the university's strategic
plan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU provides a unique context in which to examine the
recruitment, retention and promotion of women faculty in STEM disciplines. ASU
is a small, primarily undergraduate, public, Hispanic-serving institution (HSI)
in rural south-central Colorado. The campus has been challenged to recruit and
retain women, who account for 27 percent of STEM faculty. ASU has demonstrated
readiness for change; all stakeholder groups have communicated their commitment
to the project, and the campus already has extensive programming and policy
organized around the theme of "inclusive excellence." ADVANCE will build on this
strong foundation, and the program could serve as a model for small, rural HSIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADVANCE program is focused on developing systemic
approaches to increase the participation, retention, and advancement of women in
academic STEM careers. The IT-Catalyst track funds projects that aim to conduct
institutional self-assessments and implement ADVANCE strategies that have been
shown to be effective to address gendered issues for STEM faculty.