* 1611829
* Improving Learning Outcomes Via Enhancement of Biology Research (iLOVE Biology Research)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Mustafa Morsy, University of West Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The University of West Alabama (UWA) Improving Learning Outcomes Via Enhancement
of Biology Research (UWA iLOVE Biology Research) project goal is to provide
biology students with hands-on experience through a series of discovery-based
courses and research projects. Allowing students the opportunity to participate
in undergraduate research engages their intellectual curiosity, satisfies their
thirst for discovery, and gives them an outlet for their creativity. This award
will support UWA students, traditionally students from underrepresented groups
including women, ethnic minorities, and first-generation college students. UWA
is located in one of the poorest counties in the United States, therefore the
project will have a significant impact on a low-income student population that
encounters many barriers to successful degree completion. The project will
provide students with the necessary training and essential skills to
successfully join the workforce or enroll in graduate schools. The project will
be instrumental in broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in
biology and thus, contribute to solving the significant shortage of qualified
biology and science educators in the area.

The UWA iLOVE Biology Research project is an attempt to build from the existing
research infrastructure to successfully attract, retain, and graduate well-
trained undergraduates majoring in biology. The UWA iLOVE Biology Research
program's ultimate goals are to help students develop skills that enable them to
apply scientific processes appropriately in their daily lives, and to change how
biology and other STEM related fields are taught at UWA by implementing
evidence-based, student centered teaching as a cultural norm at UWA. The
specific goals of the project are to provide undergraduate students majoring in
biology with a rigorous, comprehensive research experience, and to examine the
impact of undergraduate research experiences on UWA students compared to
students enrolled in traditional coursework. Students will be engaged in hands-
on discovery based courses and long-term research projects, which will provide
them with increased hands-on experience and knowledge of many research-
associated skills. It is expected that the project will improve student
attitudes towards biology, increase confidence in students' abilities to do
research, enhance students' scientific process and critical thinking skills, and
increase student success and retention in biology and persistence in STEM
careers. The iLOVE Biology Research program approach will provide an attractive,
feasible model for providing research experiences to undergraduates that will
generate the necessary data to become a model approach that can be readily
implemented campus wide.

This project is being jointly supported by the NSF Division of Undergraduate
Education and the NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure as it aligns with an
important subset of the objectives of both divisions that is expressed in the
"Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education" effort (see
http://visionandchange.org/).