* 1611989
* STEM Pioneers: A 3-year pilot study to increase science literacy and STEM enrollment among first-year first-generation students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Dirk Vanderklein, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This project will address the barriers that first-generation students experience
in college. There is a critical need to expand the existing research to better
understand how first-time, first-generation students will be enabled to enter
and succeed as STEM majors. The project is unique in that it will integrate
several interconnected, research-based, effective practices aimed at the
specific needs of first-generation students in the sciences. Specifically the
project will (1) convene a group of science professors who will work together to
design and teach a science literacy course aimed at teaching not just what
science is, but also why it matters to society; (2) create a group of peer
mentors and mentoring activities aimed at fostering a supportive environment
within which first-generation students can express their needs and have them be
addressed; and (3) work with the campus advising office to select students to
participate in the program and to provide additional support services such as
extensive career counseling. Participants in each of these three groups will
also meet with each other on a continual basis to monitor student success and
the success of the different approaches taken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
that is envisioned has two specific objectives: (1) to increase science literacy
of undeclared first-generation, first-year college students and (2) to encourage
and enable students to select and successfully embark on STEM majors at the
university. This project will develop a three-pronged approach that transforms
and blends existing interventions into a sustained, integrative and organized
structure to address the broad scope of needs of first-generation students. The
first prong is a professional learning community (PLC) of faculty from a variety
of science majors (biology, chemistry, math, physics, computer science, and
earth and environmental science) and from English. The PLC will work together to
create and teach a two-semester science literacy course for the selected first-
generation students. This course will follow a broad topic in science such as
global climate change or water availability and study it from the perspectives
of the different scientific disciplines of the PLC faculty. Students will be
guided in developing a research project on this topic. The second prong places
selected first-generation students in student learning communities (SLC) where
they take the same courses together. A goal of the SLC will be to create shared
experiences and bonding between the students and faculty. The third prong
focuses on advising and mentoring, and will be accomplished by employing
professional advisors, peer mentors, and organizing advising sessions that will
cover topics ranging from course and major selection to career opportunities. A
framework will be established to allow constant interaction between all three of
these components. Very important to the success of this project will be an
assessment that will look at the success of each component individually and as a
whole. A goal will be to figure out how to successfully increase first-
generation students' recruitment into the sciences and enhance their academic
and professional success once they have chosen a science major. A well-qualified
evaluator and statistical consultant will assess the project through the use of
a comparison group.