* 1611699
* I-Corps: Solving Information-Integration Problems Using Category Theory
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* David Spivak, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Simple business questions can be surprisingly hard to answer. For a large
company, a question like "how many employees are tax-exempt?" may require
querying hundreds of databases using multiple data models and possibly
inconsistent definitions: for example, is a "contractor" also an 'employee?"
Over the past 5 years, this I-Corps team has developed a new technology for
performing information-integration tasks such as querying, combining, and
evolving databases based on category theory, a branch of mathematics that has
already revolutionized several areas of computer science, including functional
programming. Category theory provides theoretical guidance missing from the
widely-used relational model of data, and this team has used it to build a
prototype software tool, FQL (categoricaldata.net/fql.html), for integrating
databases more quickly and accurately than existing relational tools. But FQL is
still an academic prototype. The purpose of this project is to perform customer
discovery activities so that the team can better understand (1) the market
demand for this new technology and (2) the exact form that an industrial-
strength tool should take, e.g. a programming language, a Java library, a cloud
service, etc.

During the I-Corps program, the team will interview 100+ potential customers,
including IT managers of large enterprise companies in a variety of sectors, ETL
and database specialists familiar with existing tools, and engineers who use
databases in their process design. This team will use this customer information
to find a product-market fit for the technology: e.g. are the customers
interested in platforms or in-house solutions, how customized do the proposed
solutions need to be, what is the best way of communicating the proposed
technology-and to develop an industrial-strength tool for categorical data.
Specifically, this team will develop use-case scenarios, alpha-test the existing
FQL tool on potential customers, and use this information to validate and refine
use-cases. By the end of the I-Corps program, the team plans to have a demo, a
clear commercialization plan and a minimal viable product.