* 1611465
* Degradation of Chlorinated Contaminants at Mineral - Water Interface: The Engineered vs. Natural Surfaces of Sulfide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Weile Yan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 387,049.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professors Weile Yan and
Kayleigh Millerick from Texas Tech University (TTU) investigate a class of
surface sulfided iron materials, which may have potential to degrade chlorinated
molecules (specifically ethenes) in the sub-surface environment. It is
hypothesized that controlled sulfidation of iron metal (Fe(0)) through chemical
or biological means creates surfaces that have significantly enhanced reactivity
towards chlorinated ethenes. This study explores the use of environmentally-
compatible reactive surfaces for in situ abatement of persistent groundwater
contaminants. This research provides a training ground for undergraduate and
graduate researchers to engage in multidisciplinary investigations in
environmental biogeochemistry and remediation. The findings are incorporated
into a new course on Environmental Interfacial Chemistry. In addition, the
investigators develop experiment kits and introduce the subject of groundwater
contamination to K-12 students through science enrichment programs at
TTU.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators take an integrated experimental
approach to probe the relationship between the chemistry of the sulfided
materials prepared under different conditions and the reactions of
perchloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) on these reactive surfaces. Key
factors controlling the rates and pathways of PCE and TCE degradation on these
surfaces are elucidated through kinetic and isotopic investigations. The
interface between a sulfided overlayer and an Fe(0) phase provides a sustained
driving force against oxidative passivation in the environmental media. The
transformation of surface sulfided iron and natural iron sulfides in groundwater
environment, particularly under the influence of pertinent biogeochemical
processes, are studied. This study advances the fundamental understanding of
interactions between chlorinated ethenes and reactive surfaces that are either
introduced by engineering intervention or naturally present in the subsurface
environment. This study explores in situ abatement of persistent groundwater
contaminants and trains undergraduate and graduate researchers to engage in
multidisciplinary investigations in environmental biogeochemistry and
remediation.