* 1611514
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Fatma Gomaa, Gomaa                   Fatma
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Fatma Gomaa Proposal Number: 1611514 This action funds an
NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Broadening
Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellowship supports a
research and training plan that will increase the participation of groups
underrepresented in biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship
to Fatma Gomaa is "Assessing the diversity, specificity and functions of the
bacterial communities associated with free-living amoebae belonging to genus
Arcella (Arcellinida: Amoebozoa)." The host institution for this fellowship is
Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Colleen Cavanaugh. The
goal of this research is to investigate the genetic and functional diversity of
the core symbiotic bacterial community associated with closely related species
of free-living amoebae obtained from wild and cultured isolates. Research on
protist-bacteria interactions is increasingly relevant as these associations
play important roles in ecosystem and human health. The Fellow is comparing the
stability of the symbiotic bacterial community under different experimental
conditions (e.g., food source, temperature, and pH), and exploring whether
complementary metabolic pathways are essential for amoeba survival and
adaptation to stressful environments (e.g., low pH, heavy metals). This research
is increasing our understanding of how ancestral life forms such as members of
Amoebozoa co-evolved along with microbes in response to environmental
variability, as well as contributing to the understanding of how key protist
groups will respond to future climatic changes.

The Fellow is receiving training in transcriptomics, genomics, bioinformatics,
and microscopy. To broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
biology, the Fellow is training and mentoring K-12 and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups. These students are conducting laboratory
experiments with field collections and hands-on molecular biology exercises, and
learning about data analyses and manuscript writing. High school students and
undergraduates involved in the project also interact with other members of the
sponsoring scientist's lab, attending and contributing to weekly lab meetings
with presentations once per semester. Finally, the Fellow is doing educational
outreach to students and K-12 teachers through the Harvard Life Sciences
Outreach Program, advancing their knowledge of evolutionary and ecological
principles through studies of protists and symbiosis.