* 1611953
* Science Cafes: Modeling and Assessing a Structured Adult Informal Science Education Program
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Karen Rader, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/2019
* USD 283,273.00

Adult education beyond K-12 and postsecondary levels is very important as this
citizenry group is often the policy and decision makers in local communities, as
well as for state and federal issues that impact the Nation. Moreover, they are
responsible for advising their progeny on a myriad of choices. This project will
plan, execute, and promote four annual public lecture events, working with a
professional educational evaluation expert to develop an appropriate assessment
tool for adult learners in the structured informal learning environment of a
science café. These planned events will be used to test and refine an assessment
tool for making this work widely available to the community of informal science
practitioners and researchers. Further, this project is a pilot for epitomizing
the use of science cafés to address the learning needs of unique citizens of
Richmond, Virginia. The project is committed to including under-represented
citizens including Veterans with disabilities. The evaluation and research
efforts will validate the education mechanisms so science cafés can be more
effective in the future. As a part of its overall strategy to enhance learning
in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program
funds research and innovative resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration that includes
Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), Rockman et al (an evaluation firm),
Science Pub RVA (Science Pub RVA is a long-running and award-nominated Richmond,
VA science café), Carver Community Partnership, East District Family Resource
Center, VCU Partnership for People with Disabilities, VCU Department of
Rehabilitation Counseling, VCU Medical Center, and a variety of other VCU
departments. The investigators will conduct a series of science cafés to
determine motivation, interests, and best practices for educating the diverse
citizens of Richmond, Virginia. The objective of the research is to rigorously
analyze the characteristics of participants and cohesively determine the best
practices for the effective learning for each person. Further, rigorous
evaluation will determine validity of the best and most effective learning
practices enabling the project to derive an adaptable model. The investigators'
hypothesis is that the participant's knowledge base is derived from the
traditional learning which occurred in the K-12 classroom. Thus, in this work,
the investigators hope to add to the participant's knowledge base with STS
(Science, Technology, and Society) content and enhance the depth and breadth of
knowledge and knowledge acquisition. The research scope will embrace an
assessment that is based on the three vertices of a triangle composed of
cognition, observation, and interpretation, all of which converge on the nature
of science, the relevance of science to everyday life, and decision-making
behaviors.