* 1611538
* Removal of time and fidelity constraints in MALDI-MS imaging of proteins in tissue
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Franco Basile, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Franco Basile and his group at the University of Wyoming are
working to develop new means of determining the composition and distribution of
proteins in biological samples, employing the powerful analytical tools of mass
spectrometry (MS). Specifically, the Basile group is developing new means of
using MS to form an image of the location of specific (bio)chemicals on
biological samples, including animal or plant tissue. These tools can be used
widely in investigations of fundamental biology, biomedical research, renewable
energy (biofuels) and bio-inspired materials, all areas that benefit society.
Students involved receive broad, interdisciplinary training, preparing them for
careers in a range of disciplines in industry and academia. The project is also
fostering collaborative research within the University of Wyoming, and involving
faculty and students from neighboring institutions (including community
colleges) and others in the broader MS-imaging scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Basile team is developing a rapid (seconds)
and solvent-free method to thermally digest and decompose proteins in biological
samples. This represents a significant improvement over current methodologies,
which require time-consuming (4h to overnight) digestion of proteins with
expensive and difficult-to-use enzymes in solution. The non-enzymatic and
solvent-free approach for on-tissue protein digestion is not only ~500 times
faster than traditional enzymatic digestion, but also provides more control over
the area of the tissue that is analyzed. The new method utilizes well-
characterized thermal protein decomposition reactions that were discovered and
developed in the Basile laboratory over the last 10 years. Potential
applications span a wide range of disciplines, broadening the training received
by participating students.