* 1611451
* Engineering Silver Clusters for Molecular Measurement
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Petty, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 06/30/2021
* USD 549,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Yeh at University of Texas at Austin and Professor Petty
at Furman University are studying the properties of small metallic particles,
termed silver clusters. Due to the special chemical, physical and optical
properties of silver clusters, these tiny particles have been made into a
variety of colorful molecular sensors for detection of disease-related DNA and
modifications on DNA. But we do not understand what really controls the color,
the stability, and synthesis yield of these wonderful nanomaterials. The project
seeks to answer these fundamental questions, with the end goal to engineer and
harness silver clusters for a diversity of biological sensing and imaging
applications. Undergraduate and high school students at Furman characterize the
chromophores and the graduate students at UT-Austin at the same time develop
their sensing applications. The collaboration and feedback between the two
groups are the linchpin that drives the development of new nanosensors.
Furthermore, the PIs outreach to local high schools to integrate a larger group
of interested and talented students. These research activities will inspire a
diverse group of curious students to share in the excitement of scientific
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future progress in fluorescence detection and
imaging is hampered by the scarcity of functional probes. Professors Yeh and
Petty are developing a novel class of switchable and tunable silver clusters
that are conjugated with DNA strands. They are addressing core factors that
control the chemical stabilities, biocompatibilities, and optical properties of
silver clusters using a wealth of purification and analysis techniques such as
HPLC, SEC, CD, MS, ICP-AES and DNA footprinting. Silver clusters present new
opportunities for molecular sensing and imaging because of their strong,
activatable emission. The transformative integration of physical/analytical
chemistry, molecular engineering, and photonics will create a versatile set of
toolkit for diverse applications, including personalized medicine, super-
resolution microscopy, and biothreat detection.