* 1611330
* Collaborative Research: Electric-field Directed Assembly of 3D Chiral Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* David Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 278,001.00

Chirality is a fundamental characteristic of living matter. Chiral metamaterials
are engineered structures composed of periodic metallodielectric building blocks
that exhibit chirality. The resonance of individual building blocks and strong
coupling between neighbors allow the realization of exotic electromagnetic
properties such as negative refractive index and giant circular dichroism.
Chiral metamaterials could revolutionize many modern technologies including
superlenses, optical communication, cloaking devices, and high resolution
sensors. Three-dimensional chiral metamaterials are, however, extremely
difficult to fabricate especially in an economical and large scale fashion. This
research will utilize asymmetric particles as building blocks and exploit a
time-varying electric field to guide the assembly of these particles into long-
range periodic chiral structures. The solution-based process could potentially
reduce the fabrication cost significantly. The compatibility of the electrode
design with existing microelectronic manufacturing infrastructures will also
open the door to commercialize innovative metamaterials for emerging
applications. The research team will also engage both high school and
undergraduate students with immersive research experiences. Learning modules
such as "Colloids, surfactants, and our daily lives" and "Optical technology
that changes our lives" will be developed in collaboration with K-12 teachers.
The research findings will also be included in the development of several multi-
disciplinary courses such as "Engineering of Soft Materials" and
"Nanotechnology: From Molecules to Machines".

The goal of this collaborative project is to use electric fields to assemble
Janus metallodielectric particles into a periodic array of chiral clusters as an
efficient bottom-up route for making three-dimensional chiral metamaterials.
Particles with increasing morphological complexity will be fabricated as
building blocks by glancing angle deposition. A liquid electrode cell will be
built for the manipulation of the Janus particles via time-varying electric
fields in three-dimensions. The Coulomb, dipolar, and electrohydrodynamic
interactions will be exploited to guide the assembly of Janus particles into
chiral clusters. Further manipulation of the chirality of the electric fields
will transform the racemic mixture into enantiomerically pure clusters. The
photonic response of the fabricated structures and their applications will be
measured and explored in both near-infrared and visible regions. Numerical
simulations will also be performed to elucidate the particle assembly
mechanisms, their optical properties, and guide experimental optimization. The
collaborative and iterative nature of this project will reveal the
interrelationship between the design of fundamental building blocks, control of
lattice symmetry, and targeted photonic properties of chiral metamaterials.