* 1611460
* Collaborative Research: Novel Terahertz Phased-Array Wireless Transmitters with Beamforming Capability Enabling Point-to-Point 50 Gbps Data Rates
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Omeed Momeni, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 123,161.00

Collaborative Research: Novel Terahertz Phased-Array Wireless Transmitters with
Beamforming Capability Enabling Point-to-Point 50 Gbps Data
Rates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proliferation of advanced cellular and wireless
data communications continues to bring forth new possibilities for the general
public. The applications resulting from these possibilities require increasingly
broader bandwidth. This ever-increasing need for broader bandwidth over a very
crowded spectrum below 30 gigahertz (GHz) necessitates new paradigm shifts to
enable spectrally efficient communications. Improving spectral efficiency by
only increasing the complexity of modulation schemes to 256-QAM (quadrature
amplitude modulation) or higher is expected to plateau, as it exerts stringent
design requirements that are impossible to achieve given the power budget
constraint in a wireless system. On the other hand, the vastly under-utilized
spectrum across the terahertz (THz) band, commonly referred to the frequency
band from 300 GHz to 3 THz, has prompted researchers to investigate futuristic
wireless systems that can potentially achieve 10+ gigabit-per-second (Gbps) data
rates, normally only achievable in wired (copper or optical) links. The
availability of wide spectrum over the THz band also addresses a challenging
requirement associated with conventional wireless links, that is, the need to
accommodate very complex modulation schemes to enhance spectral efficiency so as
to best take advantage of an already congested band at lower radio frequencies
(i.e., 30 GHz and below). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
interdisciplinary research project is to study, design, and implement novel
integrated phased-array wireless transmitter architectures that are amenable to
frequency scaling and will be the core enabling blocks for a wireless
infrastructure that can potentially achieve 50 Gbps line-of-sight (LOS) wireless
connectivity over a 20-50m link range. The project will leverage prior
experience and knowledge established in the PIs' research groups in the areas of
silicon-based THz integrated circuits design as well as multi-antenna wireless
communication theory. This proposal will develop new phased-array transmitter
architectures that overcome the above challenges. Specifically, we propose a
phase locked loop based phased-array with no need of local oscillators or radio-
frequency phase shifters and front-end power amplifiers. Importantly, we exploit
the non-linearity of front-end frequency triplers to combine three streams of
lower bandwidth intermediate-frequency data right before the high data rate
signal is radiated by the antennas. We propose to study analog beamforming and
hybrid analog/digital beamforming methods that are fine-tuned to specific
phased-array structures proposed in this project so as to provide efficient
adaptive beam-steering. This clearly requires a close collaboration between
circuits and communications experts to address many challenges. As proof of
concept, we will design and implement a 300-GHz, 16-element phased-array
transmitter. Upon successful fabrication and temporal/spectral measurements, we
will expand our current indoor wireless testing setup and conduct outdoor
wireless testing.