* 1611916
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Zaid McKie-Krisberg, McKie-Krisberg          Zaid           M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Zaid McKie-Krisberg

Proposal Number: 1611916

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups under-represented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Zaid McKie-Krisberg is "A Systems
Approach to Investigations of Light Independent C4 Type Carbon Fixation in Green
Algae." The host institutions for this fellowship are City University of New
York-Brooklyn College and Rutgers University-Newark. The sponsoring scientists
are Drs. Juergen Polle and Adam Kustka.

The Fellow?s research investigates whether green algae use the C4 pathway for
photosynthesis. Understanding the genetic and molecular underpinnings of carbon
(C) fixation by photosynthesis is important because C fixation by algae provides
organic energy for nearly all aquatic food webs, and because algae
photosynthesis can be an important source of biofuels. While there is some
evidence that single-celled green algae use the C4 pathway (based on enzyme
activity and the synthesis of organic C compounds), complete C4 photosynthetic
pathways have yet to be confirmed in these algae, which are the closest
relatives of vascular plants. In vascular plants, C4 pathways are associated
with either a distinct multicellular anatomy, or with a diurnal rhythm. C4
pathways have been suggested to function as carbon concentrating mechanisms,
contributing to pre-fixation of inorganic carbon. However, in green algae, the
products formed in these pathways can also be involved in synthesis of
metabolites such as amino acids. This suggests that C4 activity in green algae
could be both 1) a mechanism to facilitate carbon availability for fixation, and
2) a connection between carbon and nitrogen metabolism. The Fellow is exploring
the existence of C4 pathway activity and cellular organization in several
species of green algae, using a comparative approach that integrates genomics,
transcriptomics and proteomics, together with metabolic tracking experiments and
molecular studies.

The Fellow is being trained in systems biology, computational biology, and
applied phycology, while advancing his development towards an independent
academic career by publishing scientific articles, learning new techniques, and
mentoring/training students. In an effort to broaden participation in science,
the Fellow is drawing on the diverse populations at both host institutions to
provide training and instruction in cutting edge biological research to students
in under-represented groups. The Fellow is training undergraduate researchers,
who are receiving training in bioinformatics theory and techniques, including
biocuration and metabolic mapping. In addition, the Fellow is creating a Systems
Biology teaching module, which is being made available for public use by
educators. In addition, the Fellow?s mentoring and training efforts are
preparing undergraduate minority students for successful careers in STEM
research.