* 1611843
* Improving the Undergraduate Learning and Teaching Experience Through Innovative Course Clustering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Terry Kamps, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,798.00

The biology and chemistry faculty of New Jersey City University will institute a
new laboratory curriculum exploring the concept of "course clusters". These are
logical, cross-disciplinary groupings of advanced undergraduate courses that
span both biology and chemistry. Students within a cluster will work
collaboratively to pursue a single common project using their respective
laboratory components, regardless of which course they are enrolled in. This
will model a cross-functional, authentic research experience involving multiple
disciplines to solve a real-world problem, as is done in an industrial setting.
Students will interact with each other in a collaborative environment and
develop the skills needed for the STEM workforce. Due to the diverse nature of
students at New Jersey City University, the project will increase the number and
diversity of students pursuing STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a unique methodology to improve and broaden the scope of the biology and
chemistry laboratory curriculum. The course clusters will form an integrated
approach to addressing real-world research topics in an undergraduate setting.
This approach mirrors the paradigm utilized by research-driven organizations to
solve problems, so students will develop both the technical skills and the soft
skills required to be workforce-ready upon graduation. Working with a project
evaluator, the investigators will generate new evidence regarding how course-
clustering increases student understanding of fundamental scientific principles,
and how it influences non-cognitive student outcomes. The expected outcomes
include improved self-efficacy, retention and graduation rates, satisfaction
with the curriculum for both students and faculty, and placement in industrial
positions and graduate schools. Program success will be assessed using validated
survey tools and compared to historical data.