* 1611710
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Lisa Barrow, Barrow                  Lisa           N
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This award will support an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for
FY 2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a
research and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to
grand challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly
innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Lisa
Barrow is "Assessing host specificity and climatic limits of avian blood
parasites using a genome-wide approach." The host institutions for this
fellowship are the University of New Mexico and Lund University, Sweden, and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Christopher Witt and Dr. Staffan Bensch.

The aims of this research are to (1) uncover patterns of biological diversity of
avian blood parasites (i.e., malaria and related haemosporidians), and (2)
determine how the interaction of bird host communities and climate affect
parasite distributions. Understanding the evolution of either specialist life
strategies (organisms living in a narrow range of environmental conditions) or
generalist life strategies (organisms with the ability to occupy a wide range of
environments) is a key question in biology and is of particular importance in
host-pathogen systems. The Fellow's research uses the extensive bird and
parasite collections in the Museum of Southwestern Biology, combining emerging
genomic technologies, existing specimen and sequence databases, microscopy of
blood smears, phylogenetic analysis, and species distribution modeling to
address three main research objectives. The Fellow has three research
objectives: 1) to assess levels of host specificity; 2) estimate evolutionary
patterns of transition between specialist and generalist life strategies, and 3)
determine the relative influence of host immune system or climate on parasite
distributions. To pursue these objectives, the Fellow is collecting genomic data
to investigate blood parasites along elevational gradients in the Peruvian
Andes, a region with a diverse avian host community and climatic regime. Host
switching has important evolutionary and ecological implications, and can also
be devastating to native wildlife populations that are inexperienced with
certain parasites. In the face of changing environments and climate, exposure to
new pathogens is a pressing concern for population persistence. By focusing on
communities along elevational gradients, the Fellow's research is providing
insights into the factors limiting parasite distributions.

The Fellow is receiving training in avian host-parasite systems, developing
expertise in museum curation, improving bioinformatic and analytical skills,
strengthening her mentoring skills, and building international collaborations.
These goals directly contribute to the Fellow's development as an independent
research scientist focusing on natural history collections. The research focuses
on areas of broad human interest (disease and climate change), thereby providing
several opportunities to promote training and learning, broaden participation of
underrepresented groups, and develop international collaborations. The Fellow is
providing research experiences to undergraduates, who are receiving training in
skills applicable to biomedical or wildlife conservation careers (blood smear
analysis, molecular data collection and analysis, species distribution
modeling). The fellow recruits research assistants by coordinating with UNM's
Initiative for Maximizing Student Development program, which works to increase
diversity in STEM fields. The fellow is also visiting the co-sponsor's lab in
Sweden to further develop international collaborations. Results from the
research are being shared with the public through the MSB Ornithology Blog and
Open House in order to increase public awareness and interest in scientific
research and museum collections.