* 1611119
* Collaborative Research: Directing Charge Transport in Hierarchical Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 345,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor James Batteas of the Texas A & M
University and Professor Charles Drain of Hunter College of the City University
of New York study the molecular assembly and electron transport properties of
molecules that might help in electronic device miniaturization. Moore's Law,
which has held for the last four decades, states that the density of transistors
on an electronic device "chip" will double approximately every two years, making
electronic devices smaller, faster and more powerful. A pressing question is
whether Moore's Law will continue into the future or has it reached its
fundamental limits. Professors Batteas and Drain study metal-organic complexes
known as porphyrinoids, found in nature as the active component of hemoglobin
and chlorophyll, to aid in these developments. They design, synthesize and
evaluate the conductive properties of porphyrinoids assembled into specific
structures on surfaces. Using imaging techniques such as atomic force microscopy
(AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), the team can place individual
molecules into precise arrangements on surfaces and measure not only their
assembled structure at the molecular level but also how the structure controls
the movement of electrons through the molecules. This research has broader
impacts in science and technology, and enables the rational design of potential
molecular electronic devices, including enhanced photovoltaics, chemical sensors
and molecular electronics. The team also trains students, for broader impacts in
education, in fundamental materials chemistry, preparing them for the 21st
century high technology jobs sector.

Professor Batteas and Professor Drain study how to design, synthesize and
evaluate the conductive properties of porphyrinoids assembled on metal surfaces
with an eye toward the implementation of hybrid molecular-based devices for
photonics applications, including enhanced photovoltaics, chemical sensors and
molecular based electronics. The electroactive properties and self-assembly of
robust porphyrinoids can be readily tuned through chemical synthesis using
simple high yield reactions that facilitate commercial viability, making them
attractive targets to be integrated as active components in electronic devices.
In this project porphryinoids are assembled on Au surfaces in precise
architectures via a combination of nanolithography and directed click-chemical
reactions to create nanoscopic assemblies of less than 10 nm in lateral
dimension. Characterization methods (time resolved florescence, UV-visible
absorption, STM and AFM) are applied to understand how local molecular
interactions influence electron transport properties in small molecule
assemblies, how spatial confinement of molecules on a surface influence their
resulting assembly process and the structures that can be formed, and how the
assembled architectures control electron transport. Broader impacts of the
research result in an improved fundamental understanding of the assembly and
electron transport properties of the porphryiods, with potential to influence
molecular electronic device and solar light harvesting applications. Broader
impacts through education and outreach incorporate aspects of the work,
including atomic scale imaging, nanolithography, molecular self-assembly and
nanoscale electronics, into demonstrations for elementary school students as
part of a weeklong summer camp on Nanotechnology (at Texas A&M University), and
into the undergraduate and graduate classrooms at Texas A&M University and CUNY
Hunter College.