* 1611906
* On the long-time behavior of Ricci flow and Ricci flow surgery
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Richard Bamler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2019
* USD 174,000.00

A Ricci flow is a geometric process that can be used to smooth out, and
sometimes homogenize, a given space. Its mathematical significance has become
apparent by the fact that it could be used to prove various conjectures, such as
the Poincar√© and Geometrization Conjectures in 3-dimensional spaces. A general
expectation in the study of Ricci flows is that the flow produces a geometry in
the limit that is somehow inherent to the topology, i.e. the loose makeup, of
the underlying space. Most often, however, the flow develops certain
singularities, which have to be removed by so-called "surgeries" before the flow
can be continued. Despite their powerful topological implications, Ricci flows
with surgery are still not well understood in dimensions 3 or higher. The goal
of this project is to obtain a better understanding of the long-time behavior of
3 dimensional Ricci flows with surgery, and the dependence of the evolved
geometries on initial conditions. Moreover, the study of Ricci flows in higher
dimensions is suggested.

The proposal is split into three projects. The first project concerns the
analysis of the long-time behavior of 3 dimensional Ricci flows with surgery.
This project builds on previous work of the principal investigator, in which the
finiteness of the number of surgeries was established and in which an initial
description of the flow's long-time asymptotics was derived. The objective of
the second project is to construct continuous families of Ricci flows with
surgery, starting from a given continuous family of Riemannian metrics. In such
families, surgeries may move continuously in space and time depending on the
parameter, and they may appear or disappear. A successful construction of such
families can most likely be used to solve a conjecture that states that the
space of positive scalar curvature metrics on the 3-sphere is contractible.
Moreover, it may be used to solve the Generalized Smale Conjecture, which
classifies the topology of diffeomorphism groups of spherical 3-manifolds. In
the third project, the principal investigator proposes the work on several
problems associated with the study of Ricci flows with bounded scalar curvature.
This study is a continuation of previous work conducted in collaboration with Qi
Zhang. The suggested problems include the analysis of singularities in
4-dimensional Ricci flows with bounded scalar curvature, and the study of non-
collapsed, long-time existent Ricci flows, especially in dimension 4.