* 1611871
* Collaborative Research: A Field-Based Curriculum for Quantifying Deformation of the Earth's Surface with Lasers, GPS and Cameras
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Benjamin Crosby, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2019
* USD 89,994.00

There is a strong need for integration of geodesy into university geoscience
instruction. Geodesy is the study of the size, shape, and mass of Earth and
their changes with time. Recent developments in geodesy have revolutionized our
understanding of Earth processes and produced discoveries of significant impact
to society. Geodesy field techniques are particularly valuable for assessment of
natural hazards and other geologic processes. In addition to scientific
research, geodetic technologies can be applied to a wide variety of commercial
and government sector applications. The primary goal of this project is to
improve students' skills in using geodetic technologies through their
integration into geoscience field education. Hands-on, field-based experiences
provide a unique learning opportunity for students to explore phenomena
directly. In this project, curriculum materials will be developed for
instructors and students that will help them learn about a variety of geodesy
field techniques. During this two-year project at least 240 undergraduate
geoscience students will be directly impacted with that number growing to
several thousand within five years due to training university faculty to
incorporate the learning materials into their college
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a pathway for
faculty to effectively integrate geodetic technologies in field experiences.
This project will significantly expand resources for undergraduate geoscience
student learning of geodetic field methods, research the implementation of
resources by faculty in field experiences, and develop a framework to scale to
multiple technologies and reach multiple universities. This project will
develop, test, and disseminate two learning modules featuring geodetic field
methods relevant for a wide array of geoscience applications, and will include
robust measure of student learning and dissemination of developed resources to
faculty members in short courses, as well as research of faculty implementation.
This collaboration between UNAVCO, Idaho State University and Indiana University
brings together expertise in geodetic field methods, field instruction,
curriculum design, and science education research. The Science Education
Resource Center (SERC) will provide assessment consulting, research support,
project evaluation, and website hosting. National Association of Geoscience
Teachers (NAGT) will support dissemination. The learning modules will provide
instructional faculty resources to teach geodetic technologies in ways that help
students develop critical thinking and other skills necessary to succeed in
applied and academic sciences. A second emphasis will be on training and
dissemination including short courses for faculty members with both technical
and pedagogical aspects, providing a pathway for improved teaching methods in
the field and classroom. We will conduct research on the effective adoption of
field education teaching materials created by someone else at five universities.
Data collected during the implementation and testing of learning modules will
contribute to the body of educational research by analyzing the process of
adoption of curricular materials by instructors in diverse field settings. This
research will aid the efficiency of future curriculum development through better
understanding of instructor needs.