* 1611957
* Topology, Geometry, and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Daniel Freed, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 314,952.00

This research project forms a part of an ongoing vigorous interaction between
geometry and high energy theoretical physics. The engagement of mathematics with
other sciences, and of science with mathematics, is a continual source of
fruitful ideas with long-term benefits -- our current technology and economy
rely on the foundation of basic research from past decades and centuries. For
many years, the interaction of physics with geometry has concerned quantum field
theory and string theory, and now condensed matter theory is added to the mix. A
major issue in the latter is the classification of phases of matter. New exotic
phases of matter have direct applications to materials science and to quantum
computing. This research project applies recent advances in abstract topology,
the study of the gross structure of shapes, to this classification problem. The
project also aims at broader foundational issues in geometric formulations of
quantum field theory, as well as questions in pure geometry. Graduate students
are involved in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves both
purely mathematical projects influenced by physics and projects that apply
geometry and topology to concrete problems in quantum field theory, string
theory, and condensed matter theory. As an example of the latter, the
investigator aims to classify certain topological phases of matter using ideas
and techniques from homotopy theory. Another set of projects aims to develop the
general theoretical underpinnings of geometric models of quantum field theory,
including issues of scale, unitarity, and long-range approximations. The
investigator also plans to explore questions in pure geometry. One set of
projects investigates invariants of three-dimensional manifolds using
abelianization via spectral networks. This provides a new perspective on
dilogarithm formulas for volumes of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Another project
investigates quadratic forms in topology with applications to special quantum
field theories. Characteristic classes on smooth simplicial manifolds are also
revisited, with an attempt to forge a relationship with central extensions of
infinite dimensional groups.