* 1611975
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Bradlee Nelms, Nelms                   Bradlee
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Bradlee Nelms is "Specification and Differentiation of
Maize Archesporial Cells During Early Anther Development." The host institution
for the fellowship is Stanford University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Virginia Walbot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship activities are focused on
understanding early anther development in maize. As a reproductive organ of a
major crop plant, the maize anther plays a central role in many processes of
agronomic importance. Defects in early anther development lead to male
sterility, decreasing grain number and yield in many cereal crops. Furthermore,
one of the earliest causes of yield loss in response to heat and drought is
pollen inviability; thus, understanding anther development and male fertility
will be important to insuring food security in the face of climate change. This
project will increase knowledge of basic reproductive biology, information that
can ultimately lead to breakthroughs in crop breeding and yield enhancement. The
fellowship activities will also promote teaching and learning both within
academia and in the general public. The fellow will lead an undergraduate-
focused outreach project to design and market educational materials, helping to
communicate the broad importance of the plant sciences to the community and
stimulating collaboration between undergraduates from scientific fields and
other disciplines. Further educational outreach will include mentoring
undergraduate and high school students in laboratory
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific goal of this research
is to uncover early events in the development of archesporial (AR) cells--the
first cell type within the anther committed to meiosis and pollen production.
Major aims are to (1) identify cellular intermediates as AR cells differentiate
into meiocytes and (2) investigate the role of TGA-type transcription factors in
AR cell specification. These aims will be pursued using a combination of
genomics, genetics, and biochemistry. Single-cell RNA sequencing will allow the
identification of distinct AR cell populations, which will then be ordered into
a developmental pathway by integrating transcriptome data with in situ
localization of RNA transcripts. The subcellular localization, redox status, and
DNA binding activity of several TGA transcription factors will be assessed in
early stage anthers under various genetic and physiological perturbations, and
downstream signaling pathways for the TGA factors will be evaluated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Together, the fellowship activities will generate
substantial transcriptomic and ChIP-Seq data, clarify the differentiation
program of AR cell development, and help to characterize the regulation and
signaling of TGA family transcription factors during AR cell specification in a
spatio-temporal context. Research results will be presented at national
conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals, and all sequence data will
be submitted to public repositories such as the NCBI Sequence Read Archive
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and Gene Expression Omnibus
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).