* 1611114
* RET Site in Engineering and Computer Science: Digital Signal Processing in Radio Astronomy
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Natalia Schmid, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 577,815.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, entitled Digital Signal Processing in Radio Astronomy (DSPIRA) at West
Virginia University (WVU) Lane Department of Computer Sciences and Electrical
Engineering, the WVU Center for Gravitational Waves and Cosmology, and the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory, (NRAO) in Green Bank, WV, will expose high
school STEM teachers from West Virginia school districts, to hands-on research
experiences in the engineering method, via involvement in the research, design,
development, and prototyping of digital signal processing (DSP) techniques and
applications targeted for the next generation of radio telescopes. Radio
Astronomy is undergoing a revolution as major new telescopes come on line. This
next generation of telescopes requires exceptionally sophisticated signal
processing algorithms running in high throughput, heterogeneous computing
environments. Implementation of these algorithms and hardware is pushing the
state of the art of current DSP techniques. Advanced DSP algorithms running in
commodity devices are a fundamental part of modern life. The signal processing
techniques being developed here are also becoming vital across a wide range of
areas, including vision-based navigation, remote sensing, robotics,
mechatronics, computerized tomography, biomedical engineering, radar and sonar,
and signal processing for security. The experiences gained by the teachers will
give them, and through them their own students, insight into the design,
development, and implementation of such devices. DSPIRA addresses a confluence
of three needs: an industry need for greater public understanding of a widely
used technology; science and industry's need to have cross-curricular problem
solvers; and the K-12 world's need to integrate engineering principles into
their new science standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period this
RET Site will offer an intensive six week summer research program and academic
year follow-up to a total of 30 STEM high school teachers who will join research
teams led by engineers at WVU and NRAO who will provide the RET teachers the
opportunity to make meaningful contributions, with authentic involvement, in
these engineering research areas. With the recent advances in open source
Software Defined Radio (SDR) tools, teachers will be able to learn core concepts
and explore implementation strategies in an extremely accessible
software/hardware environment (a laptop and RTL-SDR device running GNU Radio
software) and take these back to their institutions. The research experience
will also include RET teachers working with project staff to develop classroom
projects that involve an entire classroom of students in DSP activities. in
addition to dissemination of the results of RET participants' research projects,
through poster sessions and national conferences such as NSTA and ASEE, the PIs
will share all educational and research material developed over the period of
this project both in state and nationally through the Teach Engineering Digital
Library.