* 1611893
* Collaborative proposal: Variable Selection in the high dimensional, low sample size setting -- Beyond the Linear Regression and Normal Errors Model
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Martin Wells, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Revolutionary new technologies are producing high-throughput biological data at
a resolution that was unthinkable only a decade ago. These new forms of data
pose enormous challenges and opportunities for statisticians and computer
scientists. This project develops new sophisticated statistical methods and
computational algorithms for analyzing and integrating complex high-dimensional
data. The work is motivated by collaborations with leading biological scientists
at Cornell-Ithaca and Weill Cornell Medical College working in diverse research
areas including plant biology, nutrition, neurology, cancer epigenomics, and
veterinary medicine.

The goal of this project is to develop new statistical models and computational
algorithms for high-dimensional, low sample size, high-throughput biological
data, including new methods for the analysis of microarrays, the identification
of quantitative trait loci, association mapping, label-free shotgun proteomics
and metabolomics. The proposed methods involve innovative extensions of modern
statistical building blocks, including the use of random effects for
regularization, shrinkage estimation, Bayesian statistics, and mixtures for
posterior classification and prediction. Novel modifications of the expectation-
maximization algorithm are proposed for scalable and efficient model fitting and
inference.