* 1611622
* Characterizing mathematical reasoning in the introductory chemistry course: Metamodeling knowledge and its role in students' construction and use of mathematical models
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Nicole Becker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,652.00

Introductory college chemistry courses are critical gateways for students
seeking to major in and develop further understandings of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Mathematical problem solving is a
key challenge, and many chemistry students resort to using mathematical
expressions algorithmically, with little understanding of how the equations they
use relate to what is happening with the chemistry of invisible particles at the
molecular level. Yet mathematical models are important predictive and
explanatory tools for scientists and engineers. One promising way to support
students' reasoning with mathematics in chemistry courses is to help students
better understand how to develop and use mathematical models. This project will
design learning activities to promote understanding of mathematical models used
in chemistry and study students' reasoning with mathematical models in
introductory college chemistry classrooms. Results from this research are
expected to provide insights regarding ways to improve chemistry students'
understanding of mathematical modeling and problem solving, and their
understanding of its applications in other STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by NSF's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education and EHR Core Research programs, this project will design, implement,
and investigate the effectiveness of mathematical modeling-focused learning
activities integrated into a general chemistry course for STEM majors at the
University of Iowa. The collaborative learning activities will engage students
in developing and testing mathematical models used to understand chemistry, and
will leverage resources such as chemistry simulations developed by the Physics
Education Technology (PhET) at the University of Colorado to allow students to
test and refine their models. Students' use of mathematical models to help
explain chemical phenomena will be assessed through semi-structured interviews.
The interviews will also probe students' meta-knowledge of modeling, which
includes understanding the empirical basis of models, and the assumptions and
limitations associated with particular mathematical models. Interview responses
will be analyzed to characterize students' 1) understandings of specific models
in the undergraduate chemistry sequence (e.g., ideal gas law, equilibrium
constant expression); 2) metamodeling ideas associated with these models; and 3)
model-based explanations of chemical and physical changes. Students'
explanations and reasoning will be compared across different chemistry topics to
examine the impact of context on students' use of models and meta-knowledge of
modeling. This work will provide researchers and instructors with a better
understanding of how students use core chemistry content knowledge and
understandings of modeling to engage in the practices of science. These
characterizations will also provide a basis for developing assessments that will
enable researchers to trace growth in students' model-based explanations and
reasoning across chemistry courses, and eventually across other STEM
disciplines.