* 1611718
* I-Corps: Microfluidic Device for the Evaluation of Drug Carrier Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Yaling Liu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Current therapeutic drugs are typically tested in static culture dish first,
followed by testing within animals, and finally progressed into pre-clinical
trials in humans. This is a long and expensive process, which could benefit from
a tool designed to assess nanomedicine performance in an inexpensive manner
while still maintaining conditions presented within the human body. The proposed
technology is a small and transparent device which allows for blood vessels to
be mimicked outside of the human body while still retaining the characteristic
features of such vessels. The significantly easier to use and more cost
effective system will save both time and money when testing therapeutic
performance prior to animal and pre-clinical testing. The proposed platform
allows for therapeutic candidate screening which in turn reduces costs and time
required to run animal and pre-clinical trial. As such, any researcher working
in industry or academia would benefit from the use of the proposed microfluidic
system to analyze key characteristics of new therapeutics. Through the use of
the proposed novel microfluidic device, this I-Corps team is able to deliver a
platform capable of improving the testing and analysis process for
drug/therapeutic development and ultimately aiding in the delivery of new and
improved drugs to market for patients in need. Overall, expediting the drug
development process will help extend and improve the lives of patients around
the world.

Technically, the device is comprised of a microfluidic chip that is cast from
molds in order to form micro-scale channels. The bilayer channels which make up
the devices are separated from each other with a semipermeable membrane which
spans the entire device, allowing only specific content to pass from the apical
(top) channel into the basal (bottom) channel. Using this simple yet effective
device, research has been conducted proving the ability to culture cells within
the device, ability to assess drug carrier binding and uptake, as well as work
geared towards more specific applications such as tumor micro-environment
studies, inflammation, and permeability. As such, the main goals for the I-Corps
program are, to further develop a customer base through in-depth market analysis
and research, to identify customers' needs and perspective of the technology,
and to gather customer feedback for improvement of the technology. Given such
goals, the major scope for the completion of the I-Corps program is to bring the
technology to market so that it can begin to assist researchers and scientists
outside of the Lehigh University lab.