* 1611155
* Facile Lab-on-Fiber Optofluidic Platform for the Study of Therapeutic-Eluting Polyelectrolyte Coatings
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 11/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Fei Tian, Co-PI: Henry Du&lt;br/&gt;Institute: Stevens Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title &lt;br/&gt;Facile Lab-on-Fiber
Opto-fluidic Platform for the Study of Therapeutic-Eluting Polyelectrolyte
Coatings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop an
innovative lab-on-fiber platform for real-time and physiologically relevant
measurements of the release profile of drug-laden polymer
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Therapeutic
polymer coatings on medical implants and in tissue scaffolds for controlled
release are increasingly being explored as a patient-care strategy and in
regenerative medicine. Clinical translation of these polymers requires
controlled and sustained drug release with dose profiles tailored to specific
needs. The lack of a robust method to study the release profiles in
physiologically relevant microenvironment hinders the development of effective
drug-laden polymer coatings and their clinical utilization. This project aims to
design, fabricate and demonstrate a facile and innovative all-optical lab-on-
fiber platform mimicking physiologically relevant microenvironment for real-time
study of therapeutic release from antibiotic drug- and growth factor-containing
polymer coatings. The lab-on-fiber platform, consisting in essence of a fiber-
optic grating sensor coated with therapeutic polymer enclosed in a glass
capillary, holds excellent promise to be a robust and broadly adoptable testbed
to meet the critical need in the development and evaluation of therapeutic-
eluting polymer coatings. This project will also provide a fertile training
ground for students at doctoral, undergraduate, as well as high-school levels
with significant opportunities to interact with collaborators at MIT and the
Academy of Sciences of The Czech Republic in Prague.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This project aims to design, fabricate
and demonstrate a facile and innovative all-optical lab-on-fiber optofluidic
platform (LOFOP) mimicking physiologically relevant microenvironment for in-situ
time-resolved study of the kinetics and mechanism of therapeutic release from
antibiotic drug- and growth factor-laden polyelectrolyte coatings deposited by
layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly. The project tackles a major challenge faced by
the scientific community in the ability, or lack of, to measure the release
profiles of therapeutic polymer coatings in situ under physiologically relevant
conditions, especially pertaining to fluid flow and microenvironment in order
for their translation as clinical solutions. The LOFOP has as its core a long-
period fiber grating (LPG) structure sensitive to LbL events at sub-monolayer
resolution. LPG coated with therapeutic-eluting LbL polyelectrolytes will be
integrated with glass capillary to mimic physiologically relevant fluid flow in
a microenvironment. The LOFOP approach represents a transformative advancement
from the commonly used test tube method to a simple and yet powerful optofluidic
technique for time-resolved and in-situ release measurements. The aims of the
project will be achieved by (1) numerical simulation using full-vector mode
solver to select cladding modes most sensitive to LbL processes and to guide LPG
fabrication; (2) LbL deposition of antibiotic- and growth factor-eluting polymer
coatings on LPG; and (3) in-situ release measurements of the antibiotic and
growth factor with physiologically relevant fluid flow rate and spacing as
parameters. The results will be fitted with established release models to
ascertain the release mechanisms. Feasibility of the LOFOP for simultaneous
evaluation of drug release and ensuing bacterial response will be explored by
integrating LPG containing antibiotic-eluting coating with glass capillary, the
inner wall of which is cultured with S. aureus biofilm. Successful outcome of
the project is expected to significantly advance the frontier of both LOF
optofluidics and LbL for biomedical applications and beyond.