* 1611885
* Plant Tracer: a time-lapse App for students to visualize, quantify and report novel mutants in plant motion
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 04/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

New York University (NYU) has received an Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources Directorate (IUSE: EHR) Exploration and
Design award for a project to develop inexpensive time-lapse photography tool to
allow the study of plant movement (tropisms, oscillations, growth, etc.) for
practicing scientists, as well as for undergraduate students in the classroom.
Through a collaborative effort among plant molecular biologists, engineers with
expertise in motion, and digital educational scientists, the PI team from NYU is
designing, developing, and disseminating a mobile app, Plant Tracer, to quantify
plant movement from time-lapse videos in an associated undergraduate teaching
environment.

The PI team is using the capabilities of Plant Tracer to advantage by developing
inquiry-based laboratories that allow students to participate in authentic
research studies on gravitropism (movement of a plant in response to gravity)
and circumnutation (movements of the growing portions of plants to form spirals
or ellipses). Using the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, students are
dissecting the mechanisms underlying these behaviors at a molecular level. Plant
Tracer permits high-throughput, low-cost analysis that allows students to
identify new mutants undetected in previous work. A collection of genetically
altered Arabidopsis germplasm is being developed to allow students to use a
crowd-sourcing approach to isolate these mutants. The project, which involves
students from six universities, is motivating student interest in plant biology
and enhancing student learning outcomes. At the same time, the data that are
collected by the students are advancing our knowledge of genetics that govern
gravitropism and circumnutation.

This project is being jointly supported by the NSF Division of Undergraduate
Education and the NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure as it aligns with an
important subset of the objectives of both divisions that is expressed in the
"Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education" effort (see
http://visionandchange.org/).