* 1611742
* Teaching Critical Thinking Skills in Science with sInvestigator
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Gheorghe Tecuci, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

A team of experts from computer science, artificial intelligence, science
teaching and pedagogy, systems architecture, software engineering, knowledge
engineering and human computer interaction at George Mason University (GMU) is
developing a cognitive assistance tool, "sInvestigator," to help students
acquire critical thinking skills in addressing scientific problems. The
sInvestigator cognitive assistant is a significant technological innovation,
based upon a computational theory of reasoning in science. It incorporates a
substantial amount of general knowledge about scientific reasoning with evidence
guiding and helping the student with the scientific inquiry process. The tool is
novel and operates on multiple computer platforms. It is designed for students
to use at home and in the lab and supports their acquisition of the core
competency of evidence-based reasoning. The resulting theory is extendable to
all STEM disciplines both undergraduate and K-12. Broadening participation is
achieved through workshops having the capacity of 50-70 participants. Recruiting
targets community colleges and minority serving institutions to attract women
and underrepresented groups to the workshops organized in collaboration with the
GMU Center for Teaching and Faculty Excellence. Evidence based reasoning is at
the core of problem solving and decision making not only in STEM disciplines but
also law, intelligence analysis, forensics, medicine, history, archeology and
other domains. The developed educational materials together with sInvestigator
exercises are widely distributed. Information on how teachers and researchers
can freely obtain the sInvestigator are posted on GMU's Learning Agents Center
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year project is first piloted in two
Honors courses enrolling 30-40 students. Working in teams, students are guided
to approach a scientific problem as ceaseless discovery of evidence, hypothesis
and arguments. New knowledge is added by answering research questions that
explore improvements in student perception of science process skills and gains
in student content knowledge, as measured by course assessments. Students
experience numerous opportunities to exercise imagination and creativity and
acquire critical scientific practices, particularly: (1) Asking questions; (2)
Constructing explanations; (3) Engaging in argument from evidence; and (4)
Obtaining, evaluating and communicating explanations (NRC, 2012 p.3). The use of
sInvestigator is explored in a sequence of courses to learn what works and what
does not work and incrementally evolve the theory and the approach while
developing and testing case studies. The mixed-methods evaluation is mostly
formative with a focus on understanding students' collaborative experiences with
sInvestigator through surveys and interviews. Modification of assessment tools
is made based upon evaluation which allows for analysis of student intrinsic
motivation, career motivation, self-determination, self-efficacy and grade
motivation. In the final year a quasi-experimental research design will be used
to evaluate the impact of sInvestigator in a general science course with 250-300
students in two course sections. The design allows for a comparison group on
student achievement scores using course assessments, a Science Motivation
Questionnaire and a Science Process skills inventory.