* 1611979
* Inverted and Active Learning Pedagogies (IALP) for Student Success and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Robert Jonas, Texas Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 291,828.00

This project at Texas Lutheran University (TLU), a Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI), will determine the optimum combination of high impact inverted and active
learning pedagogies (e.g., "flipped classroom") in order to maximize student
success for groups underrepresented in STEM. The effort includes 40 college
faculty and 350 undergraduate students in a flipped classroom experiment and the
results will be compared with those gained from a similar, but more limited
experiment which has been carried out at Harvey Mudd College. Results from the
latter experiment appear to suggest that there is no difference in results
between those students in typical versus flipped classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary research questions will be addressed: (1)
What is the optimal combination of Inverted and Active Learning Pedagogies
(IALP) that will maximize student learning for groups underrepresented in STEM?
(2) How will the effectiveness and impact of IALP techniques differ for
underrepresented groups and for students in highly selective STEM focused
colleges? and (3) To what extent will the benefits of IALP be sustained in
subsequent classes? The impact of IALP will be measured using pre-post test
instruments, student scores on assignments, quizzes, exams and projects. Results
gained throughout the semester are recorded and analyzed. Course content is
optimized following data analysis at the end of each semester. The use of course
sequences is providing control groups and facilitates measurement of impact on
later courses. The research-design model and measurement tools produced are
allowing researchers to replicate and further test IALP courses in institutions
similar to Texas Lutheran University. A team of external evaluators are
utilizing appropriate tools to conduct both formative and summative evaluation
of the programs and the project. All evaluative processes are including checking
and reporting systems designed to provide data and documentation of all
activities from beginning to end.