* 1611497
* Single-molecule studies of hyaluronic acid
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Omar Saleh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of California-Santa Barbara is to study the
size, shape and solution properties of hyaluronic acid (hyaluronan, HA) in the
presence of salts and other molecules that binds with this polymer. Hyaluronan,
or hyaluronic acid (HA), is a huge polymer molecule that defines the structure
and mechanics of many spaces in the human body such as tissue hydration, wound
healing, lubrication of certain biological interfaces, and helps to define the
mechanics of joints and functionality. Further, HA is under active investigation
for use in biomaterials applications, notably functionalized HA gels that act as
cell/tissue engineering substrates. These functions of HA rely on its polymeric,
random-walk structure, which is modulated by solution conditions, including salt
concentration, crowding by other biological polymers, and the presence of HA-
binding molecules. It is thus of basic importance, for both biological and
chemical reasons, to have a detailed understanding of the microscopic basis of
HA conformation and solution behavior. The proposed studies are expected to lead
to a better understanding of HA's various biological roles, as well as to permit
rational engineering of HA-based biomaterials. Further, carrying out this
project would have a variety of important broader impacts, including
strengthening university/national lab partnerships, and training young
scientists, at both undergraduate and graduate levels in an interdisciplinary
scientific area with excellent long-term potential. International dissemination
and scientific exchanges are parts of this project, and these unique activities
are important in achieving scientific broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a polysaccharide present in nearly
all mammalian tissues. HA is characterized by a large anionic charge density,
conformational flexibility, and polymorphism due to a variety of hydrogen-
bonding interactions. These features, along with its association with certain
ligands, lead it to define the mechanical and viscoelastic properties of
extracellular spaces, such as the pericellular matrix, eye vitreous, and
synovial fluid. HA is of further interest for clinical applications, and as a
biomaterial used to create gel substrates for cell and tissue growth. In all
these biological and biomaterials applications, there is a common need for a
thorough understanding of HA's microscopic structure and functions, particularly
including mechanical properties and their relation to the ionic effects that
dominate osmotic and viscoelastic properties. With the prior NSF project, this
researcher has established that low-force single-molecule elasticity
measurements are powerful tools to understand polyelectrolyte structure in
complex solutions. Here, 'low force' means tensions small enough to permit
looped, random-walk structure in the chain; such forces are inaccessible to
standard force spectroscopy approaches that only access nearly-straight chain
configurations. Low forces permit sensitivity to weak, long range interactions,
and thus quantification of the effects that are key to HA's biological and
biomaterials functions, such as electrostatic repulsion, direct and water-
mediated hydrogen bonding, and self-avoidance. Here, the proposed studies are to
apply the low-force approach to a rigorous examination of HA's solution-mediated
conformational and mechanical properties. This research will proceed through the
following two goals. In goal 1, HA conformation will be studied as modulated by
electrostatic screening, water structure (using chao/kosmotropic salts), and in
the presence of crowders. In goal 2, the effects of specific biological ligands
on HA conformation will be studied, with emphasis on proteogylcans that cause
swelling and crosslinking effects. International dissemination and scientific
exchange that are unique and important in the context of achieving broader
impact of the sciences are part of this awards.