* 1611723
* 2016 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (Japan-America: Irvine, California, June 2016; U.S.: Houston, Texas, September 2016; and European Union-U.S.: October 2016)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering (NAE), provide emerging engineering leaders from academia,
industry, and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights
to facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth in an increasingly
competitive environment have heightened the need for engineers to understand
each other's disciplines and enhance the value in that interaction, particularly
among those developing and using these new technologies. The symposia serve as a
catalyst to spur engineering innovation and foster collaborative networks of
researchers within the United States and between engineers from the United
States and partnering countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for three FOE Symposia, to be held in 2016, organized by the NAE
for early career researchers: the 2016 Japan-America FOE Symposium (JAFOE) to be
held on June 16-18, 2016, in Irvine, California; the 2016 U.S. FOE Symposium
(USFOE) to be held on September 19-21, 2016, in Houston, Texas; and the 2016
European Union-U.S. FOE Symposium (EU-US FOE) to be held on October 17-19, 2016,
in Helsinki, Finland. Each FOE symposium will focus on four topical areas. The
four topics for the 2016 USFOE Symposium are scalable algorithms and software
for high-fidelity graphics, technologies for eradicating cancer, water
desalination and purification, and extreme engineering. The four topics for the
2016 JAFOE Symposium are advanced 3D printing; nanotechnology in energy
generation, storage and efficiency; big data; and urban mobility efficiency.
Finally, the four topics for the 2016 EU-US FOE Symposium are carbon capture,
utilization, and storage; information and computer technologies for personal
health; integrated photonics manufacturing; and intelligent transportation
systems. About 100 outstanding young engineers for the US FOE Symposium and 30
from each country for the bilateral symposia will participate. Each two and one-
half day symposium will include four formal sessions, technical tours, break-out
sessions, and opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships.
Sessions will consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations,
and emerging research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the
symposium. Papers from the USFOE Symposium will be published in a volume
available on the National Academies Press website at http://www.nap.edu.