* 1611563
* The Influence of Defects and Adsorption on the Local Electronic Potential of Supported Metal Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jory Yarmoff, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jory Yarmoff of the University
of California at Riverside studies how the properties of nanoparticles are
affected by the surfaces on which they are supported. Nanoparticles are tiny
particles that contain thousands of atoms. While they are much larger than
chemical molecules, which contain only a few atoms, they are still much smaller
than solid materials that are large enough to see with the naked eye, containing
trillions of atoms. Nanoscale materials are unique because they have sizes
intermediate between molecules and solids, but sometimes have properties not
easily predicted by averaging the two size extremes. Professor Yarmoff uses
specialized characterization methods to investigate how the electronic
properties of metal nanoparticles are affected by defects in a solid support
material. Measurements are made as a function of nanoparticle size, the number
of intentionally produced defects in the support material and exposure to gases
that "stick" (or adsorb) to the clusters. The research has significant broader
impact in the field of surface chemistry. Learning how to control the electronic
properties of nanoparticle will facilitate their use in numerous applications
such as electronics, supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, solar power
generation and catalysis. This research project impacts knowledge in basic
science, technology and the environment while directly contributing to the
education of the university's diverse student body. Graduate and undergraduate
students obtain hands-on laboratory experience in a field that is at the
forefront of modern research, while local high school teachers benefit from a
summer program that includes laboratory experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project professor Yarmoff studies how the local electrostatic potential
(LEP) of supported metal nanoclusters is affected by (1) the intentional
introduction of defects in the substrate, (2) adsorption of various adatoms onto
the nanoclusters, and (3) the manner in which defects in the substrate act to
modify any subsequent adsorption. Although there has been a proliferation of
research on metal nanoclusters, there are still many unanswered questions and no
consensus as to the underlying mechanisms responsible for their catalytic
enhancement and other properties. There is a strong body of evidence, however,
that the charge state of metal nanoclusters is a critical factor in their
electronic and chemical behaviors. Supported metal nanoclusters are produced on
oxide and fluoride substrates by direct deposition and buffer layer assisted
growth (BLAG). Professor Yarmoff uses a novel form of low energy ion scattering
(LEIS), which relies on the neutralization of scattered 1-5 keV alkali ions, to
monitor the surface LEP and charge state of the nanoclusters. Incorporation of
intentionally produced defects and adsorption of small molecules are used to
tune the amount of charge localized on each cluster. The research has
significant broader impact on the field; these studies provide an understanding
of the physical and chemical properties of solid-state materials while
developing methods to control them, which will facilitate their use in numerous
applications such as nanoelectronics, supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries,
solar power generation and catalysis. The research program also has broader
impacts in education and outreach since it directly contributes to the education
of the University of California-Riverside's diverse body of graduate and
undergraduate students through hands-on laboratory experience in a field at the
forefront of modern research. Local high school teachers also benefit from a
summer program that includes laboratory experience.