* 1611198
* Development of Quaternary Diamond-like Semiconductors for Infrared Nonlinear Optical Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Aitken, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 490,281.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optical (NLO) crystals are used to
shift the coherent, monochromatic light of lasers to other desirable
wavelengths. Infrared nonlinear optical applications include, stand-off
detection of drugs and explosives, non-invasive medical diagnosis and monitoring
by breath analysis using molecular spectroscopy and infrared counter-measure
systems used to defend military aircraft, just to name a few. However, the
current commercially available crystals for use in infrared nonlinear optical
devices suffer from drawbacks and are lacking in critical areas that limit their
practical applications. The discovery of new infrared nonlinear optical
materials enables the realization of new applications impacting medical,
industrial and military sectors. Furthermore, the synthesis of improved infrared
nonlinear optical materials allows for more reliable, longer-lasting devices
having greater impact in areas where these materials have already found utility.
Better understanding the relationship between the structure of the crystal and
its resulting properties allows for faster progress in this field. Through this
project, structure-property correlations are evolving from systematic studies of
quaternary diamond-like semiconductors that combine strategic experimentation
with theory, in which the ability to reliably predict properties is fostered by
experimental results. These structure-property relationships are being revealed
by the research efforts of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduate researchers, high school science teachers and high school students
on the research team. X-ray powder diffraction workshops organized through this
project are training the next-generation workforce to solve complex scientific
problems with the use of advanced research tools. Outreach activities geared
toward women, minorities and economically disadvantaged students are taking
place through the research group's participation in the ACS Project SEED program
and interactions with local undergraduate women in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Current
commercially available infrared nonlinear optical crystals have shortcomings,
such as a lack of power-handling ability and multiphoton absorption effects that
preclude usage with high-powered lasers and operation at certain wavelengths,
respectively. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, focuses on the synthesis and characterization of quaternary diamond-
like semiconductors and the assessment of their potential as new infrared
nonlinear optical materials. Nonlinear optical (NLO) properties on powdered
diamond-like semiconductor samples and additional properties of centimeter-sized
single crystals are being assessed. The powdered/microcrystalline compound
samples are prepared by high-temperature solid-state or lithium polysulfide flux
synthesis. Second-order nonlinear optical susceptibility, laser damage threshold
and the onset wavelength for phase matchability, as well as transparency range
and bandgap are being measured. The preparation of centimeter-scale single
crystals of selected compounds identified as promising candidates is being
carried out via the vertical Bridgman method and iodine-vapor transport
reactions. Certain properties of technological importance, including thermal
conductivity and extreme optical transparency measured by laser calorimetry, are
being assessed using these sizeable single crystals. Relationships between the
composition, crystal structure and electronic structure of the materials,
especially bandgap, and the observed physical properties are being considered to
build crystal-chemical concepts that allow for knowledge-based optimization of
materials' NLO properties.