* 1611943
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jeana Drake, Drake                   Jeana
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Jeana Drake

Proposal Number 1611943

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and teaching plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Jeana Drake is
'Coral skeleton protein evolution: Using ancient and modern skeletal protein
data to elucidate coral evolutionary patterns'. The host institution for this
fellowship is the University of California, Los Angeles, and the sponsoring
scientist is David Jacobs.

The goal of this research is to develop and test evolutionary models of proteins
in corals, and how evolution of these proteins relates to climate change over
the past 250 million years. The Fellow is using fossil coral collections from
the Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous and Tertiary periods, from the American
Museum of Natural History and the Smithsonian Institution, and gene sequence
data from modern corals housed in university and private aquaria, to study the
evolution of coral biomineralization proteins. After employing standard
geochemical analyses to confirm the pristine nature of fossil coral specimens,
the Fellow is using mass spectrometry to sequence fossil proteins from corals
that lived just before or after dramatic climate shifts in the last 250 million
years. She is also developing constant evolutionary rate models based on gene
sequences from modern corals within the same families as the fossil coral
specimens. Finally, the Fellow is testing the validity of these evolutionary
rate models using the fossil protein sequences. The Fellow's research examines
the evolutionary patterns of corals across climate change events, and will
clarify the robustness versus plasticity of individual coral biomineralization
proteins.

The Fellow is furthering her skills in geochemistry, molecular biology, and
bioinformatics, and managing a research project within a multidisciplinary
setting. The Fellow is training undergraduate and graduate students in
laboratory methods as well as preparation of manuscripts, posters and
presentations. She is doing outreach at a local high school to share research
concepts and outcomes with students and to include highly motivated students in
laboratory work.