* 1611454
* Terahertz Quantum Electronics of Carbon Nanostructures: Population Inversion, Gain and Coherent Bandgap Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jigang Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 377,231.00

The challenge of pushing the switching speed-limit and integration density of
today's logic and modulation devices into the terahertz (one trillion cycles per
second) and sub-20 nanometer regime underlies the entire field of information
processing, recording and communication. This challenge may be met by a novel
paradigm of terahertz quantum nano-electronics based on ultrafast coherent laser
pumping in graphene - one atom thick, the honeycomb-shaped carbon material - and
single-walled carbon nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;the rolled-up sheets of graphene
monolayers. Researchers will use short pulsed terahertz light, outside the
visible spectrum, and an ultrafast camera technique to directly monitor the
formation and time evolution of photo-excited states in these carbon
nanomaterials. This novel method will allow them to capture and control their
novel electromagnetic properties on the femtosecond scale, or to one
quadrillionth of a second. The results will open fascinating opportunities to
demonstrate their significant potential to advance, e.g., above-gigahertz light
modulators, broadband gain mediums from the infrared to terahertz, radiation
controlled hot-electron transistors, multi-functional devices responding to
ultrabroadband electromagnetic radiations from the terahertz to visible
frequency. Our success in this "ultrafast" and "ultrasmall" challenge will
reveal as-yet-undiscovered physical processes for developing new generation
optoelectronic device and offer perspectives for sustaining the information
revolution and the 21st century's digital economy. Education is an integral and
essential component in this proposal. It consists of interconnected, specific
plans for education that span small college professors/undergraduates, "A
Physics Day" program for high school teachers and their students; outreach to
underrepresented minority students and provision of research/training
opportunities to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How coherent photoexcitations
control excitonic bosons in single-walled carbon nanotubes and Dirac fermions in
graphene monolayers is among the most fundamental, yet cross-cutting, issues in
quantum and optoelectronic technologies. The proposal aims to explore some
remarkable laser-driven quantum processes in these carbon nanostructures and
demonstrate their significant potential for device applications. The primary
goals are: to determine broadband gain spectrum and threshold in strongly
photoexcited graphene monolayers; to demonstrate coherently photo-driven,
bandgap opening near the Dirac cone using intense terahertz pulses; to
investigate extreme mid-infrared and far-infrared nonlinear wave mixing in
graphene; to achieve terahertz stimulated emission in single-walled carbon
nanotubes using two-photon excited, dark exciton states. The approach for the
timely advancement lies in the combination of ultrashort terahertz pulses,
specially fabricated, high quality mono- and few-layer graphene and carbon
nanotubes, and ultra-broadband probe capability from the terahertz to visible
spectral regions. This proposal has identified compelling opportunities to
advance one of the most poorly- addressed territories in some most exciting
materials today dynamical, non-equilibrium, and nonlinear aspects of carbon
nanostructures. The targeting problems are in the boundaries of several
frontiers such as quantum optical control of matter, terahertz electrical
transport, and ultrafast optoelectronic technology. Although sophisticated
theoretical studies have been underway, the experimental schemes for exploring a
wide range of the predicted fundamental phenomena, as proposed, have lagged
behind. These original results are transformative, opening the possibility for
graphene- and carbon nanotube- based above-terahertz speed modulators, saturable
absorbers, ultra-broadband gain medium.