* 1611856
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Lauren Cline, Cline                   Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Lauren Cline

Proposal Number: 1611856

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Lauren Cline is
"Fungal responses to anthropogenic N deposition: a historical perspective." The
host institution for this fellowship is the University of Minnesota, and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Peter Kennedy and Jessica Gutknecht.

The goal of this research is to measure the belowground responses of plants and
fungi to historical increases in nitrogen pollution. The Fellow is accomplishing
this goal by analyzing long-term trends in stable isotope signatures of plants
and fungi from archived biological collections. Over the last century, human-
caused nitrogen (N) deposition has doubled the amount of N entering the
biosphere, mostly due to burning of fossil fuels. N is a nutrient that limits
plant growth in temperate and boreal ecosystems, and experiments manipulating N
supply have revealed dramatic, albeit relatively short-term, belowground
responses to high rates of N deposition. As primary regulators of N and carbon
cycling in soils, microbial responses to increased deposition will have
important consequences for plant production and belowground carbon storage.
However, we do not understand the mechanisms by which current rates of
anthropogenic N deposition have altered biogeochemical cycling, or if
experimental responses match long-term ecosystem consequences. Isotopic analyses
of long-term fungal and plant collections present an innovative approach to
track the changing role of fungi in supplying N to plants, and allows for direct
comparison between historical anthropogenic N deposition and experimental N
studies. The Fellow's research is revealing forest ecosystem responses at
current N deposition rates and the plant and fungal traits that elicit ecosystem
responses. To date, no study has used fungal herbaria specimens to investigate
long-term soil responses to N deposition; thus the Fellow's research represents
a transformative approach to advance our understanding of global ecological
responses amidst rapid environmental change.

The Fellow is being trained in stable isotope analysis and in utilizing
biological collections to add a long-term perspective not possible with
experimental approaches. The Fellow is actively engaged in educational outreach,
including the training of undergraduate researchers from underrepresented
groups, and developing biological content knowledge and inquiry-based classroom
activities with local elementary school teachers. The Fellow is also undertaking
outreach activities with the Bell Museum at the University of Minnesota.
Finally, the Fellow's research has important implications for environmental
stewardship, as it is revealing forest ecosystem responses to N pollution.