* 1611112
* mm/Sub-mm Wave Compressive Sensing Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* David Ricketts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 12/31/2020
* USD 415,963.00

Imaging in the millimeter-wave to terahertz (mmw-THz, 30GHz-3THz) region of the
electromagnetic spectrum provides a new dimension to the investigation and
perception of the world around us. Millimeter wave imaging has been extensively
used for threat detection at airports and for scientific discovery in radio
astronomy to identify particles in gas clouds thousands of light years away.
Terahertz imaging has shown a new means to investigate biological tissues, in
particular in tumor screening. While the scientific and societal benefits are
enormous, the field of mmw-THz imaging is still in its infancy. A particularly
acute challenge is that it is impractical to integrate a large number of mmw-THz
sensors on a circuit board, because the size of each "pixel" must be at least
proportional to the wavelength. Unfortunately, using a single sensor or small
number of sensors renders current mmw-THz imaging systems far too slow. In this
work we will investigate a new method for mmw-THz imaging that uses compressive
sensing and a digital mmw-THz configurable lens to provide up to a 32x
improvement in resolution or speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compressive sensing
allows a reduction in the information needed to reconstruct an image, thus
enabling optical imagers that require 70-80% fewer measurements. Key to this
reduction is the use of pseudorandom spatial modulators, or masks. In the mmw-
THz frequencies, however, such spatial modulators do not exist, due to the size
of each modulator "pixel" needing to be at least proportional to the wavelength.
Consequently, mmw-THz has not been able to leverage these new approaches. In
this project, we will investigate a transformative solution to mmw-THz imaging
by combining several research areas. First, photon induced dynamic spatial
modulators will be used for mmw-THz frequencies. Second, advanced compressive
sensing algorithms will reconstruct high fidelity images from a reduced number
of measurements. Third, multi-sensor arrays will accelerate the image
acquisition, and signal processing algorithms will account for the shared
structure of the image being acquired by all the sensors. The resulting system
has the potential to provide speeds of 50-100 frames per second and greatly
increased signal-to-noise ratio.