* 1611767
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Andrew MacDonald, MacDonald               Andrew         J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Andrew John MacDonald

Proposal Number: 1611767

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Andrew J. MacDonald is "Land use change
and deforestation: A cause and consequence of vector-borne disease risk in the
Amazon Basin." The host institution for this fellowship is Stanford University,
and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Erin Mordecai.

The goal of this project is to understand the bi-directional relationship
between vector-borne disease and land use change, using malaria and
deforestation in the Amazon as a model system. Improved understanding of these
relationships is critically important to conservation, economic development and
human health. Land use change is one of the most pressing environmental issues
facing society. As natural lands are cleared by humans, species reliant on the
cleared habitat are lost while other species replace them. There is substantial
evidence that arthropod vectors - such as mosquitoes and ticks - and the
pathogens they transmit, often benefit from land use change. Yet, studies
attempting to link land use change directly to human disease have yielded
ambiguous results, often drawing contradictory conclusions. One important source
of this ambiguity may be the existence of bi-directional feedbacks between land
use change and disease that, if overlooked, can result in unreliable and
misleading results. The Fellow is using robust statistical techniques widely
applied in empirical economics, and high-resolution environmental and
epidemiological data, to develop an understanding of the relationships between
land use change and malaria. In so doing, he is helping to develop a general
framework to address feedbacks between land use change and infectious disease,
thereby contributing greatly to the burgeoning field of disease ecology.

The Fellow is receiving training in advanced statistical and computational
modeling, incorporating techniques from econometrics and epidemiology. In
addition, the Fellow's research results are being used to develop interactive
educational tools and curricula in collaboration with high school teachers from
underserved communities in the San Francisco Bay Area. These teachers are
working to implement innovative teaching tools and strategies in their own
classrooms to engage underrepresented students in STEM fields, using the
Fellow's project results. The Fellow is also mentoring several high school and
middle school students through programs aimed at engaging low income and first
generation students in science. Finally, the Fellow is using the research
results to inform conservation policy in Brazil to reduce malaria burden.