* 1611341
* Total Tomography of III-V Non-Planar Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lincoln Lauhon, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 408,831.00

Nontechnical description: Semiconducting materials, particularly alloys composed
of group III and group V elements, are useful for converting electrical energy
to light in light-emitting diode devices. Different III-V semiconductors can be
combined in heterostructures to make devices smaller and the energy conversion
processes more efficient. The project develops fundamental understanding of how
semiconducting alloys in nanowire form can be best arranged to control the flow
of electrical energy and generate light in the infrared portion of the spectrum.
This understanding contributes to the development of on-chip photonic
interconnects that overcome the bottleneck in the speed of information transfer
between computer chips that process huge volumes of information in cloud
computing. The project trains graduate students in cutting-edge three-
dimensional characterization methods at Northwestern and in national
laboratories. Web-based interactive case studies are used to disseminate
advances in these characterization methods, which can accelerate the development
of new electronic and photonic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The goal of the project is to correlate the composition, strain,
and electronic structure of group III-As nanowire core-shell heterostructures in
three dimensions to understand how interactions between composition and strain
influence nanostructure growth and optoelectronic properties. Atom probe
tomography is used to measure three-dimensional composition fields with
nanoscale resolution. Based on these composition data, finite element models of
relaxed physical structure are created to extract three-dimensional strain
information from single nanowire x-ray imaging and diffraction studies. Combined
strain and composition data, including dopant distributions accessible only by
atom probe tomography, are used to model electronic and optical properties and
identify materials factors that limit the performance of III-As core-shell
nanowires as infrared light emitting diodes and lasers. Single nanowire Raman,
photoluminescence, and electrical measurements are used to spatially map strain,
carrier concentrations and lifetimes, and the band offsets that establish
confinement potentials.