* 1611562
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Breanna Putman, Putman                  Breanna        J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Breanna J. Putman

Proposal number: 1611562

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Breanna J. Putman is
"Does tolerance affect lizard species persistence in urbanized landscapes? A
citizen science approach." The host institution for this fellowship is the
Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County and the University of California
Los Angeles (UCLA), and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Gregory Pauly and
Daniel T. Blumstein.

The Fellow's research examines the role that tolerance plays in animal responses
to human disturbance via urbanization. Worldwide, urbanization is rapidly
occurring and causing biodiversity loss. Many animal species are negatively
affected by urbanization because they do not tolerate human disturbance. Humans
induce behavioral or physiological responses in these animals that ultimately
reduce their fitness. If animals do not modify these fear responses, they are
likely to be pushed out of urban areas over time. Currently, we lack a
fundamental understanding of the historical filtering process which led to the
urban-tolerant fauna that persist today, a question that must be studied in an
explicitly historical context. The Fellow's research goals are to: (1) quantify
how species' ranges have changed over time in urbanized areas, and (2) determine
whether differences in tolerance (i.e., fearfulness) among species explain the
filtering process which led to some species moving out of urban areas. The
Fellow will achieve her research goals by focusing on reptiles in Southern
California, one of the most urbanized and biodiverse regions in the United
States. Reptiles are an excellent model group because they serve as
bioindicators of ecosystem stress and they are abundant and diverse in this
region. The Fellow is comparing historic ranges of reptiles (delineated with
traditional museum collections) to current ranges (delineated through modern
citizen-science data), to determine which species have been negatively affected
by urban development. In addition, using lizards as a model group, she is
examining whether underlying fear responses (flightiness, stress reactivity) and
associated natural history and life history traits predict quantified range
shifts. This research extensively uses biological collections; Part 1 uses
online databases of collections (VertNet and iNaturalist), and aspects of Part 2
rely on measurements of museum specimens.

The Fellow's training activities include: (1) expanding knowledge on research
techniques, (2) gaining experience teaching and training undergraduates, (3)
gaining expertise in informal education and citizen science, and (4)
establishing data that will drive the early portion of her career as a professor
at a teaching institution. The Fellow's project has a large outreach component
that engages the public in scientific research through a citizen science
project, the Reptiles and Amphibians of Southern California (RASCals). The
applicant works closely with the Natural History Museum's Citizen Science Office
to train participants in this ongoing data-collection project, and interacts
with the public and disseminates results at multiple Museum events. Her research
not only uses digital and museum collections, but also adds to them by
increasing citizen science involvement and through the continued collection and
preservation of reptile specimens at the Museum. Finally, the applicant is
gaining experience in the mentoring undergraduates, who assist in museum work,
endocrinological assays, and fieldwork, and gaining teaching experience by
leading an undergraduate course at UCLA.