* 1612002
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Tara Smiley, Smiley                  Tara           M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's Name: Tara M. Smiley

Proposal Number: 1612002

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016,
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Tara M. Smiley is
"Ecological interactions and community assembly under climate change: a Cenozoic
perspective." The host institution for this fellowship is Oregon State
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Rebecca Terry.

This research evaluates the processes underpinning community assembly and
persistence during two climate-warming intervals in the geologic past that
differed in magnitude, rate, and environmental context. The research results
will promote understanding of anthropogenic climate change, because novel
climates and non-analog biotic communities will become more common as human
activities rapidly change natural environments. The Fellow is examining three
aspects of community ecology: 1) turnover of species at the local scale; 2)
niche dynamics along body size and resource use gradients;&#8232; and 3) higher-
level aggregate properties such as biomass and energy flow within communities
and among functional and size classes. This research focuses on small mammals
(rodents and lagomorphs) because they are taxonomically and ecologically diverse
and are numerically abundant, facilitating community-level analyses in the
fossil record. Small mammal communities are also indicators of ecosystem health;
therefore understanding baseline ecological response to past climate warming is
a priority for forecasting and minimizing biodiversity loss in the future. The
Fellow is using the exceptional fossil collections from the John Day, Oregon,
and Barstow, California, formations housed at the John Day Fossil Beds National
Monument, the University of Washington Burke Museum, and the University of
California Museum of Paleontology to answer these questions, and to generate
novel ecological datasets via laser-ablation mass spectrometry and high-
resolution X-ray computed microtomography (micro CT).

The Fellow is receiving training in stable isotope methods, developing niche
models, using micro CT methods and datasets, and developing skills for the
analytical assessment of community dynamics. To broaden participation in
biology, the Fellow is mentoring undergraduate students in the collection of
ecological data from museum specimens and developing an inquiry-based module on
small-mammal ecology in Oregon to engage young, underserved students in biology
and conservation through Oregon State University's Science and Math
Investigative Learning Experiences program.