* 1612308
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Caitlin Fong, Fong                    Caitlin        R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2020
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Caitlin Fong Proposal number: 1612308

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Caitlin Fong is "Resistance and Resilience of Turf
Communities to Pressed and Pulsed Subsidies?. The host institution for this
fellowship is California State University Northridge (CSUN), and the sponsoring
scientist is Robert Carpenter.

This research explores the consequences of resource subsidies for coral reefs.
Resource subsidies, an addition of a resource to an ecosystem from outside its
boundaries, have important influences on ecological systems, and mounting
evidence suggests that human activities are increasingly influencing resource
subsidies. Resources subsidies vary widely in magnitude, duration, and
frequency; the pattern, or subsidy regime, can range from pulses (low frequency,
high magnitude) to presses (high frequency, low magnitude). It has been proposed
that increasing subsidies of nitrogen and sediment, in conjunction with reduced
herbivory, cause shifts in coral reef communities from a dominance of corals to
dominance by macroalgae. The Fellow is characterizing the nutrient and sediment
subsidy regime of a fringing reef in French Polynesia, and quantifying the
effects of the subsidies on benthic organisms. The Fellow is testing the
hypothesis that nitrogen availability and sediment load are characterized by a
pulse-press regime, are increased with rainfall events, and attenuate with
distance from the source stream. The Fellow is also using lab and field assays
to test the hypothesis that algal species have individual responses to press
versus pulse nutrient and sediment subsidies and different resistance to
herbivores that can be characterized by trade-offs. Finally, the Fellow is
conducting a field experiment to test the hypothesis that the subsidy regimes of
nitrogen and sediments interact with each other and with herbivory to drive
shifts in benthic organisms.

CSUN is an official minority serving (MSI) and Hispanic serving (HSI) intuition,
and 51% of the students are self-described minorities, which facilitates the
Fellow?s efforts to broaden the participation of under-represented groups. She
is collaborating with existing programs at CSUN aimed at broadening
participation to channel students into her research program in biology and ocean
science. Additionally, the Fellow is offering a workshop for graduates students
entitled ?Develop Your Outreach? to develop research modules or teachable units
aimed at exposing and involving underrepresented groups in science. Finally, the
Fellow is sharing her research through online platforms, including: 1)
publishing research updates on her personal website, 2) publishing updates
called ?A Day in the Life of a Marine Ecologist?, 3) creating videos of
fieldwork to provide a virtual field experience to students, and 4) using
Twitter and Instagram accounts to provide updates on research.