* 1612158
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Kelly Swarts, Swarts                  Kelly          L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 182,616.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Kelly Swarts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1612158&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to take
transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ biological
collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Kelly Swarts is "Direct estimation of maize population dynamics
and targets of selection from near domestication to the present from
archaeological samples in Mexico." The host institution for this fellowship is
the Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, and the co-sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Hern√°n Burbano and Johannes
Krause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on domestication and
adaptation of maize (corn) to better understand the basis for modern maize
diversity. Maize is a globally important commodity crop plant, found everywhere
from arid deserts to lowland tropics to northern Europe. Non-agricultural
peoples in central Mexico first identified the biological potential in teosinte
(Zea mays ssp. parviglumis) nearly 10,000 years ago and began the selection
process of transforming a wild grass into a dependent crop plant. This process
continues to the present, as people carried maize first across the Americas and
then the world. Each of these peoples has imposed their values and priorities
onto maize, persistently selecting favorable and adapted varieties, and
ultimately generating the remarkable biological and morphological diversity
found globally in maize. The Fellow?s research addresses the arc of
domestication and adaptation, integrating ancient genomics, maize genetics, and
archaeology, to better understand the basis for modern maize diversity through
maize evolution near the center of origin in Mexico. The Fellow is combining
publicly available databases of modern maize with DNA derived from
archaeological maize macroremains recovered from sites near the putative center
of maize origin (dating from nearly 6,000 years ago to the present), to answer
the following questions: 1) How strong was the domestication bottleneck and what
were the effective population sizes of early maize?; 2) Can we refine the
geographical region of domestication using archaeological populations?; 3) Which
phenotypic traits and functional classes of the genome were targeted for
selection and how did these change over time?; and 4) Can we differentiate the
effects of the changing environment, culture, and heritable genetic variance in
ancient maize phenotypes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is being trained to be
proficient in the methods of extraction and analysis of ancient DNA, and to
integrate these data with population and quantitative genetic analyses.
Addressing maize evolution as a culturally-situated process is of societal
importance because understanding the genetic impacts of past decisions can help
us predict the genetic impacts of human actions going forward, for this globally
important crop.