* 1612515
* A Reflecting on Practice Professional Learning Program
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Catherine Halversen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,365,298.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds efforts that seek to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants. This project will achieve these aims by identifying and closely
evaluating critical factors and processes that are necessary to effectively
broaden access and sustain professional learning (PL) for educational
professionals working within informal STEM learning (ISL) settings. The context
for this work builds on an evidence-based and nationally field tested
professional learning model, Reflecting on Practice (RoP). This model will be
refined to provide ISL educators with increased access to a proven PL curriculum
via an in-person or blended approach, enhanced localized support, and cultivated
regional professional learning communities. There is still little known about
the effectiveness of blended PL within informal contexts. The emphasis on
greater accessibility to PL is particularly important to the ISL field, given
the significant number of informal STEM educators and institutions in
underserved and remote locations, often facing disparate and insurmountable
challenges in access to high quality STEM professional development. This modular
program will not only target a broad range of informal institutions; varying in
size, STEM content foci, geographic location and communities served but it is
also uniquely designed for institutional customization and adoption, further
increasing the likelihood of wide-spread uptake, participation, and engagement.
If successful, this broad implementation effort will directly impact over 3,000
informal science educators and professionals in nearly 350 informal STEM
learning institutions across the country.

The intended theory of action and iterative, design-based implementation
approach will be closely monitored, documented and analyzed by an experienced
team of external evaluators, using formative and summative evaluative methods. A
mixed methods approach will be employed to: (a) examine the effectiveness and
accessibility of blended PL and regional PLCs for the ISL field, (b) identify
critical design features in blended PL and regional PLCs for impacting
educators' practice, (c) determine how PLCs can develop and continue in ISL
through looking at what system of support is needed, and (d) ascertain the
effective role of the Leaders and Leadership Sites. Data will be collected at
all levels - from the RoP directors and PIs, document reviews, interviews and
observations with RoP leaders at the six partnering institutions, and surveys
with the RoP facilitators (n=700) and informal STEM educator participants
(n=2,000). The results of the findings could be instrumental in the development
of future frameworks and models designed to broadly disseminate similar
professional learning models effectively within ISL contexts.