* 1612053
* Self-efficacy Intervention to Improve STEM Performance
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* William Gerace, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,937.00

Increasing the number of US university students who successfully complete
degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and enter
the STEM workforce is of national importance. However, this has proven to be
surprisingly difficult, especially with women and underrepresented minorities. A
primary reason is that the students most likely to drop out of STEM disciplines,
and therefore most in need of help, benefit least from innovations that merely
address teaching quality or curriculum content. Research shows that we must
influence students' self-efficacy: their belief in their own ability to overcome
setbacks and ultimately succeed. This project will develop, test, document, and
publicize a practical, inexpensive, single-session intervention to improve
students' self-efficacy. It is suitable for inclusion in any university STEM
course. Our test population will be 440 STEM majors taking introductory physics
at UNCG and NCA&amp;T, both universities having particularly large minority
and/or female enrollments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on two
strong, but previously separate, lines of research into attitudinal/affect
variables that influence student success. The first is "attributional
retraining", in which students learn to attribute their successes and failures
to internal rather than external factors. The second is "mindset" about fixed
vs. growable intelligence, in which students learn that the brain remains
plastic throughout life and that they can, with conscious effort and attention
to thinking skills and strategies, become smarter. Interventions of demonstrated
efficacy exist for each of these two, but none exist that address both
concurrently, and none are suitable and practical for widespread use in
university-level STEM instruction. In addition to developing a disseminable
intervention and documenting its effectiveness, this project will develop
procedures for efficiently and reliably gauging STEM students' self-efficacy
(with extant instruments), and will advance our theoretical understanding of
self-efficacy, its components, and its growth dynamics.