* 1612251
* Collaborative Research: Unifying Science for Students: Investigating transfer within a coherent, interdisciplinary set of science courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Emily Borda, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 248,053.00

This Exploration and Design project in the Engaged Student Learning track in the
Improving Undergraduate Science Education program seeks to address the
intractable concept of transfer of learning to new settings. A central
assumption in most systems of education is that students will be able to apply
knowledge and skills beyond the context in which they are originally learned and
hence transfer their learning. Existing research studies indicate, however, that
successful transfer is exceedingly rare. In this project, transfer will be
examined within an existing series of undergraduate science courses intended to
promote coherent understanding of energy in physics, chemistry, Earth science,
and biology. Energy, a unifying concept important in most science disciplines,
is central to scientific literacy and is an idea students should be able to
apply to a variety of situations. The integrated curriculum presents energy
coherently across disciplines, was designed on the basis of cognitive research,
and has been extensively classroom tested at multiple institutions. The course
sequence thus serves as a natural laboratory to investigate how much transfer is
possible under highly favorable, yet still realizable, conditions. Unifying
Science for Students will measure and describe transfer, as well as document the
specific components of instruction that promote transfer. Special attention will
be paid to understanding how to support transfer among students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. Findings will contribute to the knowledge
base of what works in supporting application of energy concepts across contexts,
for all students. This project may also help to establish the integrated course
sequence as a national model for coherent, cross-disciplinary undergraduate
science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated curriculum spans four
courses: The Flow of Matter and Energy in Physical Systems, Earth Systems, Life
Systems, and Chemical Systems. Unifying Science for Students will bring together
expertise in physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and cognitive science at two
institutions to add to the research base on transfer, using this course series.
It will do so by: (1) evaluating the extent to which students successfully
transfer understanding of energy in a coherent, constructivist-based sequence of
science courses; (2) documenting the productive and problematic reasoning
approaches that arise when students transfer ideas about energy to new contexts;
(3) identifying instructional cues that facilitate transfer; and (4)
investigating the impact of explicit instruction in metacognition on the
understanding, retention, and transfer of energy concepts across disciplines.
Quantitative and qualitative methods will be employed to address these goals. A
longitudinal study will generate quantitative measures of the transfer of energy
concepts from the original learning context, physics, to a target domain,
chemistry. Interviews, classroom observations, and analysis of written work will
be used to describe what transfer "looks like" by developing a taxonomy of
discipline-specific transfer attempts. Finally, a quasi-experimental study will
investigate the impact of metacognitive writing assignments on transfer. The
general and discipline-specific knowledge generated through this project will be
situated to inform curriculum design so that transfer can become a more
realizable goal in higher education. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program is providing co-funding for this project in recognition of its alignment
with the broader teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort.