* 1612616
* An informal learning model of genetic and genomic education for adult, bilingual learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joanne Sandberg, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,897,217.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a community model of
informal genomic education that is culturally and educationally appropriate for
low-literacy Latino adults born in Mexico and Central America (MCA). The
community engagement strategy and materials created will be designed to lead to
three learning outcomes: increased interest and engagement with genomics, change
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) attitudes and self-
identity, and increased understanding about gene function and the human genome.
The model created in this project will have the potential to inform other
educational efforts, nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-structured in-depth
interviews will be conducted in Spanish with 60 MCA Latinos to delineate beliefs
and knowledge about genetic and genomic concepts and transmission of traits.
Interview transcripts will be systematically analyzed to identify explanations
about trait transmission, and familiarity with genetic and genomic concepts.
Variation in responses across geographic and cultural regions will be noted.
Knowledge from this analysis will be used to develop a meaningful community-
based learning program about genomics. Lay community educators will facilitate
informal learning with MCA adults about genetics and genomics, including gene-
environment interactions. This project will use information about environmental
exposures (e.g., residential pesticides) as a vehicle to pique participants'
interest and illustrate genetic and genomic content. It will compare outcomes
for 100 participants who receive practical strategies only to reduce negative
and increase positive environmental exposures, respectively, to 100 participants
who also receive genetic and genomic content. The strategy and materials will be
disseminated through journal articles and presentations at meetings that focus
on informal STEM education. The process and content will be rigorously evaluated
throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.