* 1612867
* Nonparametric estimation of integral curves and surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2019
* David Zhu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 204,316.00

Integral curves are reasonable models for a variety of natural structures that
arise in brain imaging and in atmospheric sciences. Natural structures in brain
imaging include the axonal fibers connecting neurons. Natural structures in
atmospheric sciences include isolines of barometric pressure, storm fronts, and
jet streams. Generally, the data are points along the curves and are corrupted
by noise. The goal of this research is statistical estimation of these curves.
These researchers will investigate a detailed list of issues pertinent to
statistical integral curve estimation, which will deepen and widen our
understanding of the natural structures. The PIs will validate their statistical
methodology by analyzing images on both diseased and healthy brains. The
reliable statistical estimation of fibers will include the assessment of
uncertainty in the images used for diagnostic procedures in diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, and brain tumors. It will also enhance
the imaging tools needed for planning imaging-guided neurosurgeries. In
meteorology the correct estimation of these curves can enhance existing weather
maps. Finally, the PIs will capitalize on the similarities between modeling
curves and modeling surfaces and investigate the statistical estimation of
surfaces, which serve as natural models for axonal fiber bundles in brain
imaging and iso-surfaces in digitized images used by many sciences. Integral
curves are solutions of differential equations where the governing vector or
tensor fields are observed directly or indirectly and perturbed by noise.
Several directions of their statistical analysis are planned, including a fully
nonparametric diffusion function model, simultaneous confidence bands for
integral curves, adaptive estimation, comparison of images of the same brain
obtained via different procedures, model reduction based on tensor's order, and
a unified approach to nonparametric estimation of manifolds, where integral
curves and surfaces serve as particular cases. Specifically, the PIs plan to
provide an end-user with enhanced images that contain not only estimated
integral curves, but also simultaneous confidence bands that show the quality of
the estimation in a uniform way, and moreover all the tuning parameters would be
calculated from the data only. Upon completion of the proposed research, a
practitioner would be armed with a procedure of systematic comparison of
statistical properties of different tractography algorithms. Finally, the PIs
plan to extend their methodology from 1D curves to 2D surfaces. The basis of
this research is a synergy of empirical processes theory, Gaussian processes
theory, the theory of ordinary differential equations, perturbation theory for
tensors, numerical analysis, computer vision, and computational statistics.