* 1612399
* I-Corps: Mobile HealthLink Wearable Remote Health Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Nils Hakansson, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Remote health monitoring is a rapidly growing field with potential for improved
care and reduced hospitalizations and outpatient visits for people in home-care
or community-care environments. To reduce the cost to health providers while
enabling real-time caregiver/patient interaction, the proposed technology
(Mobile HealthLink) provides an application and online service using an
affordable smartwatch. The health monitoring application and service provide a
means for healthcare providers to assess and track the health of clients
remotely through qualitative and quantitative data collection methods. The
smartwatch health application was conceived for the growing population of people
over the age of 65, of whom 80% suffer from at least one chronic illness and
require constant care. Mobile HealthLink provides an online management portal to
allow Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) organizations, home-
care facilities, and primary caregivers to better serve their clients. The
proposed project will generate a product that provides affordability, user-
friendliness, and customization currently unavailable by other systems on the
market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enhance
communication between healthcare providers and the people they serve so improved
quality of healthcare can be provided. The initial target population is people
over the age of 65 years who live in their homes and receive healthcare from
PACE organizations. To this end, one fundamental component of Mobile HealthLink
is the ability to practice preventative healthcare, especially in rural
populations, by remotely collecting, storing, analyzing, and responding to
qualitative and quantitative health status information. Because qualitative data
in the form of patient feedback is vital to healthcare providers' efforts to
provide quality care, Mobile HealthLink incorporates the ability to create and
send qualitative health queries to the patient's smartwatch, or other electronic
device, by way of an internet portal. With this feature, healthcare providers
can adjust the patient's health regimen based on both qualitative and
quantitative health data. A second fundamental component of Mobile HealthLink is
its scalability. The Mobile HealthLink platform can be used to follow the health
status of thousands of an organization's subscribers or that of an individual
family member. These design components and Mobile HealthLink's compatibility
with existing consumer smartwatches, smart phones and tablets will make the
product accessible to a larger population and enhance the potential to improve
healthcare.