* 1612454
* Mentoring and Training Novice Math Circle Leaders
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Diana White, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The National Association of Math Circles
(NAMC) will convene the Math Circle-Mentor and Partnership (MC-MAP) Workshop in
late 2016. The proposed MC-MAP workshop will build the field's understanding of
the training content and mechanisms that enhance the knowledge and skill
development of participants in Math Circles. The workshop will bring mentors
from experienced Math Circle leaders together with novice Math Circle leaders to
develop the expertise of the notice leaders and their group to develop their
expertise in facilitating math circle activities and in organizing related
events. The approximately 180 Math Circles currently operating across the nation
enlist mathematics professionals to share their passion for mathematics with
K-12 students, teachers, and the general public in contexts that emphasize
exploration, problem solving and discovery. This initial conference and Math
Circle trainings informed by this conference will help build a community of
practice around Math Circles through which novice and existing leaders are
connected, encouraged and inspired.

The MC-MAP workshop will include structured planning as well as guided
observation and structured debriefing of a demonstration Math Circle sessions.
The workshop design will be grounded in research related to effective adult
learning and to discovery-based mathematics. The workshop will serve as a
training prototype that will assist the National Association of Math Circles to
identify effective training formats and materials for both experienced and
novice Math Circle leaders. Pre- and post- conference surveys of Math Circle
leaders will produce data to be used in planning and designing future trainings.
The NAMC will share key findings from the workshop evaluation and workshop
resources not only with its membership, but also with other mathematics K-12
outreach programs. Workshop materials will address recruiting and serving
diverse participants in Math Circles, including girls and women, persons with
disabilities, students from varied socioeconomic backgrounds and
underrepresented minorities in STEM.