* 1612283
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Shane Campbell-Staton, Campbell-Staton         Shane          C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Dr. Shane Cornell Campbell-Staton

Proposal Number: 1612283

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Dr. Shane Campbell-Staton is "Exploring
the genetic basis of high altitude adaptation in deer mice." The host
institutions for this fellowship are the University of Illinois, Champaign-
Urbana and the University of Montana, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Julian Catchen (UI) and Zachary Cheviron (UM).

The Fellow's research addresses a major goal of evolutionary biology, to
identify the genes that allow organisms to adapt to their environment and
understand how these genes function to accomplish this feat. In this project,
the Fellow is using the deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus, as a model species
for studying adaptation to high altitude. Identifying the genetic basis of
complex traits has proven challenging, partly because complex traits are often
the result of interactions of many physiological and molecular pathways.
Studying the genetic basis of physiological adaptation to high altitude offers
unique advantages for disentangling the complex genetic interactions that
produce adaptation because the specific steps involved in oxygen transport and
use have been described. Deer mice are an excellent model species because they
are distributed from sea level to above 4300 meters elevation in western North
America. They display a suite of physiological adaptations of the heart, lungs,
blood and skeletal muscle that work together, allowing high elevation
populations to survive the cold temperatures and low oxygen levels
characteristic of their environments, by transporting and using greater amounts
of oxygen than their lowland counterparts. The Fellow is interbreeding highland
and lowland deer mice populations and conducting a series of experiments to (1)
identify the genes that contribute to differences in oxygen use; (2) partition
those genes into the different steps that contribute to overall oxygen use
(respiration, oxygen transport and metabolism in the muscle) and (3) identify
the mechanisms by which those genes influence total oxygen use. This research
will provide valuable insights into the genetic basis complex traits and serve
as a model of animal adaptation to high elevation.

This Fellow is helping to broaden the participation of groups under-represented
in biology in several ways. The Fellow is a member of an under-represented
community and is mentoring and training future scientists from underrepresented
backgrounds, and is teaching and disseminating research findings to students and
the general public. The tremendous diversity of expertise among collaborators at
the University of Illinois and the University of Montana provides a rich
intellectual community for idea sharing that strengthens the outcomes of this
project and advances the Fellow?s development as a scientist. Learning the
analytical tools needed to complete the major goals of this proposal will allow
the Fellow to develop an interdisciplinary approach to evolutionary biology.
Through this fellowship, the Fellow is recruiting students from underrepresented
groups through established channels at both host universities, and mentoring
these student researchers. Additionally, he is expanding his experience in
outreach programs geared towards recruitment of students from under-represented
backgrounds at national and university levels. All of these activities are
enhancing and expanding the Fellow?s ?toolbox? of analytical, managerial and
mentoring skills, which will position him to become an emerging leader in the
study of climate-mediated evolution, and to continue developing programs that
will broaden participation of minorities in the sciences.