* 1612277
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Shawn Billerman, Billerman               Shawn          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Shawn M. Billerman

Proposal number 1612277

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Shawn M. Billerman
is "Specimen-based comparisons of hybridization: the effect of genetic and
environmental forces on hybrid zones in a suture zone." The host institution for
this fellowship is Cornell University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Irby
Lovette.

The goal of this research is to explore how genetic and environmental mechanisms
influence speciation in suture zones. Hybrid zones are places where the ranges
of two previously isolated populations of two different species overlap, where
the two species interbreed. These areas of active hybridization are often
regarded as natural laboratories in which to study speciation. While studies of
single hybrid zones have improved our understanding of evolutionary processes,
we can better test for the general factors that contribute to the creation of
biodiversity by investigating and comparing multiple hybrid zones. Suture zones,
where multiple hybrid zones cluster in geographic space, represent particularly
powerful opportunities to identify the shared environmental and genetic
mechanisms that contribute to speciation. The Fellow is comparing patterns of
hybridization across five different pairs of bird species that meet and
hybridize in the Great Plains of North America. Using historical bird specimens
in the Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates, the Fellow is investigating how
different conditions affect speciation through time. This comparative approach
combines studying movement of genes across hybrid zones, how plumage traits are
distributed across the landscape relative to the genetic background of each
species pair, and how past changes in climate have affected changes in the
distributions of each hybrid zone over time. The Fellow is leveraging a unique
series of hybrid zone specimens collected in the 1950s and 60s that allow for
comparison and identification of the mechanisms regulating suture zone dynamics
at an unprecedented scale and level of detail.

The Fellow is receiving training in the extraction of genetic material from
museum specimens, and learning new analytical skills for using extremely large,
genome-wide datasets. In particular, the Fellow is learning how to assemble
whole-genome sequence data and develop tools to identify genomic regions of
particular importance for speciation and biodiversity. He is also developing
outreach material for the public by leveraging the resources of project eBird,
an NSF funded citizen science program run by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, to
educate the public about how studying hybridization can help reveal the impact
of climate change on biodiversity. The Fellow is also developing educational
modules for the Cornell Lab of Ornithology that emphasize the value of studying
hybrid zones and hybridization. Finally, the Fellow is mentoring undergraduate
researchers.