* 1612311
* A Study in the Integration of Western Knowledge and Native American Knowledge Bases
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Elizabeth Cook, History Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,254,947.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This proposed effort embraces broad
participation by several Native American Ute tribes, the History Colorado Museum
of Natural History, and scientists in the field of archaeology to investigate
and integrate traditional ecological knowledge and contemporary Western science.
The project will preserve knowledge from the Ute peoples of Colorado and Utah,
including traditional technology, ethnobotany, engineering and math. Results
from this project will inform educational efforts in similar
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on the long-standing
collaborations between History Colorado (HC), the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Ute
Mountain Ute Tribe and Ute Indian Tribe, Uintah &amp; Ouray Reservation, and the
Dominguez Archaeological Research Group DARG). HC will implement and evaluate a
regional informal learning collaboration focused on Ute traditional and
contemporary STEM knowledge serving over 128,000 learners through tribal
programs, local history museums and educational networks. This project will
advance the understanding of integrated knowledge and the role of Ute people as
STEM learners and practitioners. This Informal Science Learning project will
increase lifelong STEM learning in rural communities and create a replicable
model for collaboration among tribes, history museums, and scientists.