* 1612843
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Computational Modeling and Simulation Center
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Stephen Mahin, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 10,949,973.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards engineering community
with access to research infrastructure. NHERI will be comprised of separate
research infrastructure awards for a Network Coordination Office (NCO),
Cyberinfrastructure (CI), Computational Modeling and Simulation Center
(SimCenter)-this award, and Experimental Facilities for earthquake and wind
hazards engineering research, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
(RAPID) facility. NHERI awards will contribute to NSF's role in the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake engineering
research infrastructure previously supported under the George E. Brown, Jr.
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but now broadens
that support to include wind and coastal hazards engineering research
infrastructure. NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will
improve the resilience and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as
buildings and other structures, underground structures, levees, and critical
lifelines, against the natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order
to minimize loss of life, damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI
resources is available on the NHERI CI web portal (http://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide the SimCenter component
for NHERI. The goal of the SimCenter is to provide the natural hazards
engineering research and education community with access to next generation
computational modeling and simulation software tools, user support, and
educational materials needed to advance the nation's capability to simulate the
impact of natural hazards on structures, lifelines, and communities, and to make
informed decisions about the need for and effectiveness of potential mitigation
strategies. These tools will be available on the NHERI CI's DesignSafe-ci.org
Discovery Workspace. The SimCenter will provide computational modeling and
simulation tools using a new open source simulation framework that: (1)
addresses various natural hazards, such as windstorms, storm surge, tsunamis,
and earthquakes; (2) tackles complex, scientific questions of concern to
disciplines involved in natural hazards research, including earth sciences,
geotechnical and structural engineering, architecture, urban planning, risk
management, social sciences, public policy, and finance; (3) utilizes machine
learning to facilitate and improve modeling and simulation using data obtained
from experimental tests, field investigations, and previous simulations; (4)
quantifies uncertainties associated with the simulation results obtained; (5)
utilizes the high-performance parallel computing, data assimilation, and related
capabilities provided by the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal to easily combine
software applications into workflows of unprecedented sophistication and
complexity; (6) extends and refines software tools for carrying out performance-
based engineering evaluations and supporting decisions that enhance the
resilience of communities susceptible to multiple natural hazards; and (7)
utilizes existing applications that already provide many of the pieces of
desired computational workflows. The resulting cloud-based ecosystem will allow
multidisciplinary specialists and various stakeholders to collaborate on
solutions to complex natural hazard engineering problems regardless of their
local resources and geographic proximity. In tandem with the framework and
applications being developed, in-person and online educational programs,
including massive open online courses, will be implemented within a new Virtual
Community of Practice that will provide an online meeting place to obtain and
exchange community-generated ideas, feedback, best practices for modeling and
simulation, insights, and innovations for natural hazards engineering research.
The SimCenter will also provide user workshops and a graduate student research
traineeship program and will host two students as part of the NCO's Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program.