* 1612085
* On the Relation Between Galaxies and Dark Matter Halos
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Idit Zehavi, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2022
* USD 402,543.00

Dark matter, which accounts for about 85% of all mass, is the dominant driver of
structure formation in the Universe, but the nature of dark matter currently is
unknown. Galaxies, containing visible, baryonic matter in stars and gas, are
embedded in vast dark matter halos. ("Baryonic matter" in the Universe primarily
consists of protons and neutrons, and the chemical elements based on those
particles.) Galaxies, therefore, can be used as visible probes of dark matter's
role in the formation and evolution of large-scale structure in the Universe, a
fundamental problem in modern cosmology. This project aims to improve our
understanding of galaxy assembly and the relationship between dark and baryonic
matter. The researchers will expand and improve simulations and statistical
tools used to understand the connection between galaxies and their dark matter
halos. They will study the influence of environment and cosmic time on the
properties of galaxies in dark matter halos. They will create realistic mock
galaxy catalogs that will be essential for a better interpretation of upcoming
large galaxy surveys. The project will support the mentoring and active
involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students in the research program.
The PI will also expand a partnership with the planetarium at the Cleveland
Museum of Natural History, providing a unique opportunity for undergraduate
interns and enriching the public understanding of the science from galaxy
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halo occupation modeling is a powerful theoretical
tool to interpret galaxy clustering measurements and constrain the relation
between galaxies and dark matter. A standard assumption made in these
probabilistic models is that the mass of the dark matter halo fully determines
the properties of the galaxies contained in it. This project will extend the
modeling approach to include cosmic evolution and environmental dependence, two
crucial aspects that are currently missing. First, the evolution of the halo
occupation models will be studied using semi-analytic galaxy formation models.
The dependence of these models on the large-scale environment of the galaxies
will be explored using both semi-analytic models and hydrodynamical simulations.
These two studies will then be combined to examine the evolution of the
environment trends and the environment dependence of the evolution. Finally,
this extended modeling approach will be applied on simulated and real data from
SDSS.