* 1612833
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Melting and Vibrational Properties of Phase H as a Function of Pressure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Elizabeth Thompson, Thompson                Elizabeth      C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Forty years of scientific literature on the topic has produced wildly variable
estimates of the water content within the deep Earth--with values ranging from a
quarter to four times the volume of water found in Earth's oceans. The recent
discovery of hydrous 'phase H' (MgSiO4H2) provides a new insight into the
distribution of water in the Earth's interior. Determining the stability of
hydrous phases such as phase H aids in constraining the quantity of water in the
lower mantle, a region of the Earth almost 100 times more massive than the
crust. The formation of phase H was first predicted in a computational study by
Dr. Jun Tsuchiya of the Geodynamics Research Center (GRC) at the University of
Ehime, Japan. Dr. Tsuchiya will lend her expertise using first-principles
techniques to study high-pressure hydrous phases to this project and the GRC
will provide use of a supercomputer that will enable the timely completion of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to provide critical
insight into the deep Earth's hydrogen budget via three ab initio investigations
into key hydrous mantle phases: (1) modeling the melting behavior of phase H as
a function of pressure, (2) modeling the melting curve of d-AlOOH, and (3)
first-principles calculations of the vibrational properties of phase H as a
function of pressure. The melting curves of phase H and d-AlOOH will be
determined using a first principles molecular dynamics technique. This type of
calculation enables the determination of thermodynamic properties by numerically
modeling the interatomic potentials between particles in the system of interest.
Vibrational properties of phase H will be calculated using first-principles
calculations based on a generalized gradient approximation to the exchange-
correlation functional. These calculations are complementary to the principal
investigator?s experimental efforts to investigate hydrous phases under extreme
conditions and will help constrain the water budget of the Earth's deep
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.