* 1612017
* Building Community and Transforming Practice with Faculty Triads
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,982.00

The significance of this project is to improve foundational, large-enrollment
classes at Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) that contribute to developing
a technologically proficient workforce. Faculty from departments of chemistry,
biology, physics and mathematics will be brought together in small teams
("triads") to develop student-centered approaches that result in improved
learning and performance. Targeted courses have historically struggled
particularly with retention of underrepresented groups; emphasizing deeper
understanding and non-lecture-based teaching methods addresses retention of this
important population. The project also carefully assesses student learning,
using the results to inform class processes and connect learning to broader
objectives of career preparation. Finally, by explicitly studying how
innovations disseminate throughout the four departments, the project increases
the likelihood of widespread adoption, impacting faculty across RIT's College of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to disseminate and
institutionalize research-based pedagogies across multi-section courses through
the work of four faculty triads --- collaborative teams of three faculty working
together to transform high-enrollment, introductory STEM courses, which will
affect approximately 1500 students. Two courses with historically large
attrition --- Introductory Calculus-based Physics and Elements in Multivariable
Calculus &amp; Differential Equations --- will be initially targeted, and the
work in these courses will serve as models for future triads. Mechanisms to
incorporate course transformation and assessment activities into faculty plans
of work and annual reviews will be developed, thus ensuring institutional
recognition and support for the work of the faculty. Close analysis of the
triads will contribute to greater understanding of institutional change,
including important issues about the balance between emergent and prescribed
projects and which team tasks best promote change. The project, particularly the
work within the triads, also encourages the development of specific learning
goals and assessment measures. Collaboration with an existing Discipline-Based
Education Research (DBER) team enables triad faculty groups to incorporate
research-based materials and assessments into their work.