* 1612560
* OK- LSAMP - BD - Cohort 8
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jason Kirksey, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. Academic and professional preparations are essential for
building a diverse, dynamic, and innovative STEM workforce in the United States.
The challenge of recruiting and retaining students from underrepresented
racial/ethnic groups in STEM careers continues to confront the academic
community. Oklahoma State University, lead institution of the Oklahoma LSAMP
(OK-LSAMP), is uniquely situated to overcome this challenge due to its
centralized location within the state and the prominent presence of Native
American tribal nations across Oklahoma, as well as the increase of the Hispanic
population, not only in Oklahoma but nationwide. The OK-LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) initiative will ensure that a new cadre of STEM professionals
from diverse backgrounds is fully prepared for successful careers, in the
nation's workforce, including the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OK-LSAMP-
BD will implement: (i) enhanced recruitment strategies, including partnerships
with HBCUs and Tribal Colleges, as well as the extensive use of available social
media, newsletters, community and national outreach; (ii) mentoring and
networking programs across STEM departments; and (iii) courses, workshops, and
seminars supporting academic and professional development of the BD Fellows. In
addition, a BD Advisory Board of diverse OSU faculty will be responsible for
providing input on programmatic activities. Board members will have the
opportunity to serve as mentors, presenters at monthly BD meetings, or
discussants about common research related topics and key issues in graduate
degree attainment.