* 1612686
* Combining Craft and Performance to Teach Physical Computing
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Nitsche, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,885.00

Researchers at Georgia Tech and staff at the Center for Puppetry Arts in Atlanta
will address the following problem: The growth of computing calls for increased
teaching of basic hardware skills, but engaging students beyond those who are
already interested in STEM fields is difficult. Emphasizing cultural context
through personal expression has shown to attract new audiences such as women and
minorities; however, balancing accessibility and educational effectiveness
remains problematic. Current educational tools often use "black boxing" to
simplify access, to protect the underlying functionality, and/or to stay
commercially competitive. Innovations are needed where the basic skills of
design and making, along with new educational models, can support students'
exploration of everyday electronics and critical thinking. The team will test an
after-school model that could be applied in cultural institutions and other
venues that would provide students in 4 - 8 grades with multiple
computer/electronics-driven puppet design and building workshops. These
workshops will provide opportunities for basic hardware and electronics
prototyping, personal cultural expression, and performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory research and development method involves
three steps: the students develop a story-line (narrative) that will incorporate
puppets; they learn and apply basic electronics and mechanical crafts to design,
build and test their puppets; and they perform their shows to other participants
and their families. Over the course of the project, there will be five
workshops: two pilot tests (to test feasibility and design), one mid-project
evaluation workshop (to evaluate and re-iterate), and two final workshops
conducted by educators, where the research team only observes (to test for
transferability). Data collection throughout this development cycle will include
video and sound recording, still photography, field notes, pre- and post-
questionnaires, and the production of puppet "artifacts" during the workshops.
In addition to the data collected in the workshops, the project will produce
design documents and educational guidelines, as well as other media (such as
instructional video clips), which will be disseminated to educators and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments.