* 1612688
* Project RESET: Refugee Youth Engaging in Critical STEM Literacy and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Shepardson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2019
* USD 347,066.00

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understandings of, the
design and development of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) learning in informal environments. Roughly one million refugees resettled
in the United States in the past decade, many of whom are school-aged youth.
During secondary school, resettled refugee youth are often still developing
English language literacy and STEM skills needed for successful postsecondary
experiences in the United States. At the same time, these youth bring rich
cultural and linguistic resources that they can use as an asset as they grow
their STEM skill sets, prepare for future success, and make positive impacts on
U.S. society. To promote these assets and engage youth in developing STEM
literacy, this after-school program engages these youth in critical STEM
literacy development. The project focuses on STEM learning, specifically the
relationship between human life and climate, as well as developing youths' STEM
identities and agency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and
implement a community-based afterschool program that provides resettled Burmese
refugee youth with STEM learning experiences. By drawing upon youths'
experiences, the program will engage youth in learning about climate science and
developing digital stories to communicate with broader audiences. To do so, the
team will implement a program that builds on principles of responsive teaching,
funds of knowledge, and English literacy development in authentic meaning-making
contexts. The project will examine how youth expand their STEM knowledge,
develop STEM identities and agency, and develop their expertise in communicating
about STEM within and beyond their participation in the after-school program.
The research team will explore existing and innovative data collection and
analysis methods by drawing on principles of ethnography, video ethnography,
mediated discourse analysis, and phenomenological and ethnomethodological
analysis of interviews. These analyses will document learning over time in
informal STEM learning settings. As there is very little prior research on STEM
learning in this population, this project will generate knowledge about how to
support STEM sense-making and critical STEM literacy. Furthermore, by testing
the designed curriculum and building a partnership with a local community
organization, the project will build capacity for broadening participation in
informal STEM learning practices.