* 1612169
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Joseph Spraker, Spraker                 Joseph         E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 141,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Joseph Spraker Proposal Number: 1612169

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Joseph Spraker is
"Bacteria in Fungi in Plants: How intimate microbial interactions mediate plant
disease." The host institutions for this fellowship are the University of
Arizona and the University of California - Berkeley, and the sponsoring
scientists at these institutions are Dr. A. Elizabeth Arnold and Matthew
Traxler, at each respective institution.

The goal of this project is to investigate the interactions of fungi
(endophytes) associated with plant leaves, and the bacteria that live within
these fungi (endohyphal bacteria). Plant microbiomes are complex communities
consisting of bacteria and fungi. The interactions between these microbes are
increasingly recognized to play important roles in plant health in both natural
and agricultural settings. Although research has largely focused on microbial
communities associated with soils and plant roots, it is increasingly apparent
that the interactions between microbes colonizing plant leaves and shoots are
similarly impacting plant health. To gain a better understanding of how above-
ground microbes impact plant health, the Fellow is examining how their
interactions impact resistance to plant pathogens, through the production of
bioactive compounds. Integral to this work is the globally unique Robert L.
Gilbertson Mycological Herbarium collection, housing >60,000 living fungal
endophytes, which will be used as a source for a large-scale, systematic survey
of endophylal bacteria (EB). Specifically, the Fellow is: 1) systematically
characterizing EB associated with endophytic fungi and determining what
environmental factors drive their interactions; 2) assessing the impacts of EB
on fungal metabolism; and 3) evaluating the impact of EB on endophyte-plant-
pathogen interactions. The results of this work will provide new insights into
untapped strategies of sustainable disease management. Additionally, this work
will improve the knowledgebase of the existing Robert L. Gilbertson Mycological
Herbarium by documenting cryptic microbes already stored within the collection.

The Fellow is receiving training in cross-cutting research methodologies
including next generation sequencing, computationally intensive meta-analyses,
culture-based and plant-based bioassays, high throughput chemical analyses, and
cutting-edge&#8232;in planta metabolomics. These skills are facilitating the
Fellow's professional goals of becoming a research professor at an academic
institution. The Fellow is also improving his skills as an educator and bringing
science to underrepresented groups. He is developing and implementing a unique
high school outreach module focused on engaging underrepresented minorities in
STEM with biological research, using art to facilitate learning and
comprehension. This module is being developed within the framework of the award-
winning science outreach program of the Arnold lab, and will also draw on the
unique insights of the Arts and Environment Network, also housed at the
University of Arizona.