* 1612021
* The Bowman Creek Educational Ecosystem
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gabriel Torres, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 327,648.00

This project re-conceptualizes STEM Innovation, Teaching, and Learning through
the establishment of significant academic and community partnerships. Drawing
from principles and best practices for engaged learning and creation of
innovative learning environments, partners seek to develop a system of
innovation and STEM learning across institutions that is woven into the cultural
fabric of the region. Specifically, a team of student interns, their faculty,
and community mentors will investigate and implement improvements to an impaired
waterway and the surrounding economically challenged neighborhood in South Bend,
Indiana. Collaborators for the Bowman Creek Educational Ecosystem include many
partners: administrators and faculty from the University of Notre Dame, Indiana
University at South Bend, Ivy Tech Community College, and Riley High School of
South Bend; and community partners from the City of South Bend's Office of
Innovation, neighborhood associations, and a community development corporation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is Phase I of a two-phase effort and
has two key technical goals: 1) to advance the theory and knowledge of
educational environments that contribute to building and strengthening the STEM
pipeline from high school to graduate school; 2) to develop a collaborative and
sustainable community/institutional infrastructure to support trans-
disciplinary, authentic STEM learning for community impact. The approach taken
is housed within an innovative framework designed to dig deeper for answers
about STEM learning, engagement, knowledge, skill as well as the impact of
economic deficits with which many post-industrial cities struggle. The research
questions posed aim to generate knowledge about how perceptions of identity and
possibility together with life experiences shape choices with regard to STEM at
different levels of education and what factors facilitate or inhibit positive
STEM collaboration. A variety of methods for seeking answers to the questions
are adopted including exploratory sequential mixed methods for exploring STEM
pathways and cultural domain analysis for generating cognitive maps of how
students culturally understand STEM pathways at the beginning and end of the
project. Participants in the project-based learning experience are ethnically
and socio-economically diverse, furthermore, the research questions posed
examine important issues such as the types of collaboration that take place in
diverse student groups and their effect on students' recruitment, retention and
perceived identity in STEM.