* 1612555
* RAIN - Rural Activation and Innovation Network
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Andi Fourlis, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,955,970.00

Rural communities across the Nation are, in general, underserved in terms of the
various forms of STEM education. Clearly, they are under-represented in the
realm of contemporary STEM subjects often because they are geographically
isolated and cannot travel to cities where there are Science and Museum Centers
for informal education opportunities. As part of its overall strategy to enhance
learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program funds innovative resources for use in a variety of settings. This award
will, in a collaborative effort within the community, bring STEM activities to
selected communities in Arizona. Among the initial activities, there will be a
STEM festival highlighting aspects of the community and its assets in an effort
to gather support and begin to give perspective on identity for an extended
effort of longevity. Further, these communities will be networked to facilitate
discussion and to enhance effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop STEM activities and STEM learning within a selected community by giving
the community and its residents identity and opportunities for youth development
and career choices. The selected communities in Arizona represent a diverse
group that includes Native Americans and Latinos. In collaboration with
community residents, a designed plan will be established that satisfies the
needs and opportunities that can be derived from the extant community assets
whether it is mining, tourism, or government facilities. Evaluation efforts are
set to determine what the key features and methodologies are that facilitate
STEM knowledge acquisition for each rural community. This project represents
seminal and foundational work in the area of rural informal STEM education.
Researchers will explore the following questions: 1) understanding how rural
communities currently perceive, access, and engage in informal science learning,
and the extent to which they identify themselves and/or their community in
relation to science; and 2) the extent to which relevant, place-based networks
can increase public awareness of local STEM assets, resources, and
opportunities, and foster a science-related identity at both the personal and
community level. These data will be compared to data on other rural community
projects in the AISL portfolio. The partners in this effort include the Arizona
Science Center, community leaders from four rural regions in Arizona, Arizona
State University, and the Center of Science and Industry.