* 1612193
* Analysis and Extension of a Model for Oscillatory Islet Activity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Richard Bertram, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 294,235.00

Type II diabetes makes up about 90% of all cases of diabetes world wide, and 368
million people were diagnosed with type II diabetes in 2013. Although it is a
complex disease with many interacting factors, there is agreement that a major
component is dysfunction of the pancreatic beta cells that release the hormone
insulin. In normal individuals, these cells release insulin in pulses, with the
pulse amplitude reflecting the glucose level. There is now conclusive evidence
that pulsatile insulin is more effective than constant insulin at stimulating
glucose-lowering actions of the liver. In addition, it has been shown that type
II diabetics, and their nearest relatives, show disorganized insulin levels,
rather than the more regular insulin pulses of non-diabetics. This project seeks
to better understand the intracellular pathways that result in pulsatile insulin
secretion from beta cells. It also seeks to understand how mice, which also
exhibit pulsatile insulin secretion, compensate for genetic knockouts of key
proteins in such a way that rhythmic cellular activity and insulin secretion is
maintained. Overall, the project will yield insights into the complex biology of
pulsatile insulin secretion, and will push forward mathematical analysis
techniques that are useful in complex intracellular signaling systems such as
those in pancreatic beta cells. Graduate students involved in this research
project will receive broad interdisciplinary training in answering mathematical
questions driven by experimental data. Publicly available software will also be
produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dual Oscillator Model has been under
continuous development by Bertram and associates since it was first published in
2004. This model describes how three signaling pathways, metabolism,
intracellular calcium dynamics, and electrical activity combine to produce
pulsatile insulin secretion that is modulated by the extracellular glucose
level. The complexity of the model makes it difficult to understand the dynamics
of the system, but application of the fast/slow analysis technique allows one to
take advantage of the separation of time scales of the model variables and
formally decompose the system into subsystems that vary at different rates. This
powerful multi-scale analysis technique will be applied to improve our
understanding of oscillations in activity of the model beta cell that are
induced by glucose and other substrates, as well as oscillations that are
present in cells from mice in which different key proteins are genetically
knocked out. Because there are several slowly changing variables, there are a
number of different ways in which the fast/slow analysis technique can be used.
These different approaches are explored, and will yield complementary insights.
While the focus of the project is on oscillations in beta cell activity, the
analysis approach used is applicable to a wide range of dynamic models, so the
mathematical developments made in this project can be adapted to other complex
biological systems.