* 1612605
* SciGirls CONNECT2: Investigating the Use of Gender Equitable Teaching Strategies to Support STEM Identity Development in Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Karen Peterson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,257,606.00

Currently, many young people - especially girls and youth of color - lose
confidence and interest in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
pathways due to a perceived disconnect between their own identity and STEM
fields. To address this challenge, Twin Cities PBS (TPT) is implementing
SciGirls CONNECT2. This three-year Research in Service to Practice award
examines how gender equitable and culturally responsive teaching strategies
influence middle school girls' confidence, interest and motivation around STEM
studies, and their choices around STEM careers. A set of research-based
strategies, called the SciGirls Seven, are currently employed in SciGirls, an
NSF-funded informal STEM educational outreach program serving 125+ educational
partner organizations nationwide. The goal is to update and enrich the SciGirls
Seven, providing educators with a critical, current, and more effective resource
to motivate girls in STEM studies and careers. It is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments.

Florida State University will conduct a formal research study investigating the
hypothesis that STEM programs that use gender equitable and culturally
responsive strategies contribute to girls' positive STEM identity development,
including their sense of self-efficacy, persistence and aspirations around
future STEM careers. This research will include a literature review and a study
of girls' STEM identity creation. The mixed methods study will include
quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis measuring changes in
students' STEM identity and teachers' confidence in STEM teaching. The
quantitative data will come from the student, parent and teacher pre/post
surveys. The qualitative research will be conducted via case studies at four
sites and the qualitative data will include observations, focus groups and
interviews. Girls at all partner sites will create videos that will allow the
research team to gather additional insight. The independent firm Knight
Williams, Inc. will conduct the project's external evaluation.

The project will work with a subset of 16 current SciGirls partners. These
geographically diverse partners will reach youth in all-girls and co-ed informal
STEM education programs in a variety of settings. More than half serve Hispanic
or other minority populations. The updated strategies will be disseminated to
the 2,500 educators within the SciGirls partner network and the 18,800 STEM
education organizations of the National Girls Collaborative Project (NGCP)
network. Dissemination of the strategies and literature review will focus on the
informal STEM education field through publications and presentations, posts at
PBS LearningMedia, a free online space reaching 1.5 million teachers and
educators.