* 1612400
* Developing and studying the replication of Math Corps, an out-of-school-time mathematics program for urban youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven Kahn, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,922.00

The Wayne State University Math Corps is a mathematics enrichment and mentoring
program that operates during summers and on Saturdays. The curriculum and the
teach pedagogies in this informal learning program have documented success of
supporting youths' mathematics learning as well as raising achievement levels in
school. Through rigorous research and evaluation, this project seeks to analyze
and understand the nature, extent, and reasons for Math Corps' success with
youth learning in Detroit as well as the processes of program replication in
three sites: Cleveland, OH; Utica, NY; and Philadelphia, PA. As such, this
project will deepen understandings of program replication and of addressing the
needs of youth in economically-challenged communities in order to promote
mathematics learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research studies will
assess the multiple factors that make Math Corps successful with youth in
Detroit and document the implementation of the program to the three replication
sites. Research methods include discourse analyses, surveys, interviews, and
pre/post-tests. The project will also conduct a retrospective evaluation of Math
Corps based on quantitative datasets regarding both near-term and long-term
youth outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understandings of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments.