* 1612234
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Biz Turnell, Turnell                 Biz            R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2019
* USD 174,768.00

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016,
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Biz Turnell is "Female mediation of sperm metabolism
in storage: an investigation across time, species, and storage organs." The host
institution for this fellowship is the Dresden University of Technology, and the
sponsoring scientist is Klaus Reinhardt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to understand the functional consequences of sperm senescence, or
aging during storage. Sperm age has long been appreciated by human fertility
researchers and livestock breeders as an important factor in sperm
functionality, but has largely been ignored by evolutionary biologists studying
natural selection. Nonetheless, the age distribution of stored sperm is likely
to account for a substantial portion of variation in reproductive success of
males and to play a significant role in sperm competition and cryptic female
choice since sperm can be damaged during the aging period. Previous research has
shown that some female insects delay the senescence of stored sperm by reducing
the sperm cells' metabolic rates, thereby limiting the cells' production of
damaging reactive oxygen species. Using the cutting-edge method of time-resolved
microfluorimetry, the Fellow is determining whether this mechanism underlies the
spatial and temporal patterns of sperm storage and use exhibited by fruit flies
(Drosophila), an excellent invertebrate model species. Drosophila females have
two types of storage organ, the seminal receptacle and the spermathecae. In
Drosophila melanogaster, the former is used in short-term storage while the
latter are used in long-term storage. In contrast, in the closely related
Drosophila simulans, the seminal receptacle favors the sperm of the first male
to mate with a female while the spermathecae favor the sperm of the second male.
Although decades of research have produced a detailed account of these patterns,
little is known about the biochemical processes underlying them. By studying
these processes at the cellular level, the Fellow will be the first to link
storage and use patterns with the genomics and transcriptomics of sperm storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is being trained in the acquisition of new
empirical skills, broadening intellectual and theoretical perspectives,
formulating collaborations with European scientists, and developing mentoring
and outreach skills. This Fellow will serve as a role model for groups
underrepresented in biology, and will promote broader participation in biology
by encouraging young and LGBT students as research assistants, presenting to
local youth groups, and by organizing an interactive workshop.