* 1612917
* Collaborative Research:  Construction of DNA Programmed Minimal Cells with Membrane Mechanosensitive Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 438,990.00

With advances in synthetic biology, it is now possible to try to build a
synthetic cell with the minimum number of components (a minimal cell) in order
to understand what are the essential elements needed to sustain life. Over the
past decade, several approaches to assembling cell analogs using the molecules
of life have been proposed. So far, however, no minimal cells capable of basic
cell functions have been constructed from scratch, and this objective is still
in a distant future. In particular, the construction of a cell-sized genetically
programmed lipid vesicle with an active sensory membrane has not been achieved
yet. The goal of this project is to construct a minimal cell, consisting of a
cell-free expression system encapsulated into a phospholipids vesicle, capable
of sensing the environment through its lipid bilayer by expressing
mechanosensitive channels. This step, central for synthetic cell engineering,
will provide fundamental insights necessary to understand how basic biological
functions are created that characterize the link between genotype and phenotype.
This highly multidisciplinary work will also provide insights on how to engineer
truly functional minimal cell systems that could be useful in other research
areas such as biotechnologies and medicine. Students at all levels will be
trained in an interdisciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bottom-up
construction of complex biochemical systems in vitro is a rapidly growing
research area. The proposed work will offer a path towards bottom-up
construction of DNA programmed minimal cells with membrane mechanosensitive
functions. The research effort is divided into three parts. Genetic programming
will be developed to control the activation of in vitro transcription-
translation gene circuits from a membrane non-permeable inducer.
Mechanosensitive channels such as MscL from E. coli will be incorporated into
the phospholipids bilayer of liposomes and the mechanosensitivity will be tested
by the activation of a reporter protein. Finally, mechanical activation through
the membrane will be coupled to the physical growth of the bilayer by
synthesizing lipids from chemical precursors. This work addresses fundamental
questions about the integration of molecular parts at the scale of a cell to
build biological functions. If successful, the work will address a critical step
in the synthesis of cell-sized compartments with active membranes coupled to
gene regulation.