* 1612201
* Developing and Assessing a Conceptual Approach to an Algebra-based Second Course in Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Beth Chance, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,993.00

Demands for a statistically literate society are increasing, and the algebra-
based introductory statistics course remains the primary venue for learning
statistics for the majority of high school and undergraduate students. However,
the typical introductory statistics course does not give students experience
with multivariable statistical methods, which are the primary methods used in
the workforce today. The primary barrier to students' progressing beyond their
first statistics course is that they have not yet taken (or do not intend to
take) prerequisite courses in probability, calculus, and/or linear algebra.
Toward increasing the number of students who take a statistics course that
focuses on multivariable methods, this project will develop, pilot-test, and
study the use of materials for an algebra-based second course. These materials
will (1) emphasize the overarching statistical process in the context of
multivariable hypotheses, (2) start with straightforward multivariable study
design and exploratory data analysis concepts to build on student intuition and
understanding, (3) utilize a writing style and pedagogical approach designed for
the typical undergraduate student, (4) develop and integrate technology tools
for facilitating student exploration and discovery, and (5) be informed by
assessment results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide
college faculty with a fully integrated set of curriculum materials to teach a
substantially different curriculum for a second course in statistics, aimed at
important multivariable statistical concepts. Such concepts include minimizing
unexplained variability, planning and controlling for confounding variables, and
exploring and modelling interactions between variables. These materials will
leverage prior support that produced materials for introductory statistics
centered on simulation-based inference. The project's accompanying assessment
activities, development of a new assessment tool (a Multivariable Statistics
Concept Inventory), and examination of student assessment results, will address
research questions such as (1) In which areas of multivariable statistical
thinking are there significant gains in conceptual understanding using this new
curriculum? and (2) What are the characteristics of students' learning
trajectories for key inferential and descriptive statistics concepts?