* 1612047
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of an Enzymatic Method for Biofilm Removal
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* David Hesson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Bacteria have evolved a wide range of strategies to adhere to and grow on
metallic and other physical surfaces. Disease causing bacteria produce a
protective coating, known as biofilm, which shields the bacteria from chemical
treatments while at the same time allowing them to attach to these physical
surfaces. This has a major economic and health impact on manufacturing of
packaged foods, pharmaceuticals and consumer goods as well as medical devices. A
specific example is the health impact of foodborne illnesses caused by bacteria
in the United States, where the estimated cost in terms of medical treatments,
loss of work, resultant disability and mortality is at least $55 billion a year.
Furthermore, preventing bacterial contamination throughout the food
manufacturing process presents several unique challenges. While both industry
and government agree that a solution to the increasing number of infections from
food products is required, 'poultry processors have resisted, arguing that it
would be expensive and ultimately futile, because Salmonella is so pervasive.'
Thus, an effective solution to this and other similar challenges must (1)
provide broad activity against a wide range of bacterial pathogens due to their
prevalence throughout the manufacturing process and (2) do so in a cost-
effective manner compatible with current manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a series of
engineered enzymes, which are biological molecules that exhibit broad biofilm-
degrading activity against a wide range of microbial biofilms. The enzymes
retain activity in the presence of common additives used in commercial
disinfectants, making them suitable as biocompatible disinfectants in food,
pharmaceutical and other manufacturing processes. The proposed technology
directly addresses a critical, unmet need to improve water quality, food safety,
multi-drug resistance and thus well being of society through the development of
enzyme-based technologies that can remove biofilm, which is a major factor that
contributes to multidrug resistance and persistence. The I-Corps program will
enable the team to identify an effective cost per use, which is key in
benchmarking the effectiveness of the proposed approach relative to current
enzyme technologies.