* 1612252
* Collaborative Research: Building reflective scientists: Linking course-based authentic research experiences to develop metacognitive skills and scientific fluency
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2021
* David Leaf, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 11/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to enable undergraduate students to
think like scientists by integrating metacognitive practice into laboratory
experiences. Most scientists implicitly learn metacognitive practice through
one-on-one mentoring in the laboratory after finishing their undergraduate
education. One immediate goal is to design undergraduate labs with projects
involving open-ended research and formulate metacognitive prompts to help
student examine their own thinking as they plan and execute experiments and
interpret results. Many undergraduate students are not able to participate in a
standard research experience working in a faculty research lab because of time
and financial constraints. This project will increase the participation of all
students in authentic research and strengthen their self-identification as
scientists at an earlier stage in their education; it will be particularly
beneficial for students from underserved groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
particular goal of this project is to develop and validate tools for assessing
how students' scientific thinking changes in response to metacognitive
interventions when engaged in authentic research. These tools will allow
assessment of how students change their attitudes and approaches to problem
solving as they matriculate through a series of linked laboratory courses with
metacognitive training. Student interviews will be used to inform validated
surveys administered to students as they move from 200- to 300- to 400-level
courses. In addition to quantitative tools, interviews and student work will be
used for qualitative analysis of student improvements. Case-by-case analysis,
and cross-year interviews will assess changes in students' habits of mind. The
laboratory course interventions will include 1) authentic research experiences
in four laboratory courses from the 200-400 level using the model systems
Tetrahymena thermophilae and Caenorhabditis elegans; 2) metacognitive training
for students in the same four laboratory courses; 3) multiple exposures to
metacognitive training by linking these courses in the curriculum. This project
is significant because the novel laboratory courses will give more students the
chance to engage in authentic research, and because the assessment tools that
are developed will be adaptable for a wide array of STEM research experiences.
This project will benefit students of all backgrounds, and help increase the
diversity of STEM students at Western Washington University through increased
recruitment and retention. Because metacognition is prerequisite for scientific
thinking, it is likely that a combination of research experiences coupled with
instruction to promote student self-reflection will enhance students' ability to
resolve scientific problems; the tools developed in this project will be used to
test this hypothesis in a future study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly supported by the NSF Division of Undergraduate Education and the
NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure as it aligns with an important subset
of the objectives of both divisions that is expressed in the "Vision and Change
in Undergraduate Biology Education" effort (see http://visionandchange.org/).