* 1612511
* Computer-based interventions to foster student engagement in introductory engineering courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Stahovich, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,971.00

To be academically successful, students must devote the necessary effort to
studying and completing homework assignments and must engage in these activities
in a timely and effective fashion. However, prior research has shown that
students in introductory engineering courses are often insufficiently engaged in
their learning. This project will investigate two computer-based interventions
intended to remedy this problem. The first intervention, called the dashboard
system, will provide students with quantitative feedback about their level of
engagement (e.g., the extent to which they read the textbook in advance of
lecture and the extent to which they begin homework early). The second
intervention, called the merit badge system, will provide students with virtual
rewards for completing learning tasks in a timely fashion. These rewards, which
are commonly used in games, will include earned points, badges, and achievement
levels. These systems will be used and evaluated in two large undergraduate
engineering courses at the University of California Riverside (UCR). UCR is the
most ethnically diverse campus in the UC system, is one of the most diverse
major US research institutions, and is a Hispanic Serving Institution. Many of
the students are first generation college-attending. Understanding how to
improve the learning processes of these diverse students is intended to increase
student success and create increased opportunities for students from
traditionally underrepresented groups to succeed in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on the hypothesis that
providing students with detailed feedback about their progress toward completing
learning tasks will lead to increased engagement and, consequently, improved
learning outcomes. Two proposed interventions will provide students with
feedback about behavioral metrics of their engagement captured with smartpens
and tablet computers. The smartpens will record homework activity and notetaking
as timestamped pen strokes. An instrumented document viewer on the tablets will
measure students' use of instructional materials such as e-books and lecture
handouts. These technologies will provide a detailed, digital record of learning
activities, making it possible to compute measures of engagement, such as the
amount of time a student spends on particular learning activities and when he or
she does so. The dashboard system will provide direct feedback of these measures
of engagement. The merit badge system will use gamification techniques to foster
engagement by motivating students to increase their measured levels of
engagement. Studies will be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of these two
approaches for both fostering engagement and improving learning outcomes.