* 1612235
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Phillip Conklin, Conklin                 Phillip        A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Phillip A Conklin is "Elucidating the genetic networks
controlling formation of lateral organ initial cells" The host institution for
the fellowship is the Cornell University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Michael J Scanlon.

Shoot meristems are pools of plant stem cells that generate lateral organs such
as leaves and flowers from the meristem periphery, while maintaining a stem cell
reservoir in the meristem's center. This research will tease apart the conserved
and/or divergent mechanisms during the recruitment of lateral organ initials and
the organization stem cells. In so doing, this study will bridge a gap in the
knowledge of whether lateral organ initials and stem cells are organized by
similar mechanisms operating in distinct developmental domains or, in contrast,
if they are organized by distinct, domain-specific functions. The Scanlon lab at
Cornell University specializes in the mechanisms of maize leaf development and
employs comparative functional genomics analyses. Training objectives include
maize fieldwork, high throughput DNA sequencing methods and co-expression
analyses. The knowledge gained by this research aims to identify targets for the
development of wider leaves and floral organs in maize, which may contribute to
increased crop yield and thus food, bioenergy, and industrial feedstock
production.

Leaves and other lateral organs are fundamental to the conversion of solar
energy into crop yield. The mechanisms whereby lateral organ initial cells are
organized from the peripheral zone of shoot meristems are poorly understood in
grasses. This research aims to: identify genes bound and modulated by master
organizers of the meristematic functional domains in maize and compare and
contrast the organization of stem cells versus lateral organ initial cells by
building co-expression networks. By creating translational fusions of WUS and
WOX3 to GFP, we can mark these respective stem cell and organ initial organizing
centers for domain-specific ChIP-seq and RNA-seq analyses. Visualization of RNA-
Seq results will be available on qTeller (www.qTeller.com). Visualization of
Chip-Seq results will be uploaded to The Grassius Regulatory Grid eXplorer
(http://www.grassius.org/grgx).