* 1612268
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Samuel Leiboff, Leiboff                 Samuel         A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Samuel Leiboff is "Exploring Gene Networks in Maize
Tassel and Sorghum Panicle Development during Drought" The host institution for
the fellowship is the USDA-ARS Plant Gene Expression Center and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Sarah C. Hake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing crop yield
during drought is a critical challenge for U.S. corn production. The male
flowering structure or tassel of the corn plant makes several branches, which
produce the pollen necessary for fertilizing female flowers found in corn ears.
During severe drought early in the growing season, energy is re-routed from the
tassel to the ear and the number of tassel branches decreases, potentially
leading to a shortage of pollen during the season. Sorghum's flowering
structure, or panicle, is highly drought-resistant and sorghum has therefore
been studied as an ideal crop for drier regions of the U.S. This project aims to
understand genome-wide responses to drought in corn tassels and sorghum
panicles, providing molecular information for breeding better plant performance
during drought. Broader impacts include the formation of undergraduate outreach
programs promoting STEM majors, research, and career opportunities to increase
participation and retention of LGBT undergraduate students in STEM academic and
professional fields. Students will be surveyed over time and long-term
management of the programs will be transferred to campus advocacy groups,
providing an outreach model for campuses nationwide. Training objectives include
genomics, bioinformatics, biological modeling, and molecular genetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although previous studies have elucidated gene regulatory
networks (GRNs) responsible for tassel branching in maize, little is known about
how tassel GRNs respond to abiotic stresses, such as drought. Whereas several
maize GRNs are conserved in other grasses, sorghum panicle GRNs have not been
established. Using drought to manipulate tassel/panicle morphology, this project
will explore GRN-wide drought response in maize and sorghum, including known
mutants of tassel/panicle morphology. This research will use RNAseq to analyze
inflorescence tissue from several different drought simulations. Leveraging
existing GRN and genome resources in maize and sorghum, this project will
generate and compare dynamic, drought responsive tassel/panicle GRNs. With these
GRNs, morphological models linking RNA levels to tassel/panicle branching will
be constructed. To test morphological-GRN models, this project will generate and
analyze novel tassel/panicle mutants generated by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing
techniques. Research findings and analysis methodologies will be disseminated
through conferences, publications, and submissions to data/code repositories
(NCBI-SRA, NCBI-GEO, GitHub, MaizeGDB, and
Grassius).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: abiotic stress, co-expression
networks, drought, inflorescence biology, maize genetics