* 1612983
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating Shallow Geophysical Techniques to Detect Large Wood Buried in River Corridors
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2016
* USD 8,855.00

Large volumes of wood historically influenced rivers in forested regions of
temperate latitudes prior to widespread wood removal. This team will extend the
capabilities of a modern scientific instrument to measure wood in unaltered
rivers in the boreal region of Alaska. Their work will provide a unique
opportunity to infer what conditions were like in rivers in the past. This could
facilitate river restoration efforts in the future. This project will engage a
team of 2 female researchers and 1 female graduate student. The team will
collaborate with the scientific and managerial staff at the Yukon Flats National
Wildlife Refuge to disseminate research findings to 8 indigenous communities in
the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will calibrate the signals
created by buried wood when using Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) to image
fluvial sediments. Historic low water levels in the Central Yukon of Alaska
during summer 2015 allowed locations of wood to be identified and marked using
the Global Positioning System (GPS). These ephemeral locations are likely to
change as soon high flows arrive in the spring. Thus, there is an urgency to
collect the GPR measurements this winter. In addition, the PIs anticipate that
warming temperatures and melting permafrost in high-latitude regions as a result
of climate change will accelerate wood recruitment and enhance wood accumulation
in these rivers. Data collected in this study will allow later testing of how
this affects fluvial processes. This project will advance the careers of 3 women
scientists and engage a public organization to disseminate findings to
indigenous communities.