* 1612153
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Michael Landis, Landis                  Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Michael Landis is
"Modeling ecological niche and geographical range co-evolution in the nightshade
family (Solanaceae)." The host institution for this fellowship is Yale
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Michael Donoghue.

The goal of this research project is to develop a model of geographic range and
ecological niche evolution, and apply the model to a family of ecologically
diverse and geographically widespread plants, the nightshade family
(Solanaceae). Adaptation to novel ecological conditions is common throughout the
tree of life, and understanding how, when, and why ecological adaptation occurs
has far-reaching applications in areas such as conservation biology,
epidemiology, and agricultural science. Because species tend to conserve the
ecological niche of their ancestors, and because species adapt to the local
conditions found within or abutting their geographical ranges, analyzing this
process requires a unified approach that incorporates ecological, geographical,
and evolutionary perspectives. Advanced statistical models and inference
approaches can be a powerful means of reconstructing evolutionary histories,
especially in absence of hard evidence such as fossils. To this end, the Fellow
is producing software to estimate how groups of closely related species evolve
in response to ecological and geographical factors. Applying the method to
environments everywhere from the Atacama Desert to the Tibetan Plateau, the
Fellow is characterizing how plants in the Solanaceae family colonized Earth's
most extreme environments. To inform the method, the Fellow is developing
'pipeline' tools to integrate molecular, geographical, and ecological data from
online biological databases. These data will be supplemented with museum
specimens from several major national botanical collections, including the
Missouri Botanical Garden, the New York Botanic Garden, and the Harvard
University Herbaria, and the Yale Peabody Museum.

The Fellow is gaining valuable experience in conducting empirical research, a
significant departure from his dissertation research, which was theoretical and
consisted entirely of modeling. By working with the curators and collections of
various museums, the Fellow is learning how to diagnose morphological characters
using preserved and fossilized specimens. The Fellow is leading workshops in
statistical phylogenetics, thereby allowing him improve his teaching skills and
develop new collaborations. To advance his mentoring skills, the Fellow is
training biology undergraduates through the Yale Science, Technology and
Research Scholars (STARS) program, focusing on computational and statistical
skills. Through community outreach programs, the Fellow is refining his ability
to communicate scientific findings in plant evolution to high school students
(Yale Science Diplomats) and amateur botanists (Green Caf√©). Software produced
during the fellowship is open-source and freely available to the research
community.