* 1612211
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Brandon Hedrick, Hedrick                 Brandon        P
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Brandon P. Hedrick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1612211&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to take
transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ biological
collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Brandon P. Hedrick is "The Evolution of Forelimb Strength in
Mammals and Birds." The host institution for this fellowship is the University
of Massachusetts-Amherst, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Elizabeth Dumont.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is exploring linkages between functional
morphology, ecological niche occupation, and evolutionary diversification in
birds and mammals. To accomplish this, the Fellow is examining bone structure
and geometry across six evolutionary transitions from weaker forelimbs to more
powerful forelimbs in mammals and birds. For example, transitions include those
between bats, which have strong forelimbs for flight, and their close relatives,
which have relatively weaker forelimbs. Using these data, the Fellow is (1)
determining if there are convergences across these transitions, and (2)
evaluating whether there are significant increases in rates of speciation
associated with these transitions. The occurrence of shifts in speciation rates
would demonstrate that the evolution of powerful forelimbs entailed a
substantial adaptive advantage. The recurrence of the same morphological changes
across each transition would imply that increased forelimb strength is achieved
through common, fundamental mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow?s
training includes learning micro-computed tomographic (micro-CT) data collection
and manipulation, comparative phylogenetic methods, and approaches for
evaluation of rates of evolution and speciation. As one goal of the Fellow?s
research is to better understand the evolution of bat flight, the Fellow is
building bat houses to encourage bat colonization, on grounds maintained by the
Hitchcock Center for the Environment, a local conservation center in Amherst,
MA. The Fellow employs this method as a means to promote bat welfare, and
stimulate interest among both students and members of the local community in
conserving and protecting bats. The Fellow is also delivering lectures about his
research to the public through multiple venues and to undergraduates at UMass
Amherst through university programs and guest lectures. Finally, the Fellow is
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students and immersing them in the data
collection and analysis portions of this project. The training, outreach and
mentoring activities are enhancing the development of the Fellow?s teaching
skills as a means of preparing him for a successful career in academia.