* 1612782
* STEM Justice:  Building Youth Science Capital
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Zdanna King, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 739,020.00

Young people learn about science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) in a
variety of ways and from many sources, including school, the media, personal
experiences, and friends and family. Yet STEM participation and identification
by youth are not equal across social, economic, and cultural communities. This
project will study a long-term, out-of-school program for high school-age youth,
who are from groups under-represented in STEM academics and careers: girls,
youth from low-income households, and youth of color. Located in the urban
context of the Science Museum of Minnesota, the Kitty Andersen Youth Science
Center (KAYSC) engages youth in applying culturally rich STEM content to work
toward social justice and community building. Specifically, this project will
examine how the learning practices of the KAYSC model support youth in
identifying with, engaging in, and participating in STEM. Through studying the
KAYSC's STEM Justice model, which centers youth as learners, teachers, and
leaders who address critical community issues through STEM, this project will
develop resources that informal science educators in a variety of contexts and
programs can use to promote positive social change, equity, inclusion, and
applied STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Science Museum of Minnesota will
use design-based implementation research to study this model. This research will
draw on and further the emerging theoretical framework of science capital.
Science capital attempts to capture multiple aspects of science learning and
application, including science knowledge, social and cultural resources, and
science-related behaviors and practices. Empirically developing the theory of
science capital has the potential to build concrete understanding of how to
address inequalities in science participation. Four teams will work
independently and collaboratively to do so: an adult research team, a high
school youth research team, a practitioner team, and a co-design team composed
of representatives from the other three teams. Research teams will collect data
in the form of observations, semi-structured interviews, practitioner activity
reports, artifacts, and the experience sampling method. Initial cycles of design
will occur at the Science Museum of Minnesota as researchers and practitioners
document, analyze, and iteratively design learning practices within the STEM
Justice model. In the second half of the grant, the team will work with an
external out-of-school time youth leadership site to implement the redesigned
model. Participatory research and design methods involving both youth and adults
can advance understanding of what makes out-of-school time STEM learning
meaningful, relevant, and successful for marginalized youth and their
communities. Grounded in culturally and socially relevant, community-based
resources and programming, this project will study how leveraging STEM out-of-
school time learning connected to social justice can broaden access to STEM as
well as develop workforce, and leadership, and STEM skills by under-represented
youth. The project also builds staff capacity for promoting equity and access in
informal learning settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.