* 1612643
* Bringing Science Home with PEEP: Engaging Parents and Preschool Children in Science Exploration
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Sonja Latimore, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 05/31/2020
* USD 2,000,002.00

The achievement gap begins well before children enter kindergarten. Research has
shown that children who start school having missed critical early learning
opportunities are already at risk for academic failure. This project seeks to
narrow this gap by finding new avenues for bringing early science experiences to
preschool children (ages 3-5), particularly those living in communities with few
resources. Bringing together media specialists, learning researchers, and two
proven home visiting organizations to collaboratively develop and investigate a
new model that engages families in science exploration through joint media
engagement and home visiting programs. The project will leverage the popularity
and success of the NSF-funded PEEP and the Big Wide World/El Mundo Divertido de
PEEP to engage both parents and preschool children with
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the key goal of engaging families in
science exploration through joint media engagement and home visiting programs,
the team will use a Design Based Implementation Research (DBIR) approach to
address the research questions by iteratively studying the intervention model
(the materials and implementation process) and assessing the impact of the
intervention model on parents/caregivers. The intervention model will include
the PEEP Family Engagement Toolkit that will support 20 weeks of family science
investigations using new digital and hands-on science learning resources. It
will also include new professional development resources for home educators as
well as and the implementation process and strategies for developing and
implementing the Toolkit with families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research focuses first on refining and improving program design and
implementation, and second, on investigating whether the intervention improves
the capacity of parent/caregivers to support young children's learning in
science. Ultimately this research will accomplish two important aims: it will
inform the design of the PEEP family engagement intervention model, and, more
broadly, it will build practical and theoretical understanding of: 1) effective
family engagement models in science learning; 2) the types of supports that
families and home educators need to implement these models; and 3) how to
implement these models across different home visiting programs. Given the reach
of the home visiting programs and the increasing interest in supporting early
science learning the potential for broad impact is significant. This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.