* 1612485
* Think Globally, Interact Locally: Advancing Science Learning using Interactive Spherical Displays to Model Global, Physical Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lisa Anthony, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 311,785.00

The connections between technology applications of all sorts and human users
that are ubiquitous in informal learning and assume a great deal about how the
technology is used and how learning takes place. Much of the research in this
area has been focused on game design and interaction. This project will examine
this interaction involving the use of gestures that represent how individuals
work with systems and large data sets that represent complex systems like the
oceans, to understand how basic elements of a project with a 3-D type of design
might enhance the user experience and increase the utility and learning that
takes place by understanding the cognitive elements of these game like
interactions in specific STEM related settings like
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory pathways project will investigate
the use of interactive, gesture-enabled, multi-touch spheres for teaching about
ocean systems in science centers and museums. The gesture-enabled aspect of the
project will improve on interactive table-top installations which can frustrate
users who use unexpected gestures and receive no response leading to brief
interaction and abandonment without significant interaction or learning. The
project will investigate ways in which unsupported gestures would still produce
a system response which would encourage the user to remain at the installation
and continue to investigate. The effect of multiple gestures will be supported
by using natural mappings between gestures and interactions with the on-sphere
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates theories of embodied
cognition that support the notion that by engaging with global-scale datasets on
a spherical display more effectively models the earth in a non-distorted manner
and therefore will be more natural and allow users to develop a more accurate
conceptual model of how data relates to itself and the globe. In this way, the
project shares some aspects of understanding about learning through game play.
The sphere will not be a fully developed game but will share characteristics of
game play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.