* 1612689
* SUNY LSAMP 2016 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Cohort 5 at Stony Brook University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP-BD) activity provides two-
year support at the postbaccalaurate level for students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to matriculate in STEM graduate programs
with the ultimate goal of earning a doctoral degree in a STEM discipline.
Participants are selected from LSAMP institutions nationwide. The State
University of New York System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(SUNY LSAMP) at Stony Brook University is the host site for the 2016-2018 BD
program in which a cohort of twelve LSAMP certified students selected from the
national pool will engage in STEM research, academics and professional
development activities leading to STEM Master's and Doctoral degree completion.
The BD program at Stony Brook University provides a comprehensive set of support
services that monitors student progress, builds a strong BD community, and
increases BD students' academic and professional skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten cohorts of students have matriculated in SUNY LSAMP
graduate LSAMP-BD programs at Stony Brook, Buffalo, Binghamton and Albany since
2006. The programs promote systemic change in graduate education practices and
policy in ways that increase the success of individual students on the doctoral
pathway and the effectiveness of STEM graduate programs, continuing the goal of
diversifying America's STEM workforce. The program at Stony Brook University
will be externally evaluated and students will be tracked throughout the program
and into STEM careers following completion of STEM doctoral degree programs.
Collaborations with other STEM networks and resources internal and external to
the state as well as other graduate programs, such as NSF's Graduate Research
Fellowship Program (GRFP), Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP-T) and institutional resources will further ensure that
students complete the STEM terminal degree.