* 1612302
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Senay Yitbarek, Yitbarek                Senay
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Senay Yitbarek

Proposal Number: 1612302

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Senay Yitbarek is "Disease evolution: The
consequences of spatial structure and co-infection on the evolution of
virulence." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California-Berkeley and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Mike Boots.

This research examines how infections of multiple parasites in hosts (co-
infections) generates variation and drives disease dynamics at the population
level. Classical work describing parasite effects on hosts has focused on single
parasite systems. However, co-infections in hosts are ubiquitous in nature, and
prior infection by a parasite can determine host response to subsequent
invasions by parasites. Parasites that arrive early in a host may have an
advantage over late-arriving parasites by occupying niches, or by inducing
resistance mechanisms involving immune priming that elicits protection against
further attacks. In addition, the spatial structure of hosts modulates the
spread, impact and evolution of infectious diseases. The Fellow is testing the
hypothesis that the spatial structure of host populations mediates co-infection
and favors low parasite virulence. To address the ecological and epidemiological
effects of co-infection on virulence evolution, the Fellow is focusing on
interactions between the granulosis virus (PiGV) and the bacterial pathogen
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) in the insect host population of Plodia
interpunctella. This well-established infectious disease model system is ideally
suited for experimentally evolving hosts and parasites and for examining the
evolution of virulence of multiple infections. The Fellow is developing
spatially explicit mathematical models of disease transmission involving co-
infections from different parasite species, to predict parasite virulence.

The Fellow is receiving training and mentoring in developing theoretical models
of evolution, especially as applied to real world problems such as the role of
co-evolution in infectious disease dynamics. In an era of increasing global
contact networks that promote the spread of novel parasites and emerging
infectious diseases, these skills will allow the Fellow to inform policy makers
responsible for managing disease risk. The Fellow is partnering with the Biology
Scholars Program at UC-Berkeley to mentor underrepresented students, by guiding
them in developing independent research projects in host-parasite ecology. In
addition, the Fellow is developing short-courses to expose students to hands-on
field activities in evolutionary ecology, using inquiry-based learning. These
activities increase the participation of underrepresented students in ecology
and evolutionary biology, fields that have traditionally lacked diversity.