* 1612456
* A Spectral Framework for Network-Driven Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Karl Rohe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 172,365.00

Probability sampling drastically reduces the burden of research in various
disciplines because statistical inference can extend conclusions from a sample
to the entire population. However, classical sampling techniques require a
sampling frame that lists each individual in the population and a way of
contacting each individual. In many settings, a sampling frame is not available.
In others, a sampling frame is too expensive to compile or only covers a biased
subset of the population. Particularly with hard-to-reach populations, network-
driven sampling provides one of the only ways to find members of the population.
Leveraging a network to find a target population appears in many disciplines
with a multitude of names: respondent-driven sampling, snowball sampling, web
crawling, link-tracing, breadth-first search, co-immunoprecipitation, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation. These disparate techniques all provide access to
hard-to-reach and networked populations by essentially asking participants to
refer friends. As a result, these are all network-driven techniques. Classical
sampling theory does not apply to network-driven sampling because friends are
similar; this induces dependence between samples that is influenced by the
underlying social network. Preliminary research conducted by the investigator
identifies a critical threshold that relates the structure of the social network
to the referral rate in the sampling tree; beyond this critical threshold,
standard network-driven approaches produce highly uncertain estimates. This
research aims to produce new statistical techniques that continue to perform
well beyond the critical threshold. Moreover, this project will study novel
forms of network-driven data collection that incorporate additional information
to produce more representative samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical sampling
results are not applicable to network-driven sampling because friends are
similar, inducing dependence between samples. Previous theoretical results show
that some network-driven studies do not obtain square root n-consistent
estimators. Whether a study obtains square root n-consistency depends on both
(i) the spectral properties of the underlying social network and (ii) the growth
of the sampling tree. This research aims to provide new estimators that correct
for the dependence between samples. These dependence-corrected estimators can
obtain square root n-consistency, even when current estimators do not. This
project will also construct new diagnostics and new sampling designs for
network-driven sampling. The new spectral framework will provide a suite of
theory, methodology, and practices that will enable studies to obtain square
root n-consistent estimators.