* 1612826
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Allison Fritts-Penniman, Fritts-Penniman         Allison        L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Allison Fritts-Penniman

Proposal number: 161282

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a professional development plan that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Allison Fritts-Penniman is 'Understanding the role
of ecology in the evolution of high biodiversity on coral reefs.' The host
institution for this fellowship is the California Academy of Sciences (CAS) and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Terrence Gosliner.

This project investigates the role of ecology and natural selection in driving
the formation of new species, a process known as ecological speciation.
Specifically, the Fellow is examining the role corals play in the evolution of
nudibranchs, an extremely diverse group of sea slugs found throughout the
world's oceans. Coral-feeding nudibranchs, like many marine animals, depend on
specific coral species for food and protection. Previous work has shown that new
species can evolve through adaptation to life on a different species of coral.
The Fellow is integrating geographic, ecological, morphological, and genomic
data to evaluate the evolutionary history of all coral-feeding nudibranchs. This
will shed light on the importance of coral diversity in producing and
maintaining the biodiversity of other organisms, an evolutionary process that is
endangered in the face of massive coral die-offs. In addition to improving our
understanding of the evolution and taxonomy of this megadiverse group, the
Fellow is developing genomic tools to advance future evolutionary studies of
nudibranchs and their mollusc relatives.

In terms of training, the Fellow is learning comparative genomic techniques,
developing museum collection and curation skills, and advancing her skills in
mentoring and science communication. The Fellow is mentoring high school
students from groups underrepresented in biology through the CAS Careers in
Science (CiS) Internship Program. These students are learning how to study
evolution using nudibranchs as a model system, and collaborating with the CAS
Teen Advocates for Science Communication to create videos to 1) teach the public
about evolution on coral reefs, and 2) show their high school peers that being a
scientist is exciting, fun, and achievable regardless of economic or ethnic
background. To further engage the general public and augment our knowledge of
the biology and natural history of nudibranchs, the Fellow is starting a global
nudibranch photo collection project using the iNaturalist platform. iNaturalist
is accessible to people on a global scale, including people in Africa, the
Middle East, and Southeast Asia who do not often have opportunities to
contribute to international research.