* 1612580
* Workshop on Ontology Learning for Behavioral Knowledge Embeddedness
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Kai Larsen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,038.00

Title: IIS: Workshop on Ontology Learning for Behavioral Knowledge
Embeddedness&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kai Larsen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on
Ontology Learning for Behavioral Knowledge Embeddedness is designed to bring
together experts in natural language technologies, computer and behavioral
science to develop semantic ontology using two methods: 1) an initial data
extraction of relationships between theories and constructs using natural
language technologies; and 2) bringing together a multidisciplinary team to
clarify the conceptualizations. Such an ontology can be used to clarify the
conceptualizations and vocabulary that underlie knowledge and allow the field to
grow on a shared vocabulary. The workshop will yield a transdisciplinary
knowledge base that will enable researchers to better search, integrate, and
understand past behavioral research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research in
behavior relies on a plethora of theories and constructs. Past research has
suggested that there is significant overlap in these terms and that analysis of
extant behavioral theories may provide a much-needed ontology of behavioral
knowledge-embeddedness and -integration, itself the necessary requirement to
clarify the structure of knowledge within the large set of behavioral theories
in existence. Without such an ontology, clarifying the conceptualizations and
vocabulary that underlie knowledge is not possible. Beyond developing an
ontology, a transdisciplinary knowledge base will enable researchers to better
utilize past research. The major goals of this proposed workshop are to 1)
evaluate the current state of disparate ontological foundations for behavioral
theory efforts, 2) facilitate the development of shared understanding of
ontology development and learning from experts in the fields of natural language
processing, visualization, and computational ontologies, and 3) advance the
rigor of theory-integrative work towards ontology-worthy efforts.