* 1612776
* Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD): Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) BTD Cohort XII (2016-2018) Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Karen Butler-Purry, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. The primary aim of the proposed Cohort XII Texas A&amp;M
University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP)
Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) program is to increase the pool of science,
technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) PhDs among underrepresented
minority (URM) groups at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and create a cohesive
community of graduate students across different disciplines within the
university. The goal is to foster academic success in a cohort of first-time URM
STEM graduate students, by developing their readiness and encouraging eagerness
to complete STEM doctoral degrees and by preparing them to take their place as
leaders in interdisciplinary research and in academia. The broad significance of
TAMUS LSAMP BTD is to increase participation of URM groups in STEM by providing
opportunities and activities at the graduate levels that lead to educational and
career enhancements of URM graduate students. Between 2008 and 2018 the number
of jobs in the STEM field is expected to increase by 1.33 million from 7.64
million which represents a growth of 17% (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nov.
2009 Monthly Labor Review). By increasing the number of URM students that
ultimately enter the STEM workforce, TAMUS LSAMP BTD is able to increase the
economy, prosperity, and welfare of the nation. Objectives to carry out the
program's goals include (1) retention of fellows into doctoral programs with
funding after completion of the NSF BTD program, (2) preparation to meet the
challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for possible academic
careers in higher education, and (3) leadership skill development necessary to
succeed as young URM professionals upon completion of doctoral programs of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be achieved through collaborations among
the College of Science (COS), the Dwight Look College of Engineering (COE), the
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (COALS), and the College of Geosciences
(COG) at TAMU. Twelve first-time graduate students from URM groups, in five
departments in COS, fourteen in COE, fourteen in COALS, and four in COG will be
selected as BTD Fellows. The Fellows will be nurtured for two years as a
cohorted community benefiting from a program of academic and personal
development activities and social support, to sustain their commitment and
success to their degree programs and advancement toward doctoral programs by the
end of their second year. The BTD students, with differing STEM disciplines and
a common purpose, will share coordinated resources and intellectually enriching
group activities with each other, and also with the larger population of STEM,
minority and other graduate students at TAMU, to the benefit of
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the intellectual impact of BTD, the program
will enhance the infrastructure of research and education by advancing pursuit
of graduate and doctoral STEM degrees.