* 1612262
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Alice MacQueen, MacQueen                Alice          H
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan and also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology. The
title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Dr. Alice
MacQueen is "Genomics of yield variation and physiology of genotype-by-
environment interactions in common bean." The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Texas at Austin and the sponsoring scientist is
Dr. Tom Juenger.

Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) is the most consumed source of plant protein
worldwide and is a particularly important source of protein in the developing
world. A question of pressing importance is how important crop traits, such as
protein or yield, were influenced by interaction of genes with the environment,
so called GXE interactions. Common bean was domesticated to grow in a wide
variety of environments and is thus an excellent candidate to explore how crop
traits are determined by GXE interactions. An extensive dataset of over 500
common bean varieties grown at 36 locations across the United States over 34
years links bean traits in different environments. This research project
leverages these historical datasets and will document genetic variation in
common bean, thus providing an exciting opportunity to connect the traits to
their genetic drivers. Undergraduate students will be trained in cutting edge
genomic analysis and the public will learn about plant genomics through outreach
activities with the Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center.

This project combines experiments and computational analyses to determine the
interactions of GXE on yield variation and other traits of common bean. New
association mapping populations will be produced, and these will be directly
connected to historically robust datasets containing phenotype and yield data
for common bean. The genetics of yield variation will be determined through
genome-wide association approaches, both for regions with genomic variation
between varieties and genomic regions fixed by local adaptation between bean
races. The project will test for differential expression and physiology between
varieties with and without GxE in response to specific climate drivers.