* 1612549
* Efficient Algorithms with Statistical Guarantees for High Dimensional Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ambuj Tewari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 120,000.00

Various industrial and scientific fields are generating high-dimensional time
series data. Time series generated by macroeconomic indicators, stock market
performance, and sensors in the industrial internet are of huge value to the
economy. Time series generated in systems biology and neuroscience can lead to a
better understanding of human health and diseases. Classical statistical methods
are limited in their ability to deal with high-dimensional time series.
Developing statistical tools for the analysis of high-dimensional time series is
thus of pressing concern to society. This project develops both theory as well
as scalable algorithms for advancing our ability to analyze and extract
meaningful information from high-dimensional time series
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the frontier of research at
the interface between three areas: high-dimensional statistics, large-scale
optimization, and time series analysis. Three interrelated research aims will be
pursued. First, theoretical tools to analyze the performance of linear
prediction methods for high-dimensional time series under mild assumptions about
the generative process underlying the time series will be built. Second,
statistical guarantees for computationally efficient alternating minimization
based alternatives to computing the maximum likelihood estimator for high-
dimensional vector autoregressive (VAR) models will be provided. Third, fast
online algorithms for estimation and forecasting in a setting where the high-
dimensional time series observations arrive sequentially will be developed.