* 1612747
* Child Trends News Service: Advancing Social Science Knowledge to Benefit Hispanic Families
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Alicia Torres, Child Trends Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,603,000.00

Child Trends is a nonprofit organization focused on improving the lives of
children and their families by conducting research and sharing the resulting
knowledge with practitioners and the public. In this project, Child Trends will
conduct research and development to launch a Child Trends News Service aimed at
providing news reports that feature social science child-centric research. The
resulting work is designed to improve outcomes for at-risk children,
particularly Latinos, the largest and fastest-growing minority group among U.S.
children. Working with a professional news syndication company, the Child Trends
News Service will produce engaging reports for key news media outlets that
feature the latest actionable social science research related to behaviors that
help mitigate negative child outcomes associated with poverty, lack of
education, violence, among other challenges. Child Trends will draw attention to
the reports through social media and outreach to stakeholders. By airing these
reports on local television news programs in English and Spanish, millions of
people will have greater access to this information. This is early R&amp;D work
to demonstrate that local television stations can create these reports and
examine the impact of this information on Latino parents. The study will provide
valuable lessons to the informal science education field with respect to the
impact of television news on knowledge and attitudes toward specific social
science research, and a deeper understanding of how news might, or might not,
motivate behavioral change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching aim of this
project is to use commercial news to reach populations, especially Latinos, who
have historically been underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and
math (STEM) education and careers. The goals of the project are to: &lt;br/&gt;*
Leverage mass media news outlets to effectively communicate developments in
social science research on child well-being and development to Latino audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;* Advance the field of informal STEM learning by exploring how the
public interacts with actionable social science child research. &lt;br/&gt;*
Expand the reach and application of the news products through strategic
collaborations with provider organizations serving at-risk Latino families; the
child research and STEM fields; and other organizations working on Latino family
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities include the development and formative
testing of the news service, the qualitative and quantitative testing of the
news service's impact on audiences, and evaluation of the implementation of the
project's components. The quantitative research, using a control group and
treatment group, will work to establish preliminary evidence that the Child
Trends News Service will result in changes in viewers' knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviors related to child-centric social science research. The Child Trends'
project team will be informed by an Advisory Board and Technical Working Group
as well by working closely with Abriendo Puertas, the largest U.S. parenting
education program for low-income Latino parents. Child Trends will partner with
Ivanhoe Broadcast News to produce and distribute the materials. Group &amp;
Consultancy will evaluate the project and provide a research brief on lessons
learned, research outcome measures, and Ivanhoe news pick-up reports. The
proposed research and development will be conducted over a two-year period;
findings will inform ongoing service and additional
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.