* 1612393
* LSAMP BRIDGE TO THE DOCTORATE:  UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO PROVIDING MULTIDISCIPLINARY &amp; ENTREPRENEURSHIP TRAINING IN STEM DISCIPLINES AT THE PHD LEVEL
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eduardo Nicolau, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,074,999.00

The The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program
assists universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." Since
national security and economic vitality of the United States require a highly
trained domestic STEM workforce, institutions engaged in the most advanced
levels of research and innovation must do their part to train tomorrow's leaders
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Puerto Rico (Rio Piedras), lead
institution for the Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(PR-LSAMP), will administer its eleventh (11th) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
Program during the 2016-2018 academic years. Implementation of the UPR-LSAMP BD
Activity develops a highly competitive STEM education and research enterprise
required to advance Puerto Rico's economic development and meets the national
need for diverse STEM professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPR's BD program
provides multidisciplinary training in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines at the Ph.D. level to enable a seamless
transition from the STEM baccalaureate degree to STEM graduate studies. Twelve
students who received STEM baccalaureate degrees from PR-LSAMP institutions or
from mainland LSAMP institutions will be selected and supported as BD Fellows.
The program will continue to coordinate its activities with other NSF-funded
projects that are managed by the Resource Center for Science and Engineering
(RCSE) and by pertinent UPR graduate programs. The activities implemented will
increase the number of Puerto Rican STEM undergraduate students who apply and
are admitted to STEM PhD programs, and increase the number of these students who
obtain STEM doctoral degrees. The total number of BD Fellows supported by PR-
LSAMP since its inception would increase to 118. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BD
Fellows participate in a series of development activities that provides or
facilitates the BD Program including: scientific seminars on interdisciplinary
or frontier research topics; seminars in ethics of science; and workshops to
develop scientific research skills as well as written and oral communication
skills. Fellows travel to and present at national and international scientific
meetings and complete summer research internships at national and international
partner research centers of PR EPSCoR and the Institute of Tropical Ecology
(ITES). In addition, UPR's BD program implements activities that develop
mentoring and teambuilding skills. The Role Model Seminar series brings BD
Fellows into contact with successful nationally and internationally recognized
researchers thereby creating a mentoring environment that further equips the
Fellows to fruitfully incorporate themselves into the greater
research/industrial community.