* 1612441
* Pattern Selection: Growth, Fronts, and Defects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Arnd Scheel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 311,001.00

This research project aims to mathematically describe physical and biological
growth processes through direct modeling and analysis of coherent structures.
Particular model examples create regular patterns such as stripes or hexagonal
lattices of spots. The goal of this research is to find mathematical
characterizations of patterns that explain the ubiquity of such regular patterns
across nature and, at the same time, to provide recipes for the self-organized
manufacturing of microstructure. The project includes research activities that
will train graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on perturbation methods that are applicable to systems without a
technically viable spatial dynamics interpretation, including nonlocal and
multi-dimensional problems. It will explore the interaction of the domain growth
and pattern-formation and mechanisms of the speed-selection for traveling
fronts. In particular, the research aims to develop techniques for the study of
perturbation and bifurcation problems in infinite dimensional dynamical systems
in the presence of essential spectrum using rigorous core/far-field
decompositions. Beyond local perturbation analysis, these strategies will be
implemented in numerical continuation algorithms, with a priori and a posteriori
error bounds. Particular goals set forth are wavenumber and pattern predictions
in growing domains, characterization of invasion speeds in pattern-forming
systems, and depinning asymptotics in heterogeneous media.