* 1612032
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Gregory Stull, Stull                   Gregory        W
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Gregory Stull Proposal Number: 1612032

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017,
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Gregory W. Stull is
"Integrating diverse collections data for deep-time distribution modeling in a
tropical flowering plant family (Icacinaceae) with an extensive fossil record."
The host institution for this fellowship is University of Michigan, and the
sponsoring scientists are Stephen A. Smith and Christopher W. Dick. The goal of
this research is to explore using geographic data from modern species to
generate species distribution models of extinct species, thereby allowing for
the reconstruction of species distribution patterns across broad time scales.
The research uses the tropical plant family Icacinaceae, which has an extensive
fossil record, as a model group of organisms, and investigates the climatic
suitability of major land bridges/rafts for the migration of tropical plants
throughout the Cenozoic Era (65 million years ago to the present). The research
is important because understanding how species have responded to previous
climate change can help predict the impact of future climate change on the
distribution of current biological diversity. Because the fossil record is
incomplete, additional tools are necessary to reconstruct historical
distributions at different points in the past (e.g., during the early Eocene,
when the earth?s climate was considerably warmer than the present). The Fellow
is using species distribution modeling (SDM), which has emerged as a powerful
computational tool for modeling the ecological requirements of species,
incorporating the wealth of locality/geographic data available for modern
species in natural history collections. SDM has been used extensively to predict
possible future distributions as shaped by climate change. However, the
application of SDM for reconstructing distributions in deep time has been
underexplored, despite its potential for understanding how climate change has
shaped the diversity and distribution of organisms through time. The Fellow's
research constitutes one of the first applications of SDM across such a broad
time scale, using the fossil record to validate the results. This research
therefore serves as an important proof of concept for this approach, and the
novel methodological tools generated will advance future research related to
biogeography and climate change.

In terms of training, the Fellow is acquiring skills in bioinformatics and
computational biology, particularly related to methods of species distribution
modeling and biogeographic modeling. These skills (e.g., fluency in
scripting/programming languages such as Python) are becoming increasingly
important in biological research, and this research will therefore prepare the
Fellow well for a career focused on research using biological collections. The
products of this work are being distributed to the research community through a
variety of outlets including peer-reviewed publications, international
conferences, a workshop, and web tutorials. The Fellow is also mentoring and
training two undergraduates per year, seeking out individuals from minority
groups underrepresented in the sciences.