* 1612079
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Jacob Heberling, Heberling               Jacob          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Jacob Mason Heberling Proposal Number 1612079

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to J. Mason Heberling
is "Leveraging centuries of herbarium data to track plant invasion processes:
trait shifts, local adaptation, and rapid evolution." The host institutions for
this fellowship are the Carnegie Museum of Natural History and the University of
Tennessee Knoxville, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Stephen Tonsor and
Susan Kalisz.

The goal of this research is to understand fundamental plant invasion processes,
including the frequency and importance of trait shifts following plant
introductions, the direction and rate of these potential trait changes, and the
degree to which local adaptation influences invasion success. Globalization of
human activities has reshuffled plant communities across the world, resulting in
substantial environmental damage and economic losses. In this research, the
Fellow is leveraging centuries of biological collections alongside recent
advances in functional trait ecology to understand fundamental plant invasion
processes. Specifically, the Fellow is utilizing the extensive collection of the
Carnegie Museum of Natural History herbarium, supplemented with specimens from
other herbaria worldwide. The Fellow is using these specimens of introduced and
native Eastern US species, collected from early 1800s to today, to measure
traits relating to carbon gain, resource-use, reproductive/dispersal ability,
and phenology across space and time. The main research objectives include using
these data to track phenotypic change through the course of plant invasion and
assess the role of local adaption to understand and predict species success. The
Fellow's project fosters the use of herbaria in the rising field of trait-based
ecology, and will substantially expand existing global trait databases to
facilitate research on fundamental biological questions at a large scale.

The Fellow is receiving training in skills associated with herbarium methods,
recent statistical advancements, geographic information systems (GIS), and
software development for efficient specimen georeferencing. Career development
activities include building research collaborations, developing a broad research
portfolio to include herbarium data and evolutionary analyses, and encouraging
diverse participation to highlight the importance of biological collections as a
vital source of knowledge to the broader community. The Fellow is promoting the
use of collections-based research through interaction with community
organizations in Western PA, including local elementary education programs and
museum docent training.