* 1612567
* I-Corps:  Nanochon, a Commercial Venture to 3D Print Regenerative Implants for Joint Reconstruction
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,09/30/2016
* Lijie Grace Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Acute and chronic orthopedic injuries to articulating joints (knee, shoulder,
and hip) typically affect and compromise the structural integrity of cartilage
and bone. Current treatments can be extremely invasive, such as total hip and
knee metallic implants. Other treatment options focusing on graft tissue,
cadaver and synthetic material have had limited clinical success. In addition, a
large segment of this population is pediatric. Pediatric patients cannot receive
a total joint replacement, and, thus, are confined to less effective graft-based
approaches. Another potential segment lies in sports medicine, where our system
could repair large and complex injuries quickly and restore athletes to pre-
injury levels of performance. The proposed technology would provide an easy-to-
use, effective and permanent option while reducing surgical procedure time and
patient recovery time. This would in turn provide hospitals and surgeons with a
highly viable regenerative device for those patients suffering from advanced
joint injury, but who are not viable candidates for total joint replacement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a highly engineered,
patient specific, three-dimensional (3D) biologically inspired implant for
treatment of disrupted, unstable osteochondral defects using our previously
developed novel 3D printing techniques and nanomaterials. This team proposes to
use computer aided design (CAD), along with 3D printing, to fabricate functional
3D osteochondral implants from these advanced nanomaterial composites. We
propose to carry out a project in order to optimize the composition of our
materials and 3D printed design for manufacture. Participation in the I-Corps
and funding provided will further customer discovery, especially in the targeted
pediatric and sports medicine customer segments, inform design modifications to
the existing proposed prototype and catalyze efforts to generate funding for
late stage R&amp;D activities in small animal and large animal models. These
research models are essential for final scientific validation and will allow the
team to move forward with pursuit of investment from private capital sources and
industry partnerships, as well as moving forward with FDA approval.