* 1612241
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Fredrick Larabee, Larabee                 Fredrick       J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Fredrick J. Larabee Proposal Number: 1612241

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Fredrick Larabee is
"The Evolution and Mechanics of Fungus-growing Ant Mouthparts." The host
institutions for this fellowship are the National Museum of Natural History and
George Washington University, and the sponsoring scientists are Ted Schultz and
Scott Powell.

This project examines the evolution of form and function of insect mandibles,
focusing on fungus-growing ants, a particularly successful insect group that
displays a great deal of morphological and ecological diversity. Mandibles are
critical to the biology of insects, being the primary structure they use to
interact with their environment. In order to understand why insects are so
evolutionary successful, it is critical to understand the relationship between
mandible morphology, ecological function, and mechanical performance. The Fellow
is using three-dimensional imaging technology to visualize the feeding apparatus
of fungus-growing ants in the insect collection at the Smithsonian's National
Museum of Natural History. These data are being used to test the hypothesis that
mouthpart morphology correlates with the mechanical demands of processing
different fungus substrates. Additionally, the Fellow is using 3D models to test
how head shape is mechanically optimized to resist deformation from muscle
contractions.

The Fellow is receiving training in 3D imaging technology, morphometrics, and
evolutionary comparative methods. In addition, the Fellow is implementing a
significant outreach and education component. Fungus-growing ants are
charismatic, and the Fellow is educating the public on biodiversity and
evolutionary principles, using these ants as a model organism. By using 3D
imaging, the Fellow is engaging the public in dynamic ways not possible during a
typical museum visit. The 3D models produced by the Fellow are being
incorporated into existing outreach platforms at the National Museum of Natural
History to educate the public on structure-function relationships in insects.
Associated with these activities, the Fellow is mentoring undergraduate student
interns, who are gaining experience in analyzing morphological data, and
communicating results in museum and online media.