* 1612527
* Informal Learning in Computer Science: Social and Conceptual Factors Related to Women's Persistence
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Louise Lyon, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 296,591.00

This study addresses two problems: the difficulty of using informal resources to
learn to write computer code for job and career advancement and the lack of
women in computer science (CS). The work will make a contribution to the
literature on informal learning in the workplace through an in-depth
investigation into the specific field of CS. It will focus on the specific task
of using informal resources to learn to code and explore ways to improve those
resources so learners can more effectively teach themselves to code. As
Exploratory Pathways project, it will provide the pilot of a protocol
investigating the contexts of informal CS learning by career women. It is funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports work that
provides multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is understood about this
phenomenon of how women in the workforce learn CS skills that enable them to
rewrite their career paths. This project will take an ethnographic approach to
studying the informal learning (both through online, written resources and
through sharing of knowledge with others) of women involved in a grassroots,
informal, volunteer group that has formed in order to help women help themselves
and others learn to write computer code. The women's coding group will be made
up of experienced administrators on the phenomenally successful Salesforce
Customer Relationship Management software platform who are moving from end users
of the software to end user programmers that extend the software by writing
computer code to customize applications for particular business needs. This
study aims to answer the overarching research question: In what ways are
informal CS learning opportunities being used and created by adult women, what
are their experiences with those opportunities, and how does this suggest ways
to enhance those opportunities in the future to increase effectiveness in
broadening access to and engagement in informal CS learning experiences for
women? Specifically, the study will focus on personal context (e.g. what the
learner brings to the learning situation), sociocultural context (e.g.
interactions with others when learning to code), and physical context (e.g. the
resources used and the virtual learning sessions) as well as how persistence and
identity develop over time as the women are influenced by the
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is a collaboration between CS
education and learning researchers, informal practitioners, and training
practitioners who create resources to help end-users to learn to code. The work
will complement learning sciences research on STEM learning by providing some
depth to what is known about informal learning in the STEM field of CS and by
focusing on an understudied adult population. This study will make contributions
to the literature on females learning STEM in informal environments by focusing
on adult women in the workplace and the sociocultural barriers to their learning
of CS, which is an area of sparse research.