* 1612824
* Research on an International Network for STEM Media Making and Student-Led Participatory Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,722,019.00

This Research in Service to Practice project, a collaboration of Pepperdine
University and the New York Hall of Science, will establish a network of STEM-
related Media Making Clubs comprised of after-school students aged 12 - 19 and
teachers in the U.S. and in three other countries: Kenya, Namibia and Finland.
The media produced by the students may include a range of formats such as
videos, short subject films, games, computer programs and specialized
applications like interactive books. The content of the media produced by the
students will focus on the illustration and teaching of STEM topics, where the
shared media is intended to help other students become enthused about and learn
the science. This proposal builds on the principal investigator's previous work
on localized media clubs by now creating an international network in which
after-school students and teachers will collaborate at a distance with other
clubs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central research questions for the project
pertain to three themes at the intersection of learning, culture and
collaboration: the impact of participatory teaching, virtual networks, and
intercultural, global competence. The research will combine qualitative, cross-
cultural and big data methods. Critical to the innovation of the project, the
research team will also develop a network assessment tool, adapting epistemic
network analysis methods to the needs of this initiative.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.