* 1612335
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Brian Stucky, Stucky                  Brian          J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Brian J. Stucky Proposal Number: 1612335

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Brian Stucky is
"Collections as repositories of natural history data: New tools, methods, and
data to better understand the evolution of flesh fly parasitoids." The host
institution for this fellowship is the University of Florida, and the sponsoring
scientists are Robert Guralnick, Akito Kawahara, and Samuel Wong.

The goal of this research is to help unlock the potential of biological
collections as repositories of natural history data by: 1) developing new
methods for capturing life history data from collection specimens; 2) developing
new software for phylogenetic comparative methods that provide a robust
framework for analyzing these data; and 3) applying these new methods and
software to a model phylogeny, the evolution of the parasitoid lifestyle in the
highly diverse flesh flies (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). Phylogenetic comparative
methods (PCMs) are important research tools of modern evolutionary biology
because they can reveal the large-scale processes that create biological
diversity - in other words, PCMs help us understand how evolution works.
Effective use of PCMs requires detailed knowledge of species' natural history
traits, yet for the most diverse groups of organisms, such as insects, such data
are often unavailable. Biological collections contain extensive natural history
information that could help address this data shortcoming, but new computational
tools and research methods are needed to mobilize and exploit these data.
Parasitoids - insects that feed parasitically as larvae but eventually kill
their hosts - account for up to 25% of all insect species and are crucial for
controlling agricultural pests, but relatively little is known about the
evolution of their parasitoid lifestyle. The flesh flies are a large insect
family that includes many parasitoid species of major economic, forensic,
veterinary, and medical importance. The Fellow's research applies new data from
multiple museum collections to improve understanding of parasitoid evolution and
diversity. More broadly, the new analytical methods developed for by the Fellow
will be applicable to a wide variety of evolutionary questions beyond this
particular study.

The Fellow is being trained in laboratory and computational methods for
capturing genetic and natural history data from collection specimens,
statistical techniques for PCMs, and strategies for teaching and public
outreach. Data and results from this project are being made freely available
online, and all new software is open source. The Fellow's outreach activities
include teaching university students about PCMs and collections data, mentoring
undergraduates, and providing public educational programming about the
diversity, biology, and value of flesh flies.