* 1612699
* STEM Matters: Investigating the Confluence of Visitor and Institutional Learning Agendas
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Joe Heimlich, Franklin County Historical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 358,442.00

The project will conduct a nation wide study to address three broad questions:

(1) How does the public view zoos and aquariums and how do these institutions
affect STEM (Science Technology Engineering Mathematics) learning outside their
walls? (2) How do visitors experience zoos at different stages in their lives
and how do zoo visits affect their knowledge and perspectives concerning
environmental issues and conservation? (3) What are the entry characteristics of
visitors and how do those characteristics play out in behaviors during a visit?

The project is designed to advance understanding of how informal STEM learning
emerges through the intersection of institutional pedagogy and learning goals
and the characteristics of individuals and their social and cultural
backgrounds. As the first institutional study that advances a field-wide
research agenda, the project will map how to implement a national collaborative
effort that can help refine program delivery and cooperation between zoos,
aquariums and other STEM learning institutions.

The study will describe zoo and aquarium visitors based on a broad understanding
of demographics, group, and individual perspectives to expand understanding of
how these factors influence visitor learning and how they view the relevance of
educational messages presented by zoos and aquariums. The project will result in
reports, workshops and a handbook presenting findings of practical value for
educators, a research platform and research tools, online discussion forums, and
directions for future research. The project, led by New Knowledge Organization
(NKO), will be carried out through the collaboration of NKO with other informal
research organizations and the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) with its
230 informal science learning institutional members. This project is supported
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings, as a part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments.