* 1612736
* Bridge to the Doctorate 2016-18 at UMCP
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,074,998.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. BD provides support for post-baccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to STEM graduate degrees for those students who were active
(certified) participants in LSAMP activities as undergraduates. The University
System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP), with the University of Maryland, Baltimore County as the lead
institution, has strengthened both the undergraduate and graduate education
pipelines and has created an expanded community of scholars within STEM
disciplines. USM's BD Activity advances knowledge and understanding of graduate
recruitment, retention, and persistence of underrepresented students in STEM
fields. As a result, this program has provided and will continue to provide the
country with well-trained, highly-skilled STEM professionals who will have core
competencies in their disciplines and excellent training in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Maryland College Park (UMCP) is the host
site for the 2016-2018 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity for the USM-LSAMP.
USM's BD supports 12 STEM graduate students selected from LSAMP programs across
the nation and Puerto Rico. The BD Activity at UMCP will broaden participation
of underrepresented students in STEM doctoral programs and in STEM research, by
providing financial, academic, professional and social support to a cohort of 12
graduate students. Through BD community meetings, advising, counseling and
follow-up, BD Fellows will experience a smooth transition into graduate
education and become engaged in a supportive community comprised of students,
faculty and staff. Additionally, BD Fellows will expand their research and
professional training through numerous opportunities to participate in
scientific meetings and research symposia. USM's BD will expand students' access
to professional and personal development resources through a series of
activities in collaboration with the UMCP Sloan Scholars Program, the UMCP GEM
Fellows Program, and the Maryland Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) Program.