* 1612416
* Methods development for systematic investigation of factors driving outcomes in informal STEM environmental education programs
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Robert Powell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 10/31/2018
* USD 299,984.00

Youth environmental education (EE) programs often serve as gateway experiences
in which diverse audiences engage in informal science learning. While there is
evidence that these programs can have positive impacts on participants, little
empirical research has been conducted to determine what makes one program more
successful than another. To be able to conduct such research, this Exploratory
Pathways study will (1) develop and statistically validate ways to measure
meaningful outcomes for participants across a variety of programs and (2) test
observational methods that will enable research that can determine which
elements of program delivery most powerfully influence participant engagement
and learning outcomes in different contexts. These efforts will include
consultations with diverse subject matter experts from the National Park
Service, nature centers, and academia; survey research with participants in
afterschool and free-choice EE programs; and observations of EE programs
designed to fine tune the measurement of program delivery elements and student
engagement. Developing valid and reliable outcomes measures and observational
protocols will enable a larger investigation that will specifically address the
following research question: What program characteristics lead to the best
learning outcomes for program participants in different contexts? This research
will result in empirically tested guidelines that will enable educators to
design and deliver more effective programs for a wide range of audiences in a
wide range of contexts. It is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will refine methods necessary to
undertake an unprecedented study (and future AISL Research in Service to
Practice proposal) to examine the linkages between pedagogical approaches,
participant engagement, and learning outcomes in informal STEM-focused youth EE
programs. The larger study will involve systematically observing a large number
of programs to assess the use of different approaches and to link those
approaches to engagement and learning outcomes through both observation and
survey research. In this current study the team will develop and refine
crosscutting outcome measures to ensure validity, reliability, and sensitivity
by drawing upon the literature and consultation with key stakeholders to develop
suites of indicators for subsequent psychometric testing and revision. They will
also refine observational techniques for assessing pedagogical approaches
through extensive testing of inter-rater reliability. Finally, techniques for
measuring participant engagement, incorporating both observational techniques
and retrospective participant surveys will be refined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will be conducted by researchers at Clemson University and Virginia Tech,
in partnership with the U.S. National Park Service, the North American
Association for Environmental Education, and the American Association of Nature
Center Administrators. This work represents the first step in a longer research
process to determine the "best practices" most responsible for achieving
outcomes in a wide range of contexts.