* 1612490
* California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The
composition of the STEM workforce in the United States, particularly workers
with advanced degrees, does not reflect the demographics of the general
population. By 2020, more than half of the children under the age of 5 will be
part of an underrepresented racial/ethnic group. The goal of the California
LSAMP (CAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) activity at the University of
California, Davis (UC Davis) is to increase the quality and diversity of
students successfully completing STEM doctoral degree programs and increase the
diversity of graduates entering the STEM workforce with the highest level of
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC Davis will host the 2016-2018 cohort of the
CAMP BD, which will provide fellowship support to 12 underrepresented STEM Ph.D.
students. The BD activity at UC Davis is developed based on evidence-based
practices and builds on previous successes of other partner institutions in the
CAMP alliance. BD Fellows will benefit from state-of-the-art research facilities
and a connective network of their peers, post-docs, and faculty, who will be
instrumental to their success along the degree pathway. UC Davis' BD will offer
professional development and rigorous training in specific STEM disciplines
through interactive training and activities that promote networking and
leadership in the scientific and engineering communities. In addition, strong
community-building activities and events that bring the family into the support
network will be pursued. The findings, lessons learned, and impact of the UC
Davis BD will be disseminated through social networks, publications,
presentations at national meetings, and data sharing processes with NSF-
affiliated initiatives and diversity consortiums. UC Davis will implement a
rigorous evaluation and longitudinal study of CAMP BD programs, which would
result in improved understanding about the effectiveness of programs that seek
to increase the diversity and inclusiveness of doctoral-level training in the
STEM fields.