* 1612289
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Tara Mastro, Mastro                  Tara
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Tara Mastro

Proposal number: 1612289

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Tara Mastro is "Reorganization of
postsynaptic signaling complexes by dynamic competition for protein binding
domains." The host institution for this fellowship is California Institute of
Technology, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Mary B. Kennedy.

This research advances our understanding of how new neural circuits that
underlie learning and memory are established in the brain. Specifically, the
Fellow is quantitatively describing newly discovered competitive protein
interactions that underlie learning and memory. This research is producing a
detailed understanding of the systems that regulate synaptic transmission, and
is advancing knowledge of brain function and dysfunction on a molecular and
biochemical level. Furthermore, the research has implications for disease
because recent approaches to treat several neurological disorders have drawn on
what is currently known about the mechanisms of learning and memory and the
process by which synapses are changed to form new circuits.

The Fellow is gaining expert knowledge in neuroscience, specifically in the
molecular mechanisms that underlie learning and memory. Specific training
activities include mastering technical laboratory skills involving neuronal cell
culture and biochemistry, and developing expertise in written and verbal
scientific communication. The Fellow is actively broadening the participation of
under-represented groups in biology by forming support networks to aide in the
retention of disabled people in the sciences, including individuals who have had
a disability over their entire lifetime as well as those who have experienced
onset disabilities. In addition, the Fellow is engaged in outreach to high
school students from under-represented groups, thereby promoting the importance
of diversity among individuals who are in the earliest stages of considering
STEM careers.