* 1612062
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Matthew Borths, Borths                  Matthew        R
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Matthew R. Borths Proposal Number 1612062

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Interdisciplinary Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to engage in research and
training that utilizes biological collections. The title of the research plan
for this fellowship to Matthew Borths is "Mammalian carnivore diversity,
replacement, and extinction when the modern African ecosystem emerged." The host
institution for this fellowship is Ohio University, and the sponsoring scientist
is Nancy Stevens.

This project examines changes in African food webs after the continent of Africa
collided with Eurasia twenty-three million years ago. When this continental
collision occurred, animals native to Africa spread into Asian, European, and
American ecosystems while animals native to these northern continents spread
south into African ecosystems. Before the collision, the top of the African food
chain was occupied by predators from Hyaenodonta, a group of mammals that are
now extinct. After the collision, relatives of modern cats, dogs, and mongooses
invaded Africa and started to occupy carnivore niches alongside hyaenodonts. By
about eight million years ago, the hyaenodonts, once a diverse and dominant
group of carnivores, were extinct. The Fellow is examining this crucial time
period in African history, when carnivores from different continents encountered
one another, establishing a natural experiment that will facilitate
understanding how changes at the top of the food chain affect the ecosystem. To
accomplish this goal, the Fellow is using several biological collections to
analyze changes in African carnivore assemblages, and developing models of the
niches occupied by the once-dominant hyaenodont carnivores before and after the
invasion of carnivores from outside Africa. Newly discovered hyaenodont material
collected in the Rukwa Rift Basin of Tanzania and Meswa Bridge in Kenya is being
described to better understand the full diversity of hyaenodonts during this
ecological transition. Today, carnivores play a significant role in stabilizing
their ecosystems and supporting biodiversity. But, around the world, carnivores
are rapidly being lost in modern ecosystems. The discoveries made through this
project will provide a deep time perspective to policymakers who must confront
the rapid decrease in mammalian carnivore diversity and populations in North
America and around the world.

The Fellow is receiving training in paleobiological methods and niche modeling.
He is also mentoring undergraduate researchers recruited from underrepresented
groups in science, including the Appalachian Scholars program at Ohio
University. The Fellow is making his results accessible to a wider, non-
specialized audience through Past Time, a project he co-created and that uses
blogging, podcasts, and virtual fieldtrips to paleontology labs to illustrate
the scientific process through paleontology. The Fellow is also collaborating
with sponsor Stevens to create online and physical exhibits for a natural
history and environment museum at Ohio University, which will feature portions
of this project. For many K-12 students in Appalachian Ohio and West Virginia,
this museum will be the closest natural history exhibit space.