* 1612816
* DFG/NSF: Demonstration of Position and Speed Measurements in the Quantum Non-Demolition Regime Towards a New Gravitational-Wave Detector Topology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Yanbei Chen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 168,984.00

This award supports a collaboration between Roman Schnabel at University of
Hamburg and Yanbei Chen at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and
is funded by the Gravitational Physics program from Physics Division and the
Global Venture Fund from the Office of International Science and Engineering.
Gravitational forces change the position and speed of a mass. The most precise
measurement devices for gravitational forces are laser interferometers sensing
the motion of mirrors acting as test masses, in particular those built for the
detection of gravitational waves. Theoretical research in quantum metrology has
predicted the possibility to improve force measurements by realizing a quantum
non-demolition (QND) scheme for position and speed. Such a scheme surpasses the
so-called standard quantum limit (SQL), which is a direct consequence of
Heisenberg's Uncertainty Relation and a fundamental, yet not ultimate, limit in
gravitational-wave detectors. Up to now, neither a position nor a speed
measurement noise spectral density beyond the SQL has been demonstrated. This
project studies and demonstrate strategies toward improving the sensitivity of
future gravitational-wave detectors upon this limit. It has an experimental
component at the University of Hamburg, led by Schnabel, and a theoretical
component at Caltech, led by Chen. This project will serve as a training ground
for young scientists, in particular teaching Ph.D. students how to conduct
research within a close collaboration between experimental and theoretical
research groups. Research carried out here will benefit the broader community of
quantum optomechanics, adding new tools for preparing, manipulating and
observing the quantum states of mechanical objects. Techniques developed in this
project will also be applicable to other precision measurement
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are the theoretical
analysis and the construction of a new type of a cavity-enhanced optomechanical
interferometer; the characterization of the interferometric measurement of speed
as a QND variable; and the employment of the new setup's unique properties for
demonstrating a noise spectral density beyond the SQL. The new setup will be
table-top and will comprise for the first time a membrane inside a ring cavity.
In contrast to previously investigated coupled cavities with a membrane in the
middle, the new setup avoids optomechanical instabilities and will allow for
much higher intra-cavity light powers. Furthermore, the new setup has two output
ports, whose combination enables the simultaneous monitoring of membrane
position and membrane speed. This unique feature will be used for a direct
comparison between position measurements that are affected by quantum back-
action and QND speed measurements. The high intra-cavity light powers, together
with the back-action evading property of the new system and the injection of
squeezed states of light will enable reaching and even surpassing the SQL at
temperatures above 5K. The first demonstration and verification of QND
techniques as planned in this project will be accompanied by a detailed analysis
of scalability with regard to detection frequency and test mass size. This would
be development towards a new interferometer topology with unprecedented
sensitivity for the detection of gravitational waves.