* 1612642
* Digital Media and Parent/Child Engagement Resources to Increase Preschool Computational Thinking
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Heather Lavigne, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 05/31/2021
* USD 3,000,000.00

This project will capitalize on the power of story to teach foundational
computational thinking (CT) concepts through the creation of animated and live-
action videos, paired with joint media engagement activities, for preschool
children and their parents. Exposure at a young age to CT is critical for
preparing all students to engage with the technologies that have become central
to nearly every occupation. But despite this recognized need, there are few, if
any, resources that (1) introduce CT to young children; (2) define the scope of
what should be taught; and (3) provide evidence-based research on effective
strategies for bringing CT to a preschool audience. To meet these needs, WGBH
and Education Development Center/Center for Children and Technology (EDC/CCT)
will utilize an iterative research and design process to create animated and
live-action videos paired with joint media engagement activities for parents and
preschool children, titled "Monkeying Around". Animated videos will model for
children how to direct their curiosity into a focused exploration of the
problem-solving process. Live-action videos will feature real kids and their
parents and will further illustrate how helpful CT can be for problem solving.
With their distinctive visual humor and captivating storytelling, the videos
will be designed to entice parents to watch alongside their children. This is
important since parents will play an important role in guiding them in
explorations that support their CT learning. To further promote joint media
engagement, hands-on activities will accompany the videos. Following the
creation of these resources, an experimental impact study will be conducted to
capture evidence as to if and how these resources encourage the development of
young children's computational thinking, and to assess parents' comfort and
interest in the subject. Concurrent with this design-based research process, the
project will build on the infrastructure of state systems of early education and
care (which have been awarded Race to the Top grants) and local public
television stations to design and develop an outreach initiative to reach
parents. Additional partners--National Center for Women &amp; Information
Technology, Code in Schools, and code.org (all of whom are all dedicated to
promoting CT)--will further help bring this work to a national audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can parent/child engagement with digital media and hands-
on activities improve children's early learning of computational thinking? To
answer this question, WGBH and EDC/CCT are collaborating on a design-based
research process with children and their parents to create Monkeying Around
successive interactions. The overarching goal of this mixed-methods research
effort is to generate evidence that supports the development of recommendations
around the curricular, instructional, and contextual factors that support or
impede children's acquisition of CT as a result of digital media viewing and
hands-on engagement. Moving through cycles of implementation, observation,
analysis, and revision over the course of three years, EDC/CCT researchers will
work closely with families and WGBH's development team to determine how children
learn the fundamentals of CT, how certain learning tasks can demonstrate what
children understand, how to stimulate interest in hands-on activities, and the
necessary scaffolds to support parental involvement in the development of
children's CT. Each phase of the research will provide rich feedback to inform
the next cycle of content development and will include: Phase 1: the formulation
of three learning blueprints (for algorithmic thinking, sequencing, and
patterns); Phase 2: the development of a cohesive set of learning tasks to
provide evidence of student learning, as well as the production of a prototype
of the digital media and parent/child engagement resources (algorithmic
thinking); Phase 3-Part A: pilot research on the prototype, revisions,
production of two additional prototypes (sequencing and patterns); Phase 3-Part
B: pilot research on the three prototypes and revisions; and Phase 4: production
of 27 animated and live-action videos and 18 parent/child engagement activities
and a study of their impact. Through this process, the project team will build
broader knowledge about how to design developmentally appropriate resources
promoting CT for preschool children and will generate data on how to stimulate
interest in hands-on activities and the necessary scaffolds to support parental
involvement in the development of children's CT. The entire project represents
an enormous opportunity for WGBH and for the informal STEM media field to learn
more about how media can facilitate informal CT learning in the preschool years
and ways to broaden participation by building parents' capacity to support STEM
learning. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.