* 1612501
* Abrupt Structural Changes in Complex Stochastic Systems with Applications to  Economics, Finance, and Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Haipeng Xing, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Abrupt structural changes in complex stochastic systems arise in science and
engineering, including economics, finance, genetics, industrial quality control,
and public health. An important step to analyze these problems is to develop
appropriate models with parameter jumps and efficient inference procedures. In
the proposed research, the principal investigator will investigate three
complicated problems with abrupt structural changes that recently arise in three
different disciplines and develop corresponding statistical methodology for
them. The first is to develop a modulated Markov model with unknown structural
breaks to characterize U.S. firms' credit rating transitions when the economy
undergoes abrupt structural changes. An inference procedure is also proposed to
analyze the relationship between structural changes in the U.S. credit market
and variations of macroeconomic and firm-specific covariates. The second is to
investigate the issue of learning and control in a sharply changing environment
and develop an approximate policy optimization and adaptive control method for
the analysis of optimal policies, its application to monetary policy analysis is
also discussed. The third problem is to develop a segmentation model that
identifies topologically associated domains in the analysis of chromatin
interactions, which is an important step in the analysis of the next-generation
genome-sequencing data. A statistically and computationally efficient
segmentation algorithm is also proposed to estimate the boundaries of
topologically associated domains. The PI will show how these challenging
problems in different areas can be unified and resolved by the proposed
statistical models and inference procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical
inference problems in complex stochastic systems with abrupt structural changes
arise in science and engineering, including economics, finance, risk management,
genetics, industrial quality control, and public health. There has been an
extensive literature on stochastic systems with simple structural change
mechanisms, however, problems of complex stochastic systems with abrupt
structural changes have been hampered by their statistical difficulty and hence
has not received much attention. In current genetic research, understanding 3D
chromosomal structures and chromatin interactions for decoding and interpreting
functions of the genome can provide important hints toward decoding the
mechanisms of gene regulation and the maintenance of genome stability, as well
as DNA replication, repair and modification, an important step in studying these
genetic events is to identify the topologically associated domains from
chromatin architecture data. In macroeconomic studies, central banks are keen to
control the policy target and estimate the impact of policy action
simultaneously with the presence of the unobservable economic structural breaks,
so that proper monetary and fiscal policies can be taken to mitigate the
potential harmful impact of sharp economic turns. In financial studies, the
2008-2009 financial crisis raises the immediate needs for the regulatory
authorities that the financial market should be monitored based on solid
statistical and econometric models and procedures, and hence an early warning
system should be established to surveillance the stability of financial systems.
The proposed research explores the possibility of building quantitative and
implementable early-warning systems for financial crisis, which aggregates
microeconomic information from individual firms and macroeconomic statistics
from general economic activities.