* 1612451
* CS for Insight: Disciplinary Computing Beyond CS1
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Zachary Dodds, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2021
* USD 298,338.00

Computer Science's traditional role in the university setting has been to
develop skilled software engineers and computing professionals. Eclipsing, not
replacing, that role is the growing need for computing expertise in non-
computing disciplines. The "CS for Insight" project at Harvey Mudd College will
develop a curriculum that will serve as a bridge from a typical introductory
computer science course (CS1) to discipline-specific courses in computing for
many fields. In the "CS for Insight" curriculum students will use existing
computing resources, first to gain confidence in learning new interfaces, and
then will apply these resources to address challenges within their discipline.
The project's broader goal will be to better understand the pathways that non-
computing disciplines may follow to provide their students with the appropriate
computing skills for their specific discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Departments
at schools across the country are exploring the many pathways for leveraging
computation for their specific purposes. Two paradigms have begun to emerge.
Some disciplines "adapt and assimilate," integrating their own computing
curriculum from the very start. Others collaborate to "factor-out-then-follow-
up," choosing to build discipline-specific skills atop a computing-based CS1.
The consortium of Claremont Colleges, simultaneously widely varied and close-
knit, offers a laboratory uniquely suited for comparing these paradigms head-to-
head and exploring the hybrid approaches that will arise alongside. This project
will leverage this disciplinary diversity to draw a more representative cohort
of students to computing. The PI team will carefully track the demographics and
computational identities of the participants to develop knowledge that can be
used by others to create a model by which all disciplines can leverage computing
as part their own unique culture.