* 1612859
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Rena Schweizer, Schweizer               Rena           M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Rena M. Schweizer

Proposal Number: 1612859

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology in
partnership with the Tribal Colleges and Universities program in the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan for the Fellow that will increase the participation of groups
underrepresented in biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship
to Rena M. Schweizer is "Adaptation to High Altitude and Evolution of Metabolic
Pathways in Deer Mice." The host institution for this fellowship is the
University of Montana, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Zachary Cheviron.

This research uses deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) as a model species to
pursue questions about how animals adapt to high altitude, a question that has
long been of interest to biologists. Insights from this work will serve as a
basis for new theories of adaptive evolution, which can be tested with other
animal species. The survival of mice depends on their performance at different
altitudes, and genetic patterns indicate natural selection among populations
living at different altitudes. Differentiation of the hemoglobin molecule (which
animals use to absorb oxygen) in red blood cells between low- and high-altitude
populations of deer mice is a well-studied case of genomic and physiological
adaptation. The process of how oxygen is subsequently transported through the
animal?s tissues is one example of a metabolic network. The Fellow?s research
examines the metabolic networks that control multiple physical traits involved
in how deer mice adapt to high altitude, in order to describe genetic patterns
that are important to adaptation. Methods include sequencing to assess genetic
variation of all genes within each of several candidate metabolic pathways,
precise physiological measurements of multiple traits that affect aerobic
performance in a lab colony of deer mice, and sampling wild deer mouse
populations to assess whether the identified genes are under natural selection.
The results will shed light on the genetic basis of physiological adaptations to
high altitude and will help characterize how gene evolution is affected by
metabolic pathway position.

Training objectives include collecting and analyzing multiple high-throughput
sequencing data types, learning protocols for handling small mammals, and
measuring complex physiological processes. To increase the participation of
students from underrepresented groups, the fellow is coordinating with the
Indigenous Research & STEM Education at the University of Montana to bring in
local learners - including grade school students as well as undergraduates - by
communicating and teaching science. Additional activities include the initiation
of a "Lunch with a Scientist" program, creating hands-on demonstrations in the
field, writing non-technical articles, and creating an informative multimedia
website on the project.