* 1612904
* Sea Surface Temperature-Forced Monsoon Evolution and Variability in West Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Yochanan Kushnir, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2021
* USD 590,414.00

The West African monsoon delivers most of the annual rainfall to the Sahel
region in a short but intense rainy season. Since agriculture remains the
dominant economic activity in terms of percent of population engaged,
understanding and predicting the variability in both the magnitude and timing of
the monsoon season is especially important and potentially devastating if not
prepared for. This work;will directly contribute to improving seasonal to
interannual prediction of monsoon rainfall. The results of this work will be
highly relevant to climate prediction organizations interested in helping the
Sahel such as the International Research Institute for Climate and Society and
its long-standing partners in West Africa. Through various channels, information
from the study can inform applications;of climate information for better
decision-making in the Sahel. The work will also support a graduate student.
Knowledge gathered from this study will also contribute to the teaching of
climate and society in the School for International and Public Affairs (SIPA) at
Columbia University programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to improve the understanding and prediction of the West African summer monsoon,
specifically response to changes in sea surface temperatures in the surrounding
tropical oceans. Information on sea surface temperature fluctuations is
routinely available and is important for climate prediction. The seasonal amount
of Sahel monsoon rains, varies from year to year sometimes dropping to drought
levels with serious effects on society. This variability has been linked to sea
surface temperature fluctuations in remote and nearby ocean areas. Past studies
have shown a that summer monsoon rains tend to weaken and sometimes fail when
eastern tropical Pacific sea surface temperatures are relatively warm, a state
known as the El Niño. Rains tend to be strong and plentiful when the east
tropical pacific are relatively cool, during the La Nina phase. However, this
association is not steady because the region is also sensitive to temperature
changes in other basins, such as the tropical Atlantic and the Indian Oceans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing an atmospheric global climate model, in which
different sea surface temperature scenarios are prescribed in the global ocean
mimicking what is found in observations, this research will elucidate how the
monsoon responds to changes in local and remote sea surface temperature changes
in different basins, acting separately and together. By understanding the
response pattern and the mechanisms of momentum, heat and moisture transport as
a function of time, it is anticipated that possibilities of prediction of
monsoon rainfall, based on pre-season sea surface temperatures conditions, will
be advanced. This experimental method also provides a measure of "signal-to-
noise" ratio in the monsoon rainfall. Putting the observations in that
perspective will help frame better the prediction uncertainties, also helping
advance the quality of monsoon season prediction.