* 1612143
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tricia Rubi, Rubi                    Tricia         L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Tricia L. Rubi

Proposal Number: 1612143

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Interdisciplinary Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative
approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ biological collections in
highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to
Tricia L. Rubi is, "Do epigenetic mechanisms facilitate colonization?
Characterizing methylation profiles in historic colonist populations using
museum specimens." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
Michigan, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Ben Dantzer.

The major aim of the Fellow's research is to conduct novel methylation analyses
using museum specimens to investigate the role of epigenetic effects in adaptive
processes. The role of epigenetic mechanisms (processes that modulate gene
expression) in adaptation is unresolved and contentious. Museum collections are
a remarkable tool for investigating questions related to adaptation because they
allow us to examine change over time. Recently, it was discovered that ancient
and historic specimens retain patterns of in vivo DNA methylation, one of the
best-explored epigenetic mechanisms. Specifically, the Fellow's research tests
the hypothesis that epigenetic diversity acts as an adaptive buffer in
populations colonizing novel environments. Colonist populations must rapidly
adapt to novel conditions, often while faced with relatively low genetic
diversity. In such populations, epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation may
facilitate rapid adaptation by generating phenotypic variation, including
environmentally-induced phenotypes. Focusing on the well-documented northward
expansion of the white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), this research
characterizes spatial and temporal patterns in genetic and epigenetic diversity
over the course of a range expansion in order to test the hypothesis that
epigenetic effects facilitate colonization by acting as an adaptive buffer at
the expansion front.

The Fellow is building skills in molecular genetic and epigenetic lab techniques
and data analysis, and applying these skills to the emerging field of museum
epigenomics. This work helps to build and modernize existing museum resources,
and all genetic and epigenetic data are being made publicly available. In
addition, the Fellow is conducting outreach activities aimed at educating the
public about museum collections and how they contribute to research. As part of
these activities, the fellow is partnering with Detroit-area groups that promote
STEM field participation by underrepresented groups such as low income and
minority youth (MYELIN) and young women (FEMMES).