* 1612412
* Topology and Contact and Symplectic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jeremy Van Horn-Morris, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 101,631.00

Symplectic manifolds are spaces equipped with an additional structure coming
from classical mechanics. Contact manifolds are in some sense a dimensional
simplification, and have historically had connections to the differential
equations of optics and dynamics. In recent years, mathematicians have found
strong applications of the study of contact and symplectic manifolds to our
understanding of three- and four-dimensional spaces. One foundational goal in
topology is to understand the extent certain algebraic simplifications of a
manifold determine the manifold itself. For example, the famous Poincare
Conjecture asks whether the structure of a sphere is determined by a related
algebraic entity known as its fundamental group; a four dimensional version of
this question is still unanswered. Somewhat surprisingly, symplectic manifolds
have played a strong role in answering such questions. In turn, as the field has
progressed, mathematicians have used tools from topology, differential geometry
and physics with the goal of better understanding contact and symplectic
manifolds. This project aims to both use the tools from the study of contact and
symplectic manifolds to further our understanding of three- and four-dimensional
spaces, as well as to develop new tools to increase our understanding of contact
and symplectic manifolds themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In one sense, contact
and symplectic topology bridges the rigidity of Riemannian geometry and the
flexibility of topology, showing traits of both: local flexibility and global
rigidity. Modern contact topology began in the 1980s with Bennequin's work and
was connected to symplectic topology by Gromov and Eliashberg. Giroux brought
topology and contact geometry in 3-dimensions closely together by associating a
topological object, a singular fiber bundle called an open book decomposition,
to a contact structure, as well as a method for describing all open books
compatible with that contact structure. This tool has been extremely effective
at forming connections with low-dimensional topology, allowing for the
construction of new contact invariants, surgery characterization of certain
knots, and the classification of symplectic fillings, among much else. Open
books additionally provide two new intrinsic invariants of the contact
structure: the page, a fiber in the open book, and the monodromy, the gluing map
of the bundle. We call the minimal genus of a compatible open book the page
genus of the contact structure, and it is an extraordinarily interesting
invariant. If the page genus is zero, then we can say a tremendous amount about
the contact structure. If the page genus is not zero, then there are infinitely
many compatible open books and the existing methods for describing them all are
far from effective, which makes determining the page genus impossible. Indeed,
it is unknown whether there are contact structures with minimal page genus
greater than one. This project aims to simplify this picture, first by producing
new invariants of contact manifolds that can be effectively calculated using a
given open book; and second by producing effective mechanisms for listing all
open books as well as determining whether two open books yield the same contact
structure.