* 1612271
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Isaac Ligocki, Ligocki                 Isaac          Y
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Isaac Ligocki&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1612271&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to take
transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ biological
collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Isaac Ligocki is "Understanding the behavioral, physiological, and
neuroendocrine impacts of agricultural pollutants: an integrative approach." The
host institution for this fellowship is University of California, Davis, and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Rebecca Calisi Rodríguez. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this project is to investigate how agricultural pollutants
influence the biology, neuroendocrinology, behavior, development, and population
dynamics of both wild terrestrial and aquatic inhabitants as compared to those
collected from areas free of such pollutants. Agricultural activities, while
critical for food production, can have non-intended negative impacts on farmland
and its inhabitants. In recent decades, the use of pesticides and herbicides has
expanded greatly on farmland and its adjacent or associated water systems,
differentially exposing terrestrial and aquatic organisms to various toxicants.
Little is known about how exposure to agricultural pollutants impacts the
development and survival of wild organisms, or the persistence of their
populations. The Fellow is exploring these questions, using museum collections
as a key element of the study. These collections are providing detailed insights
into the historical impact of pollutants on organisms over the last century, and
enhancing comparisons among current populations. Because many agricultural
pesticides are endocrine disruptors, the Fellow is testing the hypothesis that
exposure to these chemicals will impact the aforementioned biological functions
and behaviors, and predicts that this will be observable from a historical
perspective through comparisons of museum and field collections. This project is
one of the most complete investigations of how certain agricultural practices
affect wild species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow is gaining expertise in a
number of cutting edge research techniques and establishing collaborations with
other scientists, thereby contributing to his success as an independent
researcher. The Fellow's research is facilitating measures to assess,
strategize, and potentially circumvent the negative impacts of environmental
contaminants on human and wildlife communities. The Fellow is implementing a
number of broader impact activities, including educational outreach to students
both locally and in agricultural communities near field sites throughout
California and the surrounding states, with a particular emphasis on broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields.