* 1612307
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Jan Vicente-Raczkowski, Vicente-Raczkowski      Jan
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow?s Name: Jan Vicente-Raczkowski

Proposal Number: 1612307

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Jan Vicente is "Is
the coral triangle a hot spot of sponge biodiversity?" The host institution for
this fellowship is the University of Hawai'i at Manoa, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Robert J. Toonen.

The goal of this research is to characterize the biodiversity of sponges in the
'coral triangle.' This area is known for its generally high level of
biodiversity, but there is very little information on biodiversity of sponges,
an important yet cryptic group. The Fellow is using a newly-developed molecular
tool called ezRAD that allows for efficient sequencing of genomes. Fewer than 1%
of sponge holotype specimens in museums have been barcoded and none have had a
genome sequenced. Genotyping holotype specimens will allow for proper
phylogenetic analysis of closely related species. The Fellow is using this tool
to analyze biodiversity on sponges that settle on Autonomous Reef Monitoring
Structures (ARMS) deployed in the Coral Triangle; this is allowing for
assessment of sponge species and sponge populations of the sequenced holotype
specimens. The Fellow is also making publicly available all of the sequence
data, using the Sponge Barcoding Project, Porifera Tree of Life, GenBank and
BOLD online databases. Making such data available to the public allows
scientists to optimize the quality of barcodes to characterize sponge species
that have settled on ARMS all over the world. The Fellow is also developing a
web-based field guide with photographic images of each sponge species
identified, with up to date discoveries of any cryptic new species. With the
discovery of new species comes the opportunity to evaluate sponges for their
ability to produce antibiotic drugs as sponges continue to be the leading phylum
in the discovery of natural products. The Fellow is also submitting DNA samples
from new described species to the Earth Microbiome Project, a citizen science
initiative that helps reveal the world?s microbial diversity.

The Fellow is expanding his scientific horizons in several ways. He is gaining
expertise in population genetics, phylogenetics and bioinformatics, which will
help him achieve his future career goals. The Fellow is also mentoring students
from underrepresented groups, working with the Toonen lab at the Hawai'i
Institute of Marine Biology. He is also giving public seminars through national
and international meetings as well as general public presentations at the
Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology, the Waikiki; Aquarium, the Bishop Museum,
and the Hanauma Bay Lecture Series. The Fellow's previous working experience as
a Nancy Foster Scholar with the education and outreach coordinator of NOAA's
office of National Marine Sanctuaries allows him to continue participating in
outreach events like ocean festivals, Biodiversity Day and Ocean Science Day. At
the end of the award the Fellow plans to return to Puerto Rico, to become a
professor and continue training the next generation of fellow Puerto Rican
scientists.