* 1612260
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Jose-Pablo Dundore-Arias, Dundore-Arias           Jose-Pablo
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Jose Pablo Dundore-Arias is "The
potential effects of plant root exudates on phenotypic characteristics of
pathogen-inhibitory microbes." The host institution for this fellowship is the
University of Minnesota, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Linda Kinkel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow's research promises a deeper understanding of
the interactions between plants and associated soil microbes to increase our
ability to limit plant diseases and improve plant health. In particular, there
is a need to understand how plants promote beneficial soil microbes that inhibit
plant pathogens. A long-standing view holds that plants regulate microbial
community assemblages in the rhizosphere, i.e., the area of soil that is
influenced by plant root secretions and soil micro-organisms. However, how
plants select for, or enrich, specific microbial populations and the
corresponding functional traits that enhance plant fitness are poorly understood
areas. The fellowship research investigates the potential direct (chemical
signaling) and indirect (nutrient-mediated) effects of plant root exudates on
the phenotypic characteristics of microbes that inhibit plant pathogens, and the
likely implications for plant-microbe ecological interactions and coevolutionary
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship provides training in plant and
soil microbiology (particularly the use of molecular biochemical tools), genomic
sequencing, omics and data mining. The Fellow serves as a role model to other
individuals from under-represented groups by engaging in inclusive-active
teaching and mentoring, and by communicating science to diverse audiences. The
Fellow is targeting teaching and outreach experiences that enhance diversity in
STEM fields, by exposing youth from underrepresented groups in biology to plant
and microbial sciences via hands-on active-learning workshops, and inclusive and
active-mentoring and recruitment.