* 1612264
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ernesto Lujan, Lujan                   Ernesto
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Ernesto G. Lujan

Proposal Number: 1612264

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Ernesto Lujan is "Generating the
mammalian limb progenitor." The host institution for this fellowship is Harvard
University, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Olivier Pourqui√© and Clifford
Tabin.

These NSF funds are being used to generate a type of cell, the limb progenitor,
which is the basis for the limbs of animals and has the capability to give the
limb its form, pattern and structure. The research focuses on the basic biology
of the limb progenitor, but is also of great national interest because it will
advance efforts to use the limb progenitor as the source for generating limbs de
novo, with utility for amputees of war, trauma or congenital defects. To date,
no one has been able to generate such a cell type. This research gives us the
foundation to interrogate the true limb progenitor functionally, genomically and
on the chromatin level, and provides a clear understanding of how this 3D
structure is generated.

Aside from scientific endeavors, these funds are also being used to translate
the potential of modern science to the general public and to recruit
traditionally underrepresented minorities to science. To this end, three active
approaches are being utilized to increase awareness and to recruit minority
students. The first is mentoring - each summer students from underrepresented
groups are recruited through the Summer Honors Undergraduate Research Program
(SHURP), a program at Harvard that recruits underrepresented undergraduate
biology students to do research in a host lab for a summer. The second is
involvement in the community - each year the Fellow helps to judge poster
presentations for the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) and Annual Biomedical Research Conference
for Minority Students (ABRCMS) conferences. The third is more traditional but
important - by publishing good science in high-impact, peer-reviewed journals,
the Fellow is increasing the awareness of the research, providing an effective
microphone for showing that modern science is on the verge of being able to
generate the basis for the mammalian limb.