* 1612964
* Annual National Science Foundation Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellows Symposium
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 11/30/2016
* USD 26,183.00

This award will provide support for the attendees and invited speakers for the
fourteenth Annual NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowships (AAPF)
Symposium, to be held in conjunction with the winter meeting of the American
Astronomical Society (AAS) in January 2016, in Kissimmee, Florida. The purpose
of the AAPF Program is to support integrated research and educational activities
at the postdoctoral level to better prepare Fellows for positions of distinction
and leadership in the scientific community. The Annual Symposium provides a
forum for the Fellows to discuss their research and educational or outreach
projects while increasing their visibility within the astronomy and astrophysics
community. The Symposium represents a key component of the AAPF Program and is a
very effective mechanism to facilitate the transfer of knowledge from
experiences that the Fellows have acquired through their postdoctoral training
to a broad audience.

As with previous symposia in this series, the 2016 AAPF Symposium will promote
interactions among astronomers with very different research interests and
backgrounds. By creating a forum in which discussions can occur across
conventional research boundaries, the Symposium will provide a great opportunity
to gain new insights and pursue interdisciplinary collaborations. The Symposium
will also provide a venue for discussing major issues that are important to
early-career astronomers. In addition, the Symposium will (1) provide a forum
for discussing integrated research and educational activities, (2) facilitate
collaborations between Fellows on both research and education, and (3) provide
greater exposure for the Fellows and the AAPF program within the astronomical
community.