* 1612744
* Intelligent Science Exhibits: Transforming Hands-on Exhibits into Mixed-Reality Learning Experiences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,827.00

The project will develop and research a new system that bridges the advantages
of physical and virtual worlds to improve young children's inquiry-based science
learning and engagement in a collaborative way. The project will use innovative
technology and successful techniques developed for adaptive tutoring systems and
bring this core research into informal learning settings where they haven't been
applied before, with the goal of increasing engagement, learning and deep
inquiry-based understanding in these environments. Museums and similar informal
learning settings offer opportunities for children and families to learn
together in an engaging way. However, without learning supports provided by
people, signage, or technology, people often miss the point of the learning
activity in museums. The project will develop a new genre of "intelligent"
interactive science exhibits that combine proven intelligent tutoring system
approaches with camera-based vision sensing to add a new layer to hands-on
museum exhibits. This intelligent layer provides personalized interactive
feedback to museum visitors while they experiment with physical objects in the
real world. The project is a collaborative effort led by the Human Computer
Interaction Institute at Carnegie Mellon University in partnership with the
University of Pittsburgh Learning Research and Development Center, Children's
Museum of Pittsburgh, and Carnegie Science Center. It is supported by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and innovative
resources for use in a variety of settings, as a part of its overall strategy to
enhance learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
research whether and how learning principles and adaptive, computer-based
technologies that are effective in formal school learning be made effective in
an informal museum experience with hands-on activities to enhance the learning
and engagement of children and parents. The system will use intelligent camera
sensing that tracks and notices children's interaction in physical and virtual
spaces and provides adaptive personalized feedback via the help of an engaging
character. It guides the children as well as the parents to engage in productive
dialogue, helping shape a better parent-child interaction. To investigate this,
the project will further develop an innovative mixed-reality system and smart
adaptive system that gives personalized feedback to visitors based on their
actions, guiding them to understand the world around them like a scientist. The
project will gather data on learner behaviors in mixed-reality experiences in
informal settings to inform how to better design intelligent science exhibits
and derive patterns to support key outcomes, including learning, engagement,
collaboration, and productive dialogue. The project will also research the
application of these design patterns across different science content areas.