* 1612984
* Equilibrium in Multivariate Nonstationary Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Mohsen Pourahmadi, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Nonstationary time series systems appear routinely in economics, seismology,
neuroscience, and physics, where stationarity is usually synonymous with
equilibrium. Such systems are usually multidimensional, and their modeling,
prediction, and control have tremendous social and scientific impacts. Isolating
and identifying equilibrium or stationary features are of fundamental importance
in prediction and control of such systems. This research project aims to develop
methodologies for extracting aspects of multivariate nonstationary processes
that display a sense of equilibrium or stationarity. It is interdisciplinary in
nature and has immediate applications to the analysis of economics, seismology,
and neuroscience data. A graduate student will be involved in the research.

This research project aims to elevate the concept and theory of cointegration
from multivariate integrated time series rooted in economics theory to the more
general multivariate nonstationary time series setup in probability and
statistics. In spite of its central role in econometrics in the last four
decades and well-founded motivations in economics, the cointegration theory
suffers from the requirements that the series be integrated (unit-root
nonstationary) and satisfy a vector autoregressive and moving average model. The
goal of this project is to avoid such restrictions and focus on general
multivariate nonstationary time series. Three distinct methods for computing
analogues of cointegrating vectors and the cointegrating rank will be developed.
The first is a time-domain method in line with the classical (Johansen's)
approach that relies on the reduced rank regression and likelihood ratio tests.
The second method is in the spectral domain and relies on the idea of projection
pursuit. It searches for coefficients of candidate linear combinations by
minimizing a projection index measuring the discrepancy between time-varying and
constant spectral density functions. The third method is concerned with a time-
varying cointegration setup where the coefficients are piecewise constant over
time. Its successful implementation rests on a good solution of the problem of
change-point detection for nonstationary processes, and a novel solution is
explored in this research. The results will have immediate impact in settings
where multivariate time series data are collected, such as in financial markets,
epidemiology, environmental monitoring, and global change.