* 1612790
* Bridge To Doctorate: Mississippi-LSAMP, Cohort 13
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The United States has traditionally been a global leader in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), and as a means to address the national need
for the U.S. to remain globally competitive in the STEM disciplines, the
inclusion of an untapped pool of creative, talented, and intelligent students
historically underrepresented in STEM who earn a Ph.D. is warranted. Jackson
State University (JSU), a Historically Black University, has a strong track
record for preparing primarily African-American graduate students in biology,
chemistry, mathematics, environmental science, computer science, and engineering
for STEM doctoral degrees. To date, JSU's Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program
has produced 34 Ph.D. graduates from underrepresented groups and 139 BD Fellows
have been admitted into doctoral programs. Through their BD program, JSU will
provide well-qualified and diverse faculty members for U.S. universities and
colleges, as well as impact the number of scientists, mathematicians, and
engineers holding the doctorate and entering the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State University will execute a BD program that is
based upon rich and challenging research and academic experiences, the
development and implementation of an independent development plan (IDP),
professional long term goals and objectives, the utilization of STEM summer
extramural research internship experiences at potential graduate school sites
for the BD Fellows' targeted Ph.D. program, and an international research
experience. The BD program has four objectives that are focused on 1) research
and academic preparation, 2) enrichment activities, 3) national and
international partnerships, and, 4) evaluation and student tracking. These
activities along with sufficient financial support from the Louis Stokes
Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation (LSMAMP) program, rigorous
curricula, and committed mentoring will enable their BD program to continue to
reach their goal which is to prepare and increase the quality and quantity of
students historically underrepresented in STEM entering the Ph.D. pipeline.