* 1612258
* Assessing the Impact of Teaching Faculty in STEM Institutional Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Gabriele Wienhausen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

While recent advances in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education research have highlighted promising instructional practices to
improve undergraduate education, widespread dissemination of these practices
remains difficult to achieve at most institutions. One method which may help to
accomplish this is to embed teaching-focused faculty within STEM departments. An
example of such teaching-focused faculty are those holding positions as Lecturer
with Security of Employment (LSOE), a tenure-track faculty position within the
University of California system. The important purpose of this project is to
measure the impact of faculty in this kind of position at the departmental and
institutional levels. This study will be one of the most expansive attempts to
measure institutional teaching culture, in terms of classroom practice, faculty
interactions, and perceptions of instructional practices, across not only
multiple STEM departments, but multiple institutions within a connected
university system. The study will also analyze the role that LSOEs play in
fostering departmental-level collaborations about instruction and in impacting
departmental research productivity. The results of this study will indicate
whether whether this LSOE faculty track can be a means worthy of consideration
in STEM programs at other institutions to increase the spread of evidence-based
teaching practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
institute an assessment plan to (1) determine the impact of LSOEs on
transforming instruction across various STEM disciplines at three UC campuses
(Irvine, San Diego, and Davis) which have recently recruited large numbers of
LSOEs and (2) demonstrate that the assessment methodologies described in the
project can be used for the general purpose of departmental and institutional
evaluation of teaching. The proposed methodologies include social network
analysis, classroom observations, distribution of surveys regarding teaching
practices, collection of departmental publication and funding numbers, and
interviews with UC stakeholders and LSOEs regarding expectations of teaching
faculty. By illustrating that it is possible to utilize these methods in
combination to assess institutional education practices, results from this work
will lay the groundwork for similar studies at other universities.