* 1612741
* Enhancing Weather and Climate  Learning with Fluid Earth Viewer (FEVer)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jason Cervenec, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 349,881.00

The Fluid Earth Viewer (FEVer), an interactive and visually appealing web
application that will allow users to visualize current and past conditions of
our planet's atmosphere and oceans will be built via this award. This free web
application, available to anyone with an internet connection, will directly
impact approximately 2,000 individuals in-person through three field tests and
is expected to reach many more online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FEVer will be an
extension of an existing open-source web application, and the PIs will add polar
data sets, extended options in the user interface, and the ability to view
historical climate/weather data to the existing "earth" app. It will be a
vehicle of modern Earth science communication, making information most often
used by the scientific community accessible and engaging to broader communities.
In particular, it will provide hands-on visualization of the important climatic
role of the polar-regions, their connections to lower latitudes, and the changes
they are undergoing. A companion website, FEVer-Ed, will provide background,
educational support, and opportunities for additional learning through a gallery
of historically interesting atmospheric and oceanic events. FEVer will serve as
a gateway to data sets that have otherwise been inaccessible to audiences
outside of the research community. While a number of large data sets are
included in this proposal (regional and global operational weather
models/reanalyses), the platform is scalable to include other data such as ice
sheet and glacier dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.