* 1612840
* Parent-Child STEM Learning Using Interactive Media.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Carlin Llorente, The Jim Henson Company, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,963,808.00

As a part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings. This Innovations in
Development project will develop new knowledge about joint parent-child
participation in science talk and practices using a 2nd screen app synced with a
television program. "Splash! Ask-Me Adventures" is an app designed to work in
conjunction with a marine science-focused television program for children 2-8
years old that will premier nationally on PBS Kids (Fall 2016). This free app
will include a variety of "Conversation Catalysts" tied to the television
episodes to help parents support children's science learning at home and in
other venues such as aquariums and science centers. The project aims to support
children's conceptual understanding of science concepts and practices, empower
parents and caregivers to facilitate learning during media engagement, and
contribute to the research literature on joint engagement with media.
Collaborating project partners include The Jim Henson Company, Curious Media,
SRI Education, and The Concord Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation in
new methodology and instrumentation resulting from this project includes the
creation of two new research tools to measure (1) families' discourse while
engaging with media and (2)the impact of "Splash! Ask-Me Adventures" on
children's science learning. Potential contributions to society-at-large are:
(1)young learners will be better prepared to meet STEM curriculum milestones in
school and scientific/technical challenges as adults; (2) parents will use new
dialogic questioning skills to become more confident and active learning
facilitators during media and non-media experiences with their children; (3)
Conversation Catalysts, a new sub-genre of educational apps will emerge, based
on proven theories of beneficial adult-child interaction and the impact of
designed joint engagement with media on informal learning; and (4)a new
generation will embrace marine stewardship.