* 1612261
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tayloria Adams, Adams                   Tayloria
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Tayloria Adams

Proposal Number: 1612261

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to develop novel
cell-based biosensors and increase the participation of groups underrepresented
in biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Tayloria N.G.
Adams is "Novel separation of neural lineage cells to determine progenitor cell
characteristics." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California-Irvine and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Lisa Flanagan.

The goal of this project is to sort and characterize neural stem progenitor
cells with a multiple frequency dielectrophoresis (DEP) system, which employs
electric fields to induce cell motion based on intrinsic cell properties. More
specifically, the Fellow is creating a DEP microdevice to isolate distinct
progenitor cells based on their differences in membrane capacitance and using
biological assays to determine the critical cell molecules contributing to
membrane capacitance. In the central nervous system, neural stem cells form
specialized neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes that work together to form
neural networks that transmit information. A challenge with neural stem cells is
that little is known about their transition from stem cells to distinct
progenitor cells on their way to forming final specialized cells.
Dielectrophoresis, a technology that relies on electric fields to study cells,
offers a solution by providing information about cell's membrane capacitance,
which can be used to identify progenitors that will form astrocytes and neurons.
However, the molecular components that contribute to membrane capacitance are
not well studied. The Fellow's research is enabling the characterization of cell
surface molecules that regulate whether a neural stem cell becomes an astrocyte
versus a neuron. The Fellow's research fills a scientific gap by explaining
membrane capacitance in terms of biological function/characteristics, thereby
bridging two disparate fields - cell biology and chemical engineering.
Ultimately, the Fellow's studies are helping to uncover important differences in
these cells and shed light on the processes that control cell generation during
brain and spinal cord formation.

The Fellow is being trained in an interdisciplinary capacity, merging biology
and engineering, and is broadening participation of underrepresented groups by
increasing minorities in STEM. The Fellow's training includes responsible
conduct of research training, career counseling, and professional networking.
The Fellow, recognizing the importance of support programs for minority students
in academia, is working with an afterschool program, Girls Inc., to broaden
participation. As part of this effort, the Fellow is providing girls in grades
5-12 with a biological sciences curriculum designed to explore organ structure
and function. The Fellow's contributions include curriculum development, co-
teaching, and implementing scholarship/internship application components to
introduce students to STEM opportunities. For the girls in this program, the
Fellow is reinforcing a positive learning environment, building confidence, and
establishing a sense of belonging in science and engineering.