* 1612874
* Massive Star Birth, Life and Death: Closing the Loop in the Local Group of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Philip Massey, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 579,519.00

Massive stars are the 'cosmic engines' of the Universe. These stars shine
because of nuclear reactions in their cores. This process also has made most of
the oxygen and carbon atoms that exist today. When these massive stars die,
lighter elements are turned into heavier ones, such as iron. We are literally
made up of this 'star stuff'. These stars also give off so much energy that they
cause new stars to form. Although we understand most kinds of stars pretty well,
there are many things about massive stars that remain a mystery. The goal of
this project is to see how well our theories work by comparing predictions
against observations. This project will give us a clearer picture of what
happens as a massive star ages. The investigators will compare the type of stars
found in different nearby galaxies, using data taken on large telescopes in
Arizona and in Chile. This project will also fund two early-career research
students, and provide research projects for two
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will study massive stars
in several ways. They plan to observe Local Group galaxies, which are close
enough to be studied in great detail. They will observe all massive stars in
these galaxies. Specifically they will determine 1) how changing orbits of
binary stars modify the element formation in massive stars and 2) how the most
massive stars end their lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his
collaborators have begun a survey for Wolf-Rayet (WR) stars in the Magellanic
Clouds. With half of the area covered, the project has already confirmed the
existence of 15 new WR stars, 10 of which appear to be a new type, never before
seen. These discoveries suggest that the population of WR stars in the
Magellanic Clouds may have been underestimated by as much as 40%, and yet for
decades the Magellanic Clouds have served as the linchpins for evaluating
massive star models at low metallicities. When complete, the Magellanic Cloud WR
Survey will permit the determination of what fraction of WR stars have changed
through binary interactions (Roche-lobe overflow) and fraction show changes in
element abundance through single-star material losses due to stellar winds.
Thirty WR binaries have been identified in M31 and M33, and repeated radial
velocity measurements are being made with the 6.5-m MMT telescope, along with
photometric monitoring at Lowell Observatory?s new 4.3-m telescope. This project
will provide similar data on the frequency of binary interactions at higher
metallicity, and provide direct measurements of the masses of WR stars for
comparison with model predictions. The nature of the mysterious, oxygen-rich, WR
stars (WO stars) will be explored by determining accurate surface abundances of
carbon and oxygen. Comparing these observations to models will determine if the
WO stars are truly the "last hurrah" of the most massive stars. Each of these
experiments provides a key piece of information to improve models of massive
star nuclear energy production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
bring undergraduates into his research program, providing a boost to students
from small, liberal arts colleges. This experience enables their students to
successfully compete for entrance to best graduate schools in the country. These
students are drawn from the REU program administered through Northern Arizona
University, as well as Lowell Observatory's MIT Field Camp, which now includes
students from the all-women?s Wellesley College.