* 1612513
* Bridge to the Doctorate at Colorado State University
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1,074,786.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of
all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas
that underpin the knowledge-based economy. With a longstanding commitment to
enhancing diversity through inclusion of all individuals, Colorado State
University (CSU), lead institution of the Colorado LSAMP (CO-AMP), proposes to
extend educational opportunities for 12 underrepresented graduate students as
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Fellows for two years.

The CO-AMP BD at Colorado State will focus on 1) increasing the number of
underrepresented students who successfully complete STEM doctoral programs and
2) continuing to implement institutional change for all underrepresented
graduate students at CSU. Through a well-developed series of professional
development opportunities, coupled with ongoing individual mentoring and
networking, BD Fellows will be well prepared to compete as cutting-edge
scientists, contributing to social, economic, and academic change and outcomes,
where they will serve as role models for the matriculated students
underrepresented in STEM areas. In addition, the developmental components of
CSU's BD will be extended to all graduate programs within the university,
positively impacting the culture at CSU. Ultimately, it will result in not only
an increase in STEM doctoral recipients from underrepresented racial/ethnic
groups, but also the honing of evidence-based practices for the recruitment,
selection, and mentoring of underrepresented graduate students in STEM
disciplines.