* 1612109
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Joseph Graham, Graham                  Joseph         G
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Joseph Graham Proposal Number: 1612109

This award funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016,
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Joseph Graham is "Defining the role of the bacterial
protein BimA in Burkholderia intracellular actin based motility and cellular
fusion." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California - Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Matthew Welch.

The goal of this research is to understand differences in actin-based motility
parameters and the formation of multi-nucleated giant cells (MNGCs) caused by
the intracellular bacterium Bukholderia. In eukaryotes, the actin cytoskeleton
is a key player in regulating cell shape, migration, and intracellular
trafficking. Because of the central importance of actin in eukaryotic cell
biology, it is perhaps not surprising that many microbes (bacteria and viruses)
have evolved the ability to mobilize actin of their hosts' cells to facilitate
intracellular motility and spread during infection. This proposal focuses on
Burkholderia of the pseudomallei group, which are intracellular bacteria that
can use their host cell's actin for motility within host cells during their
infection cycle. Motility is important for cell-cell fusion and the formation of
MNGCs, facilitating cell-cell spread of the bacteria. The Fellow is using
bacterial genetics and live cell imaging to define differences in actin-based
motility parameters and MNGC formation between closely related Bukholderia
species. Additionally, the Fellow is using RNA interference screening to
characterize the host protein networks required for motility as well as
bacterial-driven host cell fusion and MNGC formation. By defining the bacterial
and host contributions to these processes, the Fellow is producing a better
understanding of how species differences evolved, and how they may contribute to
the different host ranges of Burkholderia species, which are otherwise similar
at the genetic level and in their intracellular lifecycle. More broadly, the
Fellow is providing key knowledge about cellular fusion, an event that is
required in uninfected organisms. Thus, the study is potentially impacting the
fields of microbiology, cell biology and developmental biology.

The Fellow is engaged in several activities to broaden the participation of
groups underrepresented in biology. He is providing training to undergraduate
and graduate students, and providing monthly science lessons to schools in the
San Francisco Bay Area, with a group called BASIS (Bay Area scientists in
schools). These schools have large populations of minority students and students
from low income families. The fellow is also working with these schools
independently of BASIS to provide extra help in teaching and tutoring to STEM
students.