* 1612533
* CryptoClub Afterschool and Online: Broad Implementation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Bonnie Saunders, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 02/28/2017
* USD 683,251.00

As a part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings. This Broad Implementation
project would scale up the CryptoClub Project, an afterschool and online program
designed to engage middle school youth in mathematics and cryptography. The
project builds on previous successful work and evaluation that is ready for
scale up using a train-the-trainer model implemented through a partnership with
the National Girls Collaborative. The project will train 160 new CryptoClub
leaders who will then train 800 new leaders at 20 hub sites reaching 9600
students. In addition, professional development modules and webinars will
continue to refresh leader skills. Other project components include an online
multiplayer cryptography game, weekly challenges through social media, and
digital cryptology badges for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses
a think-aloud method with students as they actually attempt to solve the
cryptology problems using mathematical thinking. Three think-aloud studies will
be performed during the Project. The research team will code transcripts of the
interviews for evidence of the mathematical thinking intended to be addressed by
each activity, as well as capturing unexpected kinds of thinking. Tasks will
also be rated according to the type of knowledge elicited. A written report will
include statistical analyses of the think-aloud and interview responses,
interpreted in light of the overall CryptoClub goals. The findings will
contribute to both future research efforts and practice. The evaluation by EDC
uses a quasi-experimental design, which assesses project outcomes for trainers,
leaders, students, and Internet users. EDC will also investigate the fidelity to
the CryptoClub model as it is scaled up. These studies have strong potential for
informing numerous other projects that are at a stage where scale up is under
consideration.