* 1612186
* i-NATURE: Indigenous iNtegration of Aquatic sciences and Traditional-Ecological-Knowledge for Undergraduate culturally Responsive Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Kazuhiro Sonoda, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,305.00

Project i-NATURE (Indigenous iNtegration of Aquatic sciences and Traditional-
Ecological-Knowledge for Undergraduate culturally Responsive Education) will
incorporate Traditional Ecological Knowledge into existing models of STEM
instruction and provide insights into environmental issues that impact American
Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities. It will build an interconnected STEM
program that fosters a culturally sensitive approach to teaching the natural
sciences and resource conservation. AI/AN students have the lowest college
enrollment and graduation rates of any student cohort at mainstream U.S.
colleges and universities, and are significantly underrepresented in the STEM
fields. This project seeks to understand and address this enrollment deficit,
and prepare students for their futures through culturally relevant partnerships,
research, and an experiential, learner-centered curriculum. i-NATURE will
develop a collaborative network between academia and tribal natural resource
programs in the Pacific Northwest, and produce an interconnected academic STEM
program that fosters and builds on an existing cultural gravitation of AI/AN
students toward the natural sciences and resource conservation. It will serve as
model for other underrepresented groups and regions nationwide, as well as those
interested in environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of i-NATURE is
to develop a new, culturally responsive, place-based STEM curriculum that
provides a seamless transition from high school and into the STEM workforce for
American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) students. i-NATURE will develop this model
using multiple partnerships among academic institutions (including Tribal
Colleges) and tribal natural resource programs in the Pacific Northwest. The
program will be tailored to meet the needs of AI/AN students in a culturally
responsive manner while helping students acquire the skills and knowledge most
critical for success in STEM fields. It will also prepare students for the 21st
century workforce. The components of this model include: (i) an experiential
project-based learning model with an emphasis on data analysis and
communication, (ii) intergenerational mentoring, (iii) summer internships, and
(iv) regional partnership development to create programs uniquely tailored for
AI/AN success in STEM. It will generate new evidence regarding the student-level
impacts on learning, success, and affect as a result of a community-driven,
Traditional Ecological Knowledge approach to STEM education.