* 1612376
* Maximizing Collective Impact Through Cross-Sector Partnerships: Planning a SENCER and NISE Net Collaboration
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Lawrence Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2017
* USD 149,987.00

The National Center for Science and Civic Engagement (NCSCE) will conduct a
Collaborative Planning project to maximize the collective impact of two well-
established national STEM learning networks, National Informal STEM Education
Network (NISE Net) and Science Education for New Civic Engagements and
Responsibilities (SENCER). Through a strategic collaboration that leverages
their respective achievements, resources, and expertise, the combined networks
can advance informal science education that engages and empowers citizens and
their communities as they address the complex civic challenges. The project will
conduct a strategic planning process to envision how to unify two networks to
increase a durable and identifiable infrastructure for cross-sector
collaboration focused on linking science and civic engagement. It is supported
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings, as a part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project objective of the planning process is to create a new and expanded
national infrastructure that will increase the capacity of science centers and
other informal learning organizations to enhance the public's engagement with
science through attention to civic issues, and access new partners,
participants, and resources from higher education institutions. The project's
core activity will be a three-stage planning process: Phase 1, an assessment of
assets, resources, and regional complementarity of the networks, and the
development and investigation of key research questions; Phase 2, a planning
workshop involving 29 project leaders from both organizations and stakeholders
from formal and informal science to identify and develop specific collaborative
strategies; and Phase 3, an evaluation and dissemination of the planning results
to the networks and the development of a new multi-year project to strengthen
the national infrastructure for formal and informal STEM education.