* 1612862
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Chris Hamilton, Hamilton                Chris          A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2019
* USD 207,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Dr. Chris A. Hamilton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1612862&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-
represented in Biology in partnership with the Tribal Colleges and Universities
program in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to engage in research and
training that will increase the participation of groups underrepresented in
biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Dr. Chris A.
Hamilton is "Broadening Participation of Native Americans into Collections-Based
Research: Testing Hypotheses on the Hawkmoth-Bat Evolutionary Arms Race." The
host institution for this fellowship is The University of Florida and The
Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH), and the sponsoring scientists are Dr.
Akito Kawahara and Dr. Charles Cobb. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow's research
focuses on the evolution of morphological diversity in hawkmoths, a species-rich
group of insects. This research enhances our understanding of how evolutionary
pattern and process produced Earth's diversity, a key question in biology.
Hawkmoths are large, charismatic moths that are strong, fast fliers, with a
diverse array of forewing shape variation and body size, yet few studies have
investigated the drivers of this spectacular morphological diversity. Between
50-60 million years ago, major evolutionary lineages of echolocating bats
emerged, along with a large radiations of the Macroheterocera, a group of moth
species that includes the hawkmoths. The Fellow is testing the intriguing but
unexplored hypothesis that differences in hawkmoth wing shape and body size are
associated with the diversity of their primary nocturnal predators - bats. This
idea challenges the conventional hypothesis that moth diversification was driven
by plant evolution (because plants are their food source). Across the
approximately 1,500 species of hawkmoths, anti-bat traits can be found which
include ears keen to a bat's ultrasonic echolocation and ultrasound-producing
organs that "jam" bat biosonar. The fast flight of hawkmoths, also thought to be
an anti-bat trait, likely provides the ability to escape predators and cover
large distances as adult hawkmoths seek out food for themselves or host plants
for their larvae. These extended periods of flight would render hawkmoths
vulnerable to predation by bats, putatively providing a strong selective force
that led to evasive anti-bat traits, diverse body sizes, and wing shapes able to
support acrobatic evasive flight; however, no one has tested this hypothesis in
a phylogenetic context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project promotes the
participation of Native American students in biology by using exciting research
questions and an interactive learning approach to characterize hawkmoth wing
shape, investigate the historical evolutionary sequence of anti-bat traits, and
test for correlations between these traits and extant diversity. The Fellow is
engaging middle and high school students from The Chickasaw Nation of Oklahoma,
by utilizing museum collections at the FLMNH to answer fundamental hypotheses
regarding patterns of diversity - effectively linking two of NSF's missions:
increasing minority participation and increasing the utility of biological
collections. This collaborative research introduces the students to the
usefulness of natural history collections (students gather morphometric data on
hawkmoth wing shape and body size), demonstrates how researchers can use these
resources to answer fundamental biological questions, and sparks students?
interest in evolution. In addition, Chickasaw Nation students are being exposed
to their own cultural history during summer trips to the FLMNH; during this time
they work in the collections, assist in DNA extraction and preparation for
sequencing of hawkmoth species, and importantly, discover the history of their
Chickasaw ancestors through interactions with archeological artifacts.