* 1612090
* Autism-Related Characteristics in College STEM Students: Prevalence, Performance, and Mediation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Bradley Cox, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,710.00

Each year, roughly 49,000 individuals diagnosed with autism complete high
school. Approximately 16,000 of them subsequently pursue higher education, with
about 1 in 3 autistic college students seeking a degree in the STEM (science,
technology, engineering, mathematics) fields. Historically, however, people on
the autism spectrum have had poor postsecondary and employment outcomes. Yet the
very traits that can cause students with autism-related characteristics to
struggle in college classrooms may also serve as a springboard from which this
population can make distinctive contributions to STEM fields and workplaces.
This project will highlight the potential of autistic college students, increase
awareness of the prevalence of autism in college classrooms, and provide tools
to shape both institutional policy and instructional practices in ways that
facilitate success for students with autism-related characteristics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although students on the autism spectrum may be
particularly well-suited for success in STEM fields due to their ability to
observe, identify, construct, and apply logical systems of reasoning, college
students with autism are often reluctant to disclose their diagnosis or seek
formal disability accommodations. As a result, these students are typically an
"invisible" minority on campus. To address these issues, this project will seek
to (1) determine the prevalence of autism-related characteristics among college
students entering STEM fields; (2) assess the effect of autism-related
characteristics on student performance in gateway STEM courses; and (3) evaluate
the effect of formal disability accommodations on the classroom performance of
STEM students with autism-related characteristics. The study, thus, examines the
possibility that an already existing but underutilized intervention could serve
as a low-cost, high-yield mechanism to help autistic students leverage their
unique characteristics to complete their STEM degrees, enter the workforce, and
contribute to the national economy.