* 1612937
* ICorps: Innovative Printing Approach for Transdermal Drug Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Basal cell carcinoma is a medical condition in which the cells in the basal
layer of the skin exhibit uncontrolled growth. In 2010, nearly three million
Americans were diagnosed with basal cell carcinoma, which the most common cancer
among Hispanics and Caucasians. This condition is commonly treated by surgical
removal of the affected skin. Unfortunately, surgery can lead to disfiguring
scarring. In addition, complete surgical removal of basal cell carcinoma tumors
near the brain or the eyes may be difficult to achieve. Several non-surgical
basal cell carcinoma therapies have been recently developed; however, these
treatments are associated with many side effects (e.g., inflammation and
erosion). Direct (topical) administration of an anti-basal cell carcinoma
therapy to the cancerous tissue provides several advantages over either oral or
intravenous administration of an anti-basal cell carcinoma therapy, including
delivery of a high concentration of the therapeutic agent to the site of the
cancerous tissue. Toxic effects and other side effects may be reduced by
minimizing exposure of the entire body to the anti-basal cell carcinoma therapy.
In addition, treatments that precisely fit the geometry of the basal cell
carcinoma tumor may be more effective than treatments that are based on
arbitrary tumor dimensions. This project will apply inkjet printing-based
additive manufacturing technology and a drug that shows tremendous promise as an
anti-basal cell carcinoma therapy to overcome limitations associated with
conventional treatment of basal cell carcinoma. This I-Corps team will use
benchtop studies to demonstrate that the microstructured devices exhibit
appropriate skin interaction and anti-basal cell carcinoma properties for
topical treatment of basal cell carcinoma. The goal of this I-Corps project is
to use an inkjet printing-based additive manufacturing approach to prepare
microstructured devices with a biomimetic design for localized treatment of
basal cell carcinoma. The mechanical properties and functionality parameters,
including the stiffness of the medical device material, the anti-cancer activity
of the device material, the fracture properties of the device, and the skin
interaction properties of the device, will be compared against predetermined
clinically-relevant milestones. Microstructured medical devices with a mosquito-
like biomimetic design will be prepared using a combination of
photopolymerization-based additive manufacturing and micromolding. Piezoelectric
inkjet printing will be used to apply an anti-basal cell carcinoma agent that
shows poor solubility in aqueous media to the surfaces of the microstructured
medical devices. An instrumented indentation approach known as nanoindentation
will be used to confirm that the mechanical properties of the microstructured
medical device are appropriate for interaction with the tumor. A benchtop study
involving cancerous and normal skin cells will be used to confirm that the
microstructured medical device eradicates cancerous cells but leaves normal
cells unaffected. Studies with cadaveric porcine skin, a substitute for human
skin, will be used to confirm that microstructured medical device can
successfully deliver the therapy to the skin without fracture. This project will
support the fabrication of demonstrator microstructured medical devices for
eventual human (clinical) studies, leading to the rapid development of devices
for clinical use. In addition, the I-Corps project will assess how to transfer
this innovative anti-basal cell carcinoma therapy from the benchtop into a
viable commercial product.