* 1612831
* Visitor Interactions in Microbiology: A New Genre of Science Museum Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Hans Riedel-Kruse, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

The project will research and further develop an interactive platform, Visitor
Interactions in Microbiology (VIM), that enables museum visitors to influence
and learn about the behavior of live microorganisms. Hands-on museum exhibits
encourage visitors to engage with, and manipulate, scientific content.
Currently, museum visitors experience microbiology by observing microorganisms
through a microscope, through models, or through simulations, all of which limit
interactivity. With the VIM platform, visitors draw on a screen or use a Kinect
motion sensor to generate microscopic light images. The single celled organisms
respond to these images in real-time. Preliminary testing shows that the
platform has significant potential to promote prolonged engagement and science
inquiry by visitors. The project will develop and research additional
technological and design considerations to understand how VIM can be translated
into effective museum exhibits. This project is supported by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which funds research and innovative
resources for use in a variety of settings as a part of its overall strategy to
enhance learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
researchers will first compare VIM to existing microscopic exhibits to
investigate both advantages as well as limitations with the platform. Based on
that research, three iterations of prototypes of VIM and user testing will
explore possible extensions of VIM with respect to modes of visitor
interactions, types of organisms and types of stimuli. In addition to improving
the VIM platform, the knowledge gained from this study will inform a new
approach to informal science learning -- an approach that supports self-directed
inquiry, interest in microbiology, and interest in underlying technology. The
project will produce: (1) research results concerning the potential of VIM and
the variety of interaction modes that are effective using the system and (2) an
open-source catalogue of hardware, software and protocol instructions that will
enable other institutions to take advantage of the research on VIM. Project
research findings and resources will be widely disseminated to practitioners via
conferences and professional journals. The research will provide the foundation
for future work that will include the design of a permanent exhibition.