* 1612775
* Sustaining and Expanding Mobile Making in Underserved Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Charles De Leone, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,740,255.00

This project by California State University San Marcos and their collaborators
will expand and continue to innovate on a pilot Mobile Making program with the
goal of developing a sustainable, regional model for serving underserved,
middle-school aged youth in twelve after-school programs in the San Diego
region. Evaluation of the current Mobile Making program has documented positive
impacts on participants' interest, self-efficacy, and perception of the
relevance of Making/STEM in everyday life, and led to a model for engaging
underserved youth in Making. The work will focus on implementing the program
model sustainably at greater capacity by increasing the number of undergraduate
activity leaders, after-school sites, and level of community engagement. The
expanded Mobile Making program is expected to engage ~1800 middle school youth
at 12 local school sites, with activities facilitated by ~1020 undergraduate
CSU-SM STEM majors. The sites are in ethnically diverse and economically
disadvantaged neighborhoods, with as many as 90% of students at some sites
qualifying for free or reduced price lunch. The undergraduate facilitators are
drawn from CSU-SM's diverse student body, which includes 44% underrepresented
minorities. Outcomes are expected to include increases in the youth
participants' interest, self-efficacy, and perception of the relevance of
Making/STEM in everyday life. Positive impacts on the undergraduate facilitators
will include broadened technical skills, increased leadership and 21st century
skills, and increased lifelong interest in STEM outreach/informal science
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to achieve
sustainability through innovative means such as involving undergraduate
facilitators via Community Service Learning (rather than paid positions), and
increased community engagement via development and support of a community of
practice including local after-school providers, teachers, Makers, and
University members. Evaluation of the program outcomes and lessons learned are
expected to result in a comprehensive model for a sustainable, university-based
after-school Making program with regional impact in underserved communities.
Dissemination to other regions will be leveraged via CSU-SM's membership in the
California State University (CSU) system, yielding a potential statewide impact.
The support of the CSU Chancellor's Office and input from a CSU implementation
group will ensure the applicability of the model to other regional university
settings, identify common structural barriers and solutions, and increase the
probability of secondary implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.