* 1612876
* Interfacial ordering in aqueous solutions: X-ray scattering studies
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2021
* USD 498,689.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Ions dissolved in water determine the properties
of colloids (including commercial products ranging from salad dressings to
paint). The interface between an electrode and an ionic solution is a crucial
part of batteries, supercapacitors and other devices. Surrounding ions affect
the physical properties of membranes and modify the behavior of proteins and
DNA. Understanding the structure and properties of ions at interfaces is crucial
to extracting them from water, whether for desalinization, removal of lead,
arsenic or radioactive elements from groundwater or wastewater, or increasing
the supply or rare earth materials for modern electronics. All these systems and
processes would benefit from a better nanoscale view of how ions actually
arrange themselves near wet surfaces. This project uses synchrotron X-rays to
look directly at how ions are arranged near wet surfaces, while varying the
surface, the ion, the concentration, the temperature, etc. What is learned from
this research will help verify or refute theoretical predictions, and may also
ultimately help design systems with specific properties for practical
applications. This project trains graduate students in an interdisciplinary
environment and gives them experience in the use of synchrotron facilities.
Project-related topics are being incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
courses and web-disseminated teaching materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;A variety of novel and/or counterintuitive behaviors have
been observed in aqueous solutions containing ions. For example, charged
interfaces sometimes attract more counterions than simple electrostatics would
predict ("charge inversion"). Though hydrophobic (nonpolar) surfaces repel
water, they are thought to attract certain ions towards the interface. The
effects of ions at interfaces and around macromolecules can be strongly ion-
specific, e.g. different lanthanides behave very differently. Such effects are
exploited, for example, in liquid-liquid separations processes used to extract
lanthanides and actinides from solution, but the origins are not understood.
These anomalous behaviors are likely to have structural origins. X-ray
scattering studies of interfaces, where one side of the interface is a solution
containing ions, are performed in this project. The goal is to characterize the
distributions normal to the interfaces, and also to understand whether and under
what conditions the ions order laterally to form condensed interfacial phases
with modified properties. The project trains graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment and gives them experience in the use of
synchrotron facilities. Liquids-related topics are being incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses and web-disseminated teaching materials.