* 1612767
* Pre-Alliance Planning for the Coalition for Promotion of Underrepresented Minorities in Academic STEM (PUMA-STEM)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Christopher Reigstad, Concordia University Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 02/28/2019
* USD 117,516.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concordia University will engage in a 18-month
planning process aimed at creating an alliance of institutions, including K-12
schools, in Illinois to achieve the goals of the LSAMP program. The planning
process includes development of an infrastructure based on best practices and
research in a coordinated, effective and efficient process to reduce barriers
for underrepresented minorities in STEM-related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome of the planning process will be
strong established and coordinated partnerships from high school to university
to employment in STEM. The model, with its multi-tiered approach including
implementation of best practice pedagogy, social and/or financial supports, will
result in increased enrollment and graduation from STEM majors as well as a
diversification of the STEM workforce. The partnership structure also provides
for future expansion of the high school-college-industry network to improve
outreach and strengthen the overall academic foundation for underrepresented
minorities in STEM programs.