* 1612380
* Enhancing Explorations in Functions for Preservice Secondary Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* James Alvarez, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

In order to increase the number and diversity of undergraduate STEM majors in
the United States, it is essential to improve students' interest and success in
mathematics before they enter their undergraduate studies. The secondary grades
are especially important for mathematically preparing students for undergraduate
STEM majors, but rigorous and engaging secondary mathematics classrooms require
a well-prepared teacher workforce to facilitate these learning environments.
This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Engaged Student Learning Exploration
and Design project seeks to transform preservice mathematics teachers'
understanding of mathematics early in their undergraduate studies, thus
contributing to the transformation of their undergraduate STEM education. More
specifically, this project will develop curriculum materials for use in
mathematics courses for preservice secondary mathematics teachers as well as
develop instructor materials that assist mathematicians and other instructors in
using these materials in an active learning environment. The materials will be
research-based and focus on targeted, inquiry-based experiences that will
develop a deep understanding of functions as they correspond to the high school
curriculum and the first two years of the university curriculum. The initial
piloting of materials will take place at a research-intensive Hispanic Serving
Institution with over 50% of its teacher preparation candidates coming from
underrepresented groups. In addition, the project will directly involve the
participation of a strong network of teacher preparation programs that use the
highly-acclaimed UTeach STEM teacher preparation model. It will also enhance the
experiences, both in content and pedagogy, for thousands of preservice secondary
mathematics teachers across the country via coordinated dissemination across the
UTeach network and other mathematics teacher preparation programs. As a result,
the project will impact the mathematical learning experiences of hundreds of
thousands of socio-economically disadvantaged students across the country, as
66% of graduates from UTeach programs teach in schools where the majority of
students are low-income. That is, diverse groups of preservice teachers and the
highly diverse students they teach will benefit from the project's
transformation of undergraduate education for preservice secondary mathematics
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by findings from the research literature
regarding secondary mathematics teachers' pitfalls in understanding key concepts
and ideas about functions, the project will enhance and supplement widely-used
resources for preservice secondary mathematics teachers in the first two years
of their university mathematics studies. The project will develop research-based
tasks and explorations that will address key concepts and ideas about functions
that are typically problematic for secondary mathematics teachers, to include
functions versus equations, graphical connections to function patterns, and
other important function concepts. Curriculum widely-used in the UTeach program
will be augmented with an instructor's guide to scaffold the lessons and
explorations for mathematicians and other instructors teaching the course. As
part of the cyclic design process, the project will collect evidence on whether
and how these materials adequately close gaps in understanding of critical
problematic concepts identified in the research literature and therefore, will
contribute to the knowledge base in the specific areas of design and
implementation of inquiry-based materials for preservice secondary mathematics
teachers. The project will generate knowledge about the key characteristics of
such mathematical tasks and about what instructional and pedagogical supports
mathematicians need to implement inquiry-based materials for preservice
secondary mathematics teachers. The project will also provide evidence on how
the curriculum materials and implementation of these materials address
conceptual difficulties that teachers encounter with functions. Thus, the
project will generate evidence for curriculum and instruction that could
transform the education of preservice secondary mathematics teachers. A
distinguishing feature of this project will be the purposeful integration of the
mathematics education research literature on the key mathematical pitfalls or
misconceptions held by preservice and inservice mathematics teachers into the
design and redesign of mathematical experiences and explorations for secondary
mathematics teachers in the first two years of their mathematics studies.