* 1612033
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Nathanael Ellis, Ellis                   Nathanael
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Nathanael Ellis is "Identifying molecular networks
underlying root-root interactions in high plant density adapted maize." The host
institutions for the fellowship are the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center and
the Washington University School of Medicine, and the lead sponsoring scientist
is Dr. Christopher Topp, with co-sponsoring scientist Dr. Yuan-Chuan Tai.

Since the 1930's, annual gains in U.S. maize production have largely been driven
by the adaptation of maize plants to increasing plant density. Two historically
important maize populations, Iowa Stiff Stalk Synthetic and Corn Borer, have
been recurrently selected for increased hybrid grain yield, resulting in density
adapted plants. Preliminary work suggests that not only have root architectures
changed in these populations, but their sensing and growth responses to
neighboring root systems have changed as well, pointing to a new paradigm for
understanding the key process of crop density adaptation. This project aims to
identify the molecular mechanisms of adaptation to high plant density in maize
roots. Thus the research will contribute to our basic understanding of how
roots, the "hidden-half" of plants, communicate with one another, and exploit
this knowledge for crop improvement. The broader impacts include synergistic
training between plant biologists and medical imaging experts, as well as
leveraging the project research objectives to develop teaching tools in a
classroom experience for underserved students. Training will include:
bioinformatics, genomics, advanced image analysis methods, analysis of complex
3D structures, and statistical approaches to quantify the dynamics of plant
metabolism.

Shoot architectures, specifically increased leaf angles, are known outcomes of
selection during maize density adaptation, but little empirical data exists
about the contribution from roots. Selected cycles from progressively density
adapted germplasm will be assayed in several ways to quantify root system
architecture of plants grown individually or paired, to identify changes in root
growth as a function of density adaption. In this project, the effects of
density adaptation on 3D root architecture and growth will be assayed by Optical
Projection Tomography (OPT), and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) to study
dynamic carbon allocation. These efforts will identify the most relevant time
points from which to sample leaf and root tissue for transcriptional profiling,
as well as profiling of root exudates via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
This project will contribute to modelling the relationship of carbon allocation
and root growth in respect to root-root communication and to identify the
underlying genetic mechanisms controlling these processes. Results from this
project will be published in peer-reviewed journals, as well as communicated at
scientific conferences. Data will be uploaded to appropriate publicly accessible
websites, including the NCBI Sequence Read Archive in association with the
maizegdb.org/expression database, as well as the Proteomics Identifications
database.