* 1612619
* Collaborative Research: Mixing Learning Experiences for Computer Programming Accorss Museums, Classrooms, and the Home Using Computational Music
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Horn, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,800.00

This project, a collaboration of teams at Georgia Institute of Technology,
Northwestern University, and the Museum of Design Atlanta and the Museum of
Science and Industry in Chicago, will investigate how to foster engagement and
broadening participation in computing by audiences in museums and other informal
learning environments that can transfer to at-home and in-school engagement (and
vice versa). The project seeks to address the national need to make major
strides in developing computing literacy as a core 21st century STEM skill. The
project will adapt and expand to new venues their current work on their
EarSketch system which connects computer programming concepts to music remixing,
i.e. the manipulation of musical samples, beats and effects. The initiative
involves a four-year process of iteratively designing and developing a tangible
programming environment based on the EarSketch learning environment. The team
will develop three new applications: TuneTable, a multi-user tabletop exhibit
for museums; TunePad, a smaller version for use at home and in schools; and an
online connection between the earlier EarSketch program and the two new devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to: a) engage museum learners in
collaborative, playful programming experiences that create music; b) direct
museum learners to further learning and computational music experiences online
with the EarSketch learning environment; c) attract EarSketch learners from
local area schools to visit the museum and interact with novice TuneTable users,
either as mentors in museum workshops or museum guests; and d) inform the
development of a smaller scale, affordable tangible-based experience that could
be used at homes or in smaller educational settings, such as classrooms and
community centers. In addition to the development of new learning experiences,
the project will test the hypothesis that creative, playful, and social
engagement in the arts with computer programming across multiple settings (e.g.
museums, homes, and classrooms) can encourage: a) deeper learner involvement in
computer programming, b) social connections to other learners, c) positive
attitudes towards computing, and d) the use and recognition of computational
concepts for personal expression in music. The project's knowledge-building
efforts include research on four major questions related to the goals and
evaluation processes conducted by SageFox on the fidelity of implementation,
impact, success of the exhibits, and success of bridging contexts. Methods will
draw on the Active Prolonged Engagement approach &lt;br/&gt;(unobtrusive
observation, interviews, tracking-and-timing, data summaries and team debriefs)
as well as Participatory Action Research methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments.