* 1612405
* Permeating Sustainability and Resiliency Concepts into Civil Engineering Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Hamilton, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 297,343.00

Sustainable infrastructure balances economic, ecological, and societal needs by
being responsive to community health and the environment. Resilient
infrastructure lasts, retaining functional and structural capacity even after
disastrous events. The goal of this institutional and community transformation
project is to revolutionize undergraduate engineering education by integrating
sustainability and resiliency (S &amp; R) concepts throughout the Civil
Engineering (CE) curriculum at Boise State University. Although the focus is on
CE at Boise State, the project has significant potential broader impacts since
the work can be a model for other engineering disciplines and other
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although in recent years, the CE curriculum
has evolved to meet standards imposed by industry, government and accreditation
organizations, these changes have typically targeted individual courses, leading
to important but limited impact on the program. In this project, active learning
S&amp;R modules and appropriate design tasks will be developed and embedded in
the curriculum to expose students to key S &amp; R concepts. Combined with
theory-driven, evidence-based educational research, impact on student learning
will be assessed using methods grounded in the KAB framework which recognizes
three distinct but interconnected aspects of individuals' responses to
educational interventions: knowledge, attitudes, and behavior. Twelve CE courses
are targeted for S&amp;R infusion including Fluid Mechanics, a junior course
that establishes the theoretical foundation for water flow and Civil Engineering
Case Studies, a sophomore course that provides an understanding of the breadth
of civil engineering design. In the latter course, the strategy to infuse
S&amp;R concepts would typically consist of the study of failed infra-structural
systems constructed without proper attention to S&amp;R. Through discussion and
fact-finding, the students will acquire knowledge on how incorporating S&amp;R
considerations in the design process could have resulted in more successful
designs.