* 1612482
* ChemAttitudes: Using Design-Based Research to Develop and Disseminate Strategies and Materials to Support Chemistry Interest, Relevance, and Self-Efficacy
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Lawrence Bell, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,930,748.00

Chemistry is an important and widely relevant field of science. However, when
compared with other STEM content areas, chemistry is under-represented in U.S.
science museums and other informal educational environments. This project will
build, and build knowledge about, innovative approaches to delivering informal
science learning activities in chemistry. The project will not only increase
public interest and understanding of chemistry but also increase public
perception of chemistry's relevance and increase the public's self-efficacy with
respect to chemistry. This project outcomes will include a guide for
practitioners along with activity materials that will be packaged into a kit,
distributed, and replicated for use by informal science educators, chemists, and
chemistry students at 250 sites across the U.S. The project team will reach out
to organizations that serve diverse audiences and diverse geographic locations,
including organizations in rural and inner-city areas. The kits will provide
guidance on engaging girls, people with various abilities, Spanish speakers, and
other diverse audiences, and include materials in Spanish. Written guides,
training videos, and training slides will be included to support training in
science communication in general, as well as chemistry in particular. This
project is supported by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program
funds research and innovative resources for use in a variety of settings, as a
part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take an innovative approach
to develop informal educational activities and materials about chemistry. Rather
than starting with content goals, the project will start with a theoretical
framework drawn from research about affecting attitudes about science related to
interest, relevance, and self-efficacy. A design-based research approach (DBR)
will be used to apply that framework to the development of hands-on educational
activities about chemistry, while also testing and modifying the framework
itself. (DBR blends empirical educational research with the theory-driven design
of learning environments.) Existing or new educational activities that appear to
embody key characteristics defined in the framework will be tested with public
audiences for their impact on visitors. Researchers and educators will determine
how different characteristics of the educational activities defined in the
framework affect the outcomes. The activities will be modified and tested
iteratively until the investigators achieve close alignment between framework
and impacts.. The project team will continue the design-based research approach
both to examine groups of activities in which synergies can have impacts beyond
single interactions as well as to examine varied ways of training facilitators
who can also significantly affect outcomes. In this way, the project will
generate knowledge about how kits of hands-on informal learning activities can
stimulate attitudes of interest, relevance, and self-efficacy with respect to
the neglected field of chemistry. The project teams will broadly disseminate
project outcomes within the educational research, science and informal Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education communities. While this
project will focus on chemistry, the strategies it will develop and test through
a design-based research process will provide valuable insight into effective
approaches for informal STEM education more broadly.