* 1612375
* Collaborative Research:  A study of How Pre-College Informal Activities Influence Female Participation in STEM Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 948,620.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This Research in Service to Practice project
will examine how a wide range of pre-college out-of-school-time activities
facilitate or hinder females' participation in STEM fields in terms of interest,
identity, and career choices. The study will address the ongoing problem that,
despite females' persistence to degree once declaring a major in college,
initially fewer females than males choose a STEM career path. To uncover what
these factors might be, this study will look at the extent to which college
freshmen's pre-college involvement in informal activities (e.g., science clubs,
internships, shadowing of STEM professionals, museum-going, engineering
competitions, citizen science pursuits, summer camps, and hobbies) is associated
with their career aspirations and avocational STEM interests and pursuits. While
deep-seated factors, originating in culture and gender socialization, sometimes
lower females' interest in STEM throughout schooling, this study will examine
the degree to which out-of-school-time involvement ameliorates the subtle
messages females encounter about women and science that can interfere with their
aspiration to a STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Social Cognitive Career
Theory will serve as the theoretical framework to connect the development of
interest in STEM with students' later career choices. An epidemiological
approach will be used to test a wide range of hypotheses garnered from a review
of relevant literature, face-to-face or telephone interviews with stakeholders,
and retrospective online surveys of students. These hypotheses, as well as
questions about the students' demographic background and in-school experiences,
will be incorporated into the main empirical instrument, which will be a
comprehensive paper-and-pencil survey to be administered in classes, such as
English Composition, that are compulsory for both students with STEM interests
and those without by 6500 students entering 40 large and small institutions of
higher learning. Data analysis will proceed from descriptive statistics, such as
contingency tables and correlation matrices, to multiple regression and
hierarchical modeling that will link out-of-school-time experiences to STEM
interest, identity, and career aspirations. Factor analysis will be used to
combine individual out-of-school activities into indices. Propensity score
weighting will be used to estimate causal effects in cases where out-of-school-
time activities may be confounded with other factors. The expected products will
be scholarly publications and presentations. Results will be disseminated to
out-of-school-time providers and stakeholders, educators, and educational
researchers through appropriate-level journals and national meetings and
conferences. In addition, the Public Affairs and Information Office of the
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics will assist with communicating
results through mainstream media. Press releases will be available through
academic outlets and Op-Ed pieces for newspapers. The expected outcome will be
research-based evidence about which types of out-of-school STEM experiences may
be effective in increasing young females' STEM interests. This information will
be crucial to educators, service providers, as well as policy makers who work
toward broadening the participation of females in STEM.