* 1612504
* Exploring the Universe from Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kevin Ponto, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 359,799.00

The goal of this project is to promote informal STEM education in polar research
through a novel interactive learning display that uses virtual and augmented
reality technology. A new display system will be developed that combines the
successful techniques of touch-enabled tabletop displays with new low-cost,
head-mounted display technology to deliver an immersive 3D learning experience
for the IceCube Neutrino Detection system located at the South Pole. The system
will provide new means for engaging the public in learning about the IceCube
Neutrino Dectection system and the challenges of Antarctic research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal relies on collaboration between three groups
on the University of Wisconsin- Madison campus, including the Living
Environments Laboratory (LEL), the Wisconsin IceCube Particle Astrophysics
Center (WIPAC), and the Games Learning Society (GLS). Once developed, the
display system will be installed at the Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery Town
Center, a public space that attracts close to 50,000 people per year. This
proposal was submitted as an Exploratory Pathways proposal, meaning that it
represents a chance to establish the basis for future research, design, and
development of innovations or approaches. Outcomes from this project will inform
the PIs of how best to extend the system to add more 3D environments for other
research locations in Antarctica. The system will be implemented in an
extensible fashion so that a user can select from one of several Antarctic
research station locations, not just IceCube, from the main menu of the system
and suddenly be immersed in a 3D world that seeks to teach users about polar
research at that location. Contents of the interactive learning display will be
translated into Spanish, and users will be able to choose which language they
want to use. Evaluations of the system will also inform designers about how
these museum-type systems impact learning outcomes for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was submitted to the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, but will be funded by the Division of
Polar Programs. AISL seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.