* 1612347
* FGLSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate 2016-2018
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The University of South Florida will serve as the 2016-2018 Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) institutional site for the NSF Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP) Project with the goal of
increasing the number of underrepresented students in STEM who will become the
next generation of scientists, engineers, research innovators, entrepreneurs,
and faculty role models. USF's FGLSAMP BD Project will provide the unique
academic setting and multiple opportunities to facilitate the professional
advancement of LSAMP graduates committed to both achieving outstanding careers
in engineering, computational, mathematics, and scientific disciplines
(physical, biological, geosciences), and shaping the nation's 21st century STEM
research agenda. The new FGLSAMP BD Activity will boldly build upon the
overwhelming success of six previous FGLSAMP USF BD awards (94% of students are
expected to earn an advanced STEM degree) by institutionalizing the best
practices initiated with the 2004 BD Project to all USF STEM majors. The project
also embodies proven organizational and operational principles by extending the
successful LSAMP model of empowering minority undergraduates toward achieving
academic and social integration and professionalization in the sciences into
graduate STEM programs.

By around 2020, more than half of the nation's children are expected to come
from minority or ethnic groups according to the U.S. Census Bureau. In response
to these changing demographics, both the National Academies and the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) have documented the need
to increase the participation of individuals from historically underrepresented
groups in S&E to help maintain the nation's competitiveness in technology and
research innovation. As such, an expected benefit of this university-wide,
unified, institutionally integrated FGLSAMP BD project will be to help
revitalize the national talent pool of domestic PhD trained scientists and
engineers. Another benefit of the FGLSAMP BD activity will be to help address
the critical shortfall of individuals from underrepresented groups who become
STEM faculty. Through evidence-based practices (e.g., proposal writing
preparation, peer-to-peer mentoring, minority scientist role model interactions,
engagement with undergraduates and K-12 students, etc.), this FGLSAMP BD
activity will seek to encourage a greater number of URM students to pursue both
academic careers and nontraditional STEM career pathways (entrepreneurship,
governmental research, industry, etc.) The five measurable objectives for the
project are as follows: 1) Recruit twelve (12) minority students as NSF FGLSAMP
BD fellows by fall 2016 into all USF STEM Colleges, 2) Initiate professional
development activities to prepare FGLSAMP BD fellows and FGLSAMP scholars across
the Alliance for competitive NSF GRFP applications and other fellowship
programs, 3) Support the transition of all USF FGLSAMP BD fellows into STEM PhD
programs, 4) Prepare FGLSAMP BD fellows to become globally engaged researchers
through cutting-edge research projects and interactions with international
scientists; and 5) Implement new graduate student mentoring and outreach
initiatives that will both encourage students to pursue academic careers and
also help to broaden the national participation of URM students in STEM.