* 1612007
* The World in a River: Redesigning an entry level Earth Science course for Pre-Service Elementary Teachers through authentic investigations in a local watershed
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Susan McGeary, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 290,308.00

This Exploration &amp; Design project, of the Engaged Student Learning track of
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program seeks to completely redesign
the way teaching and learning occurs in the entry level Earth Science course
that is required of all elementary pre-service teachers. In doing so, this
project will assist in generating knowledge related to a national critical issue
in elementary school STEM education, that of providing elementary teachers with
the knowledge, confidence and skill to engage early learners in experiences in
science that open the world of wonder of natural phenomena to them. Studies have
shown that elementary teacher education students typically lack strong
scientific content knowledge, have a limited understanding of the nature of
science and scientific processes, and have limited confidence in their ability
to learn and teach science. Furthermore, elementary and early childhood teachers
report low-levels of self-efficacy, competency, and interest in teaching
science; these attitudes are known to impact teachers'classroom science
instruction and the amount of time spent teaching science. The redesigned Earth
Science course will be developed within the framework of the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) and will allow aspiring teachers to experience the
practice of doing science, while also learning how to access and interpret
environmental data on the Internet. The overarching theme will be Earth system
processes as exemplified within a single stream watershed; each unit will be
tied to observations the students can make in the field and online. The goal of
this project is threefold: to increase student learning and skill development,
bolster the confidence of these future teachers in their ability to teach
science, and increase their motivation to learn science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a strategy for teaching Earth
Science to pre-service teachers that is place-based, hands-on, and
technologically enriched. It will involve taking students to the field to
collect authentic data, as well as using data from observatories such as the
Delaware Environmental Observing System and the NSF Christina River Basin
Critical Zone Observatory, as a bridge between fieldwork activity and
classroom/lab instruction. Using a design-based approach - with iterative
design, enactment, analysis, and redesign cycles - will allow the project team
to test and evaluate the impact of these research-based pedagogical approaches
and curriculum modifications on pre-service teacher learning. It will also
inform educational research on Earth Science instruction for non-majors, as well
as broader understandings of how pre-service teachers learn and engage with
these concepts. The project requires approaching the Earth Science content
knowledge expected of elementary teachers from almost the opposite perspective
of that represented in the standard Earth Science textbooks and curriculum,
inverting the broad survey character of the standard course by following the
story arc of a single Earth system, a watershed. By the end of the re-envisioned
course, the following learning outcomes are expected: students will understand
key processes within the Earth system as emphasized by the NGSS, be able to
access, plot, and map online environmental data, be able to design and implement
a basic scientific investigation, be more engaged with and aware of the set of
practices that are science, and be more comfortable with teaching science. The
team will use a design-based approach to curriculum improvement, with iterative
design, enactment, analysis, and redesign cycles. During the three-year term of
the project, the project will employ a quasi-experimental design where the
outcomes of the newly designed course will be compared with the outcomes of the
traditional-format course for both small classes and a large class at the
University of Delaware. The approaches and findings emanating from this project
have the potential to be of benefit to other institutions who wish to implement
a similar program using the rich resources of their specific local context to
enrich the teaching and learning experience of pre-service elementary teachers
and their future students. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is
providing co-funding for this project in recognition of its alignment with the
broader teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort.