* 1612373
* EDUCERE: Ensuring Diversity and Undergraduate Completion: Enrichment and Retention In Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Steven Cox, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,997.00

Northern New Mexico College serves a 77% underrepresented minority and
underprepared population with high attrition rates in the first two years. The
College of Engineering and Technology is developing a research-generated
knowledge base of how this student demographic best learns complex foundational
Physical Science concepts by using the evidence-based Wright State model to
create an introductory Physics course with project based activities that
students will take prior to a theory-based Physics course. Students are being
tracked to determine if this intervention leads to increases in learning,
ability to apply concepts, and retention. Additionally, Native American and
Hispanic students with high degrees of interdependent self-construal are being
studied to determine if they respond better to active learning prior to
theoretical learning.

The investigators will use a matched subjects samples methodology and a
modification of the Solomon four-group research design. In addition,
undergraduate research experiences are being studied to determine if they foster
retention and greater clarity on future career pathways among these unique
populations. The project expects to generate new scientific knowledge of
effective interventions leading to retention in engineering among students from
rural and tightly knit communities. For example, advances in understanding of
how under-prepared populations best learn; contributions to education research
regarding effective practices in engineering teaching and learning among
understudied groups; and discoveries on successful strategies that can broaden
participation of Native Americans, Hispanics and women in engineering programs.
The proposed work is likely to produce a model that can be disseminated to other
institutions facing similar challenges, or those that are focusing on
diversifying engineering undergraduate population in their programs.