* 1612212
* Polar (NSF 15-114): Research Opportunities in the Arctic for Minorities (ROAM2): Elucidating drivers of Arctic ecosystem responses to global change.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Craig Tweedie, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 298,981.00

Few undergraduate programs appear to be adequately designed to prepare students
with data analysis skills, especially as these pertain to Arctic Science. In
order to address urgent challenges and needs in both student training and
global-change science, the overarching goal of this project is to train students
at this Hispanic-serving institution to be leading data professionals capable in
cross-disciplinary collaboration, team science, and scientific communication.
The program will center on the infusion of quantitative skills development in
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) spanning an
undergraduate curriculum that addresses data intensive challenges in Arctic
ecosystem ecology. Using legacy and recent Arctic data resources for the Barrow
area in northernmost Alaska, together with field experiences and lab-based
manipulations, the PIs will orchestrate authentic, collaborative research
experiences, where students will develop research questions, collect, analyze,
and synthesize data, and communicate results in scientifically valid venues on
topics that have yet to be investigated. This proposal builds on the PIs prior
success with both International Polar Year funding for a program that took
underserved students to Antarctica (PLR 0632360), funding for undergraduate
cyberinfrastructure training (DUE 0733055), and funding for a GK-12 program (DGE
0947993). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of novel and vertically integrated
CUREs will be designed that are: i) implemented in both lower and upper-division
courses; b) focused in the area of data-intensive ecosystem ecology; and c)
constructed in a manner intended to enhance students' cognitive and non-
cognitive attributes. Arctic ecologists and a specialist in education research
will collaborate to design the CUREs and complete a formal evaluation of the
educational impact of the proposed activities. Tutorials implemented across the
curriculum, as well as web-based resources, will facilitate skills development
and transfer of knowledge and data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly 200 students
will be impacted directly by this program, which will serve to reinforce a
pipeline of students, especially Hispanic students, into UTEP graduate programs.
Existing archived Arctic data resources will be applied in a training
environment; new complementary data will be collected, integrated, analyzed,
published and archived using standardized format and best practice. Through
contributions to CUREnet and other online media, the PIs will also support
adoption by other institutions. Presentations of results will occur at local to
national scales and be published in peer-reviewed journals, and additional
outreach activities in El Paso and Barrow will also impact high school and
community college students.