* 1612729
* STEM Matters: Investigating the Confluence of Visitor and Institutional Learning Agendas
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Paul Boyle, Knology Ltd.
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,607,694.00

The project will conduct a nation wide study to address three broad questions:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) How does the public view zoos and aquariums and how do
these institutions affect STEM (Science Technology Engineering Mathematics)
learning outside their walls? &lt;br/&gt;(2) How do visitors experience zoos at
different stages in their lives and how do zoo visits affect their knowledge and
perspectives concerning environmental issues and conservation? &lt;br/&gt;(3)
What are the entry characteristics of visitors and how do those characteristics
play out in behaviors during a visit?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to advance understanding of how informal STEM learning emerges through
the intersection of institutional pedagogy and learning goals and the
characteristics of individuals and their social and cultural backgrounds. As the
first institutional study that advances a field-wide research agenda, the
project will map how to implement a national collaborative effort that can help
refine program delivery and cooperation between zoos, aquariums and other STEM
learning institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will describe zoo and
aquarium visitors based on a broad understanding of demographics, group, and
individual perspectives to expand understanding of how these factors influence
visitor learning and how they view the relevance of educational messages
presented by zoos and aquariums. The project will result in reports, workshops
and a handbook presenting findings of practical value for educators, a research
platform and research tools, online discussion forums, and directions for future
research. The project, led by New Knowledge Organization (NKO), will be carried
out through the collaboration of NKO with other informal research organizations
and the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) with its 230 informal science
learning institutional members. This project is supported by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings, as a part of its overall strategy to enhance
learning in informal environments.