* 1612660
* Collaborative Research: Debugging Failure: Fostering Youth Academic Resilience in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Melissa Chen, 9 Dots Community Learning Center
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 607,022.00

Situated within the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, this project
Research in Service to Practice award seeks to design, implement, and evaluate
an intervention aimed at fostering a culture of productive failure practices.
The project responds to a broad concern in educational research and practice:
Experiences of failure are frequently so negative that students shut down, lose
agency, and develop low self-efficacy and learned helplessness. Surrendering too
quickly to obstacles is particularly unfortunate, given evidence that initially
"getting it wrong" ultimately breeds deep and sustained learning. In order to
learn how students can make the most of productive failure, the proposed project
will study how a community of practice that includes middle school youth and
their mentors attempts to change its handling of learning obstacles. Building on
prior research documenting storytelling practices in an afterschool program, the
team now aims to embolden young students' productive practices of failure
storytelling in computer science, a field in which experts practice candid,
pervasive, and collaborative discourse around errors ("bugs").
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulling together the domains of narrative analysis, meta-
cognitive reflection, and control theories of motivation, within the context of
authentic computer-science debugging activity, this study develops a theoretical
framework that views productive responses to failure as a discipline-specific
process of reflecting as a community on how to locate obstacles, how to
construct causal theories about why those obstacles emerged, and how to plan
productive responses. A design-based research approach will investigate three
questions: (1) What is the impact of the interventions on students and
instructors' actions and discourse when they are debugging errors in computer
code? (2) What is the impact of the interventions on students and instructors'
reflections back on their prior debugging experiences and on failure in general?
and (3) What is the impact of the instructor-development efforts on the
instructors' capacity to foster students' productive attitudes toward failure?
The study focus will be 15 summer and weekend coding workshops with 5th-8th
grade students from populations typically under-represented in STEM. The
interventions are (a) setting new norms and practices for debugging, (b)
instructor education, and (c) coding software that provides students with
feedback on their productive struggle. Data sources include video and audio
recordings of the learning environment, artifacts produced during the
activities, and semi-structured interviews. Measures will capture variations in
debugging activities, reflections on debugging, students' ideas about grit and
growth mindset, and instructors' struggles and successes with the new
curriculum. The empirical results will consist of mixed-methods, micro-
longitudinal accounts of how a community of practice works to reform its
orientation to failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of this work include
empirical knowledge, theory, and curriculum about how learning communities help
students develop robust and efficient responses to failure. These will be
disseminated through journals, open-source software, and workshops/conferences
for researcher and practitioners working with youth afterschool programs. The
products may be useful for exploring practices in the classroom. This project is
being conducted by the 9 Dots Community Learning Center, UCLA and UC Berkeley.