* 1612906
* Large-Scale Multiple Testing for High-Dimensional Covariance Structures with Applications to Genomics and Neuroimaging
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Yin Xia, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2019
* USD 53,613.00

Analysis of high-dimensional data has emerged as one of the most important and
active areas of research in statistics. In particular, hypothesis testing for
high-dimensional covariance structures is an interesting and challenging problem
with a wide range of applications in areas such as genomics, medical imaging,
and the social sciences. The methodology developed in this project will be used
to study important problems in genomics and neuroimaging, including
identification of interactions between gene pathways and detection of spatial
voxels that are activated due to certain experimental stimuli. The proposed
methods will be applied to a breast cancer gene expression study and data from
fMRI experiments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator aims
to develop methodology and theory for large-scale multiple testing on high-
dimensional covariance structures. The lack of suitable test statistics, as well
as the complex entry-wise dependence structures, impose significant
methodological and technical challenges not seen in the conventional multiple
testing problem. The proposed research is anticipated to make significant
contributions to large-scale and high-dimensional inference for covariance
structures and its applications to genomics and neuroimaging. Web pages will be
created to enable quick access to software implementation of the new methods, as
well as technical reports and relevant references.