* 1612554
* Advancing Informal Environmental STEM Literacy &amp; Learning: A Co-Created Citizen Science Rainwater Harvesting in Underserved Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Aminata Kilungo, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,260,186.00

A frequently missing element in environmental education programs is a concerted
effort by communities, organizations, government, and academic stakeholders to
build meaningful partnerships and cultivate informal science learning
opportunities via public participation in environmental research. This
collaborative approach not only makes scientific information more readily
available, it also engages community members in the processes of scientific
inquiry, synthesis, data interpretation, and the translation of results into
action. This project will build a co-created citizen science program coupled
with a peer education model and an extensive communication of results to
increase environmental STEM literacy. The project targets historically
underrepresented populations that are likely to be disproportionately impacted
by climate, water scarcity, and food security. Based upon past needs assessments
in the targeted communities, gardens irrigated by harvested rainwater will
become hubs for environmental STEM education and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, gardens irrigated by harvested rainwater
will serve as hubs for environmental literacy education efforts. Researchers
from the University of Arizona and Sonora Environmental Research Institute will
work alongside community environmental health workers, who will then train
families residing in environmentally compromised areas (urban and rural) on how
to monitor their soil, plant, and harvested water quality. The project aims to:
(1) co-produce environmental monitoring, exposure, and risk data in a form that
will be directly relevant to the participants' lives, (2) increase the
community's involvement in environmental decision-making, and (3) improve
environmental STEM literacy and learning in underserved rural and urban
communities. The project will investigate and gather extensive quantitative and
quantitative data to understand how: (1) participation in a co-created citizen
science project enhances a participant's overall environmental STEM literacy;
(2) a peer-education model coupled with a co-created citizen science program
affects participation of historically underrepresented groups in citizen
science; and (3) the environmental monitoring approach influences the
participant's environmental health learning outcomes and understanding of the
scientific method. In parallel, this project will evaluate the role of local-
based knowledge mediators and different mechanisms to communicate results. These
findings will advance the fields of informal science education, environmental
science, and risk communication. Concomitantly, the project will facilitate the
co-generation of a robust dataset that will not only inform guidelines and
recommendations for harvested rainwater use, it will build capacity in
underserved communities and inform the safe and sustainable production of food
sources. This research effort is especially critical for populations in arid and
semiarid environments, which account for ~40% of the global land area and are
inhabited by one-third of the world's population. This program will be available
in English and Spanish and can truly democratize environmental STEM research and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understandings of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.