* 1612640
* iPAGE - Developing a Model for Broadening Participation in Informal STEM Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* E. Liesl Chatman, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,147,161.00

Informal Science, Techology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) institutions
seek to contribute to a scientifically literate culture, which includes new and
innovative learning opportunities, a diverse community of scientists and science
educators, equitable treatment for all, and the development of a well-trained
workforce. In order to achieve these goals, informal STEM institutions must
provide learning experiences that are welcoming and productive for all learners.
The iPAGE model is a comprehensive program that prepares teams within informal
STEM institutions to work with their colleagues to make their institutions more
inclusive learning environments in which to learn, engage in, and identify with
STEM. The project incorporates learning modules, workshops, site visits, and
institution-specific activities all geared to build knowledge, awareness, and
capacity related to creating inclusive environments at informal STEM
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core iPAGE model is based on the US
Department of Agriculture's agricultural extension service. It includes a
Knowledge-to-Action approach, in which individuals adapt what they learn to
local contexts by assessing barriers to knowledge use, selecting and
implementing interventions, evaluating outcomes, and sustaining ongoing efforts.
Through cycles of design-based iteration, the project will improve its practice,
learning modules, and theory of action. Through surveys, interviews, and case
studies, the research team will document learning, barriers to implementation,
and culture change as teams and institutions seek to become more welcoming,
diverse, and inclusive institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.