* 1612049
* Geometric Compactness Theorems with Applications to General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Christina Sormani, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 167,998.00

In General Relativity, spacetime and spacelike slices of spacetime are manifolds
(objects that locally resembles Euclidean spaces) satisfying certain geometric
conditions determined by the Einstein Equation and other physically natural
constraints. The manifolds arising in General Relativity are curved by gravity
and they can contain black holes or thin deep gravity wells, making it
technically difficult to estimate how close the manifold is to a simplified
model, like Euclidean space. New compactness theorems with new notions of
convergence are developed in this project providing fundamental new geometric
tools that can be applied to address these challenges. The principal
investigator has already been invited to present preliminary work in this
direction at various mathematics and physics institutions around the world. As
she has in the past, the PI will include young mathematicians of diverse
backgrounds in this research project.

The PI will seek intrinsic flat limits of noncollapsing sequences of Riemannian
manifolds with uniform lower bounds on scalar curvature. For example, the PI
will consider sequences of asymptotically flat Riemannian manifolds with
nonnegative scalar curvature whose ADM mass is approaching zero, or regions in
such spaces with a uniform upper bound on Hawking mass. Compactness theorems for
such sequences would be useful to prove the Almost Rigidity of the Schoen-Yau
Positive Mass Theorem or the Bartnik Conjecture. Similar methods will also be
applied towards proving Gromov's Almost Rigidity of Flat Tori Conjecture. To
avoid cancellation and bubbling, the PI proposes to forbid the existence of
arbitrarily small closed minimal surfaces in these and other conjectures stated
within the proposal. Various Compactness Theorems for Intrinsic Flat convergence
have been proven in different settings by Prof. Wenger, Dr. Portegies, Prof.
LeFloch, Dr. Perales, Dr. Matveev, and the PI. Prior applications of intrinsic
flat convergence to General Relativity have been completed in various papers by
Prof. Lee, Prof. Huang, Prof. LeFloch, Prof. Stavrov, Prof. Jauregui and the PI.