* 1612387
* GeoScholars at University of West Florida
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Matthew Schwartz, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2020
* USD 294,224.00

The University of West Florida Geoscience Scholars program will investigate the
effect of a multidisciplinary research cohort on student success and pursuit of
graduate studies and careers in STEM and the geosciences. Undergraduate research
in the geosciences will be used as a mechanism for enhancing the perception of
multidisciplinary collaborative research and as a focal point for the
development of "soft" skills, such as verbal and written communication, critical
to professional success. A research cohort model will be used. This model will
be built around multidisciplinary research projects founded in the earth
sciences and employing regular professional skills-development activities to
encourage post-baccalaureate interest in the geosciences. Faculty mentors and
research students from across the STEM disciplines will be engaged in the
project, ensuring students will have opportunities to participate in
undergraduate research in their chosen field of study, while also observing the
application of their field of study to the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pilot and assess the impact
of a multidisciplinary research cohort intended to increase the number of
students prepared to enter the geoscience workforce or continue on to graduate
programs in the geosciences. The project will contribute to the creation of
knowledge related to the impact of multidisciplinary research cohorts on student
success and engagement in STEM graduate studies and careers, both within the
geosciences and in the broader STEM community. This project will research how
multidisciplinary cohorts impact student success and retention, decisions to
continue in a geoscience graduate program, and preparation for the workforce. A
professional skills seminar course will be introduced to help students develop
verbal and written communication skills.