* 1612429
* Workshop Proposal: Wastewater Handling in Outbreak Response - Lessons and Research Needs from the 2014/15 Ebola Virus Outbreak
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Kyle Bibby, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 44,071.00

1612429&lt;br/&gt;Bibby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In March 2014, an unprecedented
outbreak of Ebola virus disease began in Western Africa. In response to the
Ebola virus epidemic, both the World Health Organization and the United States
Centers for Disease Control advised direct disposal of Ebola-contaminated liquid
waste into sewage systems (wastewater collection and treatment systems) and
latrines without disinfection. In the wake of this recommendation, several
questions were raised regarding appropriate handling of Ebola virus contaminated
liquid waste, including the environmental persistence of Ebola virus, efficacy
of disinfection approaches against Ebola virus, and risks posed by Ebola virus
within wastewater infrastructure. In light of the uncertainty and research
following this outbreak, the principal investigator (PI) proposes a workshop to
summarize the state of knowledge on Ebola fate in human waste and the
environment. This topic will be extended to other emerging deadly pathogens. The
goal of this workshop is to summarize current research findings, compare results
utilizing Ebola virus surrogates and the Ebola virus, and move towards a
consensus on recommendations for outbreak response and research needs. The
workshop is proposed to be 1.5 days (tentatively February 18-19) in the
Washington, D.C. region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop
will advance understanding in the handling of Ebola contaminated wastewater by
sharing cutting edge research. It will also inform wastewater handling in
outbreak response. The proposers are well-qualified to conduct the proposed
workshop as each have active funded projects in environmental viral persistence
and quantification, including Ebola virus persistence. The workshop is
coordinated with Homeland Security investigators who are involved in Ebola
studies, and the results of the studies conducted by the investigators will be
compared. The proposed project will promote teaching, training, and learning for
workshop participants. It is the goal of the workshop planners to invite a small
group of postdoctoral scholars and graduate students to enhance participation
and training. The proposed workshop will broaden participation and integrate
diversity through targeting gender balance in workshop participants and
discussion leaders. The results from this project will be disseminated in the
peer-reviewed literature and a final workshop report. Ultimately, this workshop
will lead to improved public health through better-informed wastewater handling
in outbreak response.