* 1612530
* Bridge to the Doctorate: Wisconsin Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Gail Coover, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." Since
national security and economic vitality of the United States require a highly
trained domestic STEM workforce, institutions engaged in the most advanced
levels of research and innovation must do their part to train tomorrow's leaders
in STEM. The Wisconsin LSAMP BD (WiscAMP-BD) builds on the growing diversity of
undergraduate students who are completing their Baccalaureate degrees in STEM.
The long-term outcome of the WiscAMP-BD effort will be to increase the diversity
of leaders throughout academic science and engineering. It is the academic
leaders who direct the nation's research agenda, set public policy, establish
international collaborations with global impact, and train the scientific
workforce.

The WiscAMP-BD program has the following objectives: 1) To recruit and enroll a
cohort of twelve BD Fellows into any of the 54 STEM doctoral programs at UW-
Madison;

2) To pair each of the students who are strong candidates for graduate study and
are underrepresented in STEM with faculty mentors who are engaged in cutting-
edge research and committed to mentoring students from underrepresented
racial/ethnic groups; and

3) To establish a community of practice for WiscAMP-BD Fellows to support the
development of eight core competencies and their persistence to the STEM
doctoral degree.

These efforts will increase the diversity of STEM academic leadership and
contribute to the growing literature on broadening participation in STEM at the
graduate and post-graduate level.