* 1612913
* Multiple time scales, coupling properties, and network interactions in respiratory rhythmicity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 280,000.00

Animals perform a variety of repetitive behaviors, such as breathing and
walking, without the need for conscious control. This automation is made
possible by particular sets of neurons that are specialized to produce the
outputs that drive these behaviors. There are many unanswered questions about
how these neurons generate activity with the appropriate features in a way that
adapts quickly and automatically to evolving conditions, such as changes in
respiratory demand that occur in a switch from a walk to a run. This project
uses mathematical and computational approaches to address several such questions
that arise in the context of breathing. A first set of issues that will be
studied relates to the understanding of how processes that evolve on very
different timescales contribute to respiratory rhythms. A second set of issues
relates to how neurons involved in a particular phase of respiration, as well as
populations of neurons active at different phases, become coordinated to produce
effective breathing rhythms. How these interactions break down to yield
respiratory dysfunction, particularly in the context of the severe breathing
disruptions arising in Rett syndrome, will also be studied. The work will be
completed in collaboration with experimentalists, and results of the project
will lead to improved models of respiratory data and novel ideas on how to
counter respiratory disorders. In addition to enhancing understanding of
respiratory function and dysfunction, this project will have broad implications,
since rhythmic patterns produced by interacting networks of dynamic components
involving multiple timescales are common across a wide range of biological and
physical systems. Trainees contributing to this research will gain experience
with using computational methods to address data-driven questions in
neuroscience. Methods and findings developed will contribute to the training of
students via local group meetings and courses and will be disseminated more
broadly via publications, presentations, and model sharing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of repetitive behaviors fundamental to animals'
interactions with the environment are driven by the rhythmic activity of
networks of coupled neurons. This project will address rhythm generation and
control via a focus on neuronal networks in the mammalian brainstem associated
with respiration. In the rhythms that these networks produce, multiple
populations of neurons take turns activating at specific relative times within
each breathing cycle, and the activity within each population is synchronized
when it arises. This work will analyze how synchronized activity with complex
dynamic features, called bursting, arises in a particular brainstem region
during the inspiratory phase of breathing. Doing so will involve novel
mathematical analysis of the dynamics of systems with components that evolve on
several distinct timescales. This work will lead to new insights into how
respiratory processes should be modeled, which will be useful for the study of
particular respiratory phenomena such as sighing and which will also generalize
to other biological and physical systems with multiple timescale dynamics. New
results will also be attained, using mathematical and computational methods,
about how synchronized bursting in neuronal networks depends on how the neurons
in the network are interconnected and communicate with each other. Respiratory
rhythms must be robust to changes in environmental and metabolic demands, and
these findings will yield predictions about what features provide this
robustness. Finally, this project will use analysis methods that reveal the
dynamic effects of particular parameter variations to elucidate how the
intrinsic properties of neurons within particular respiratory areas and the
patterns of connections between areas contribute to overall respiratory
rhythmicity and to disruptions of respiratory dynamics. These steps will be
guided by novel experimental data and will result in advances in basic
understanding as well as predictions about effective interventions to counter
respiratory dysfunction.