* 1612889
* Graphical Multi-Resolution Scanning for Cross-Sample Variation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Li Ma, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 345,116.00

Identifying variation across data sets is one of the most commonly encountered
statistical inferential tasks, and it lies at the heart of numerous applications
in a wide range of fields from astrophysics and biology to economics and
political science. The recent explosion of "big data" has raised several
critical challenges in detecting cross-sample variation, which render existing
methods inadequate and entail an urgent need for new methodologies. The most
notable and prevalent challenges include complex distributional structures, the
highly local nature of variation, various extraneous sources of variation, data
sparsity, and massive computational demand. The overarching aim of this research
project is to develop a general framework including theory, methods, algorithms,
and software for effectively identifying variation in modern big data sets to
address these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific inference problems to
be addressed in this research project include: (i) identifying differences,
especially highly local variations, across multiple data sets; (ii) separating
intrinsic (i.e., scientifically interesting) cross-sample variation from
extraneous variation; (iii) decomposing cross-sample variation into
contributions from multiple sources; and (iv) identifying cross-sample variation
and variance components in general random objects, including a variety of
processes and functional observations. The use of multi-scale inference and
Bayesian nonparametric modeling has led to development of a general
probabilistic model-based framework for detecting cross-sample variation that
integrates two powerful inference tactics -- multi-resolution scanning and
graphical modeling. Multi-resolution scanning is the strategy of scanning
through the sample space using windows of various sizes, carrying out testing or
estimation for the structure of interest -- the cross-sample variation -- on
each window. A class of graphical models is then designed to incorporate various
dependency structures across scanning windows and data samples, thereby allowing
borrowing strength among windows and related samples to achieve high statistical
efficiency in identifying cross-sample variation. The project aims to construct
a suite of computationally efficient and theoretically justifiable inferential
methods and algorithms and to investigate their statistical properties.