* 1612237
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Elisabeth Forrestel, Forrestel               Elisabeth      J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2019
* USD 228,816.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Elisabeth J. Forrestel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1612237&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2016, Research Using Biological
Collections. The fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow
to take transformative approaches to grand challenges in biology that employ
biological collections in highly innovative ways. The title of the research plan
for this fellowship to Elisabeth Forrestel is "Linking phenology and functional
traits to climate responses of diverse winegrapes" The host institutions for
this fellowship are Harvard University and INRA Montpellier (France), and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Elizabeth Wolkovich and Thierry
Lacombe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how
altered temperature and precipitation together affect the coordination of plant
functional traits and their associated ecosystem services. The Fellow is
exploring this question by studying the coordination of plant phenology and a
suite of plant functional traits related to water use and drought tolerance in
winegrapes (Vitis vinifera L.). Understanding how plants respond to multiple
environmental drivers is a fundamental goal of both plant physiological and
functional ecology. To date, however, research has focused on a limited set of
trait responses to single environmental variables, severely limiting our
understanding of how altered temperature and precipitation together will affect
the coordination of plant functional traits. In particular, phenology, i.e., the
timing of recurring life history events, is rarely incorporated into studies of
plant function. This is despite the fact that a change in phenology is the most
widely observed response of plants to climate change. The Fellow is using the
world's two largest living collections of winegrapes at the French National
Institute of Agriculture (INRA Domaine de Vassal) in Southern France and the
USDA National Clonal Germplasm Repository for Tree Fruit, Nut Crops and Grapes
in Winters, California. The winegrapes in these collections vary over two months
in ripening time and also exhibit a wide range of functional diversity. The
Fellow is transcribing phenological records, and measuring physiological and
functional traits on a diverse set of varieties in these collections to test for
the coordination between plant functional strategies and phenological shifts in
response to climate. The Fellow is also using these data to build biologically
realistic phenological models and make the first robust predictions of climate
change effects on wine growing regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow is
gaining expertise in climate and phenological modeling, and integrating
perspectives from ecological and agricultural sciences into her research
repertoire. She is also establishing important international and
interdisciplinary collaborations. The Fellow's research is yielding results that
are highly relevant to the future of an economically and culturally important
crop, and all data generated including phenological models and projections are
being made publicly available. The Fellow is also mentoring undergraduates, and
is actively engaging the community with her research. In collaboration with
botanists and chefs, the Fellow is offering public seminars and dinner series
focused on the evolutionary and cultural history of food, which includes her
work on winegrapes. In conjunction with the series, the Fellow is developing
teaching modules for high school and undergraduate students, in which students
keep journals on the evolutionary history of what the foods they eat, in order
to explore and appreciate plant diversity.