* 1612475
* Collaborative Research: Taut Foliations and Contact Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Rachel Roberts, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 221,152.00

Contact and symplectic topology are branches of mathematics that are motivated
by Physics, specifically by classical mechanics and thermodynamics. Three-
dimensional manifolds are modeled on the space we live in, and contact
structures arise naturally in the study of three-dimensional fluid flows. It is
the mathematical structure of physical fluid flows that gives rise to contact
topology. This National Science Foundation funded project seeks to extend the
application of physical phenomena to the study of three-dimensional
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important tools in the study of
three-dimensional manifolds is an analysis of the codimension one structures
they support. These include surfaces, foliations, and contact structures. These
structures are most revealing of the ambient structure when they are,
respectively, incompressible, taut, and tight. Some of the major advances in the
field have been made when people gained insight into how these structures
interact. Gabai and Thurston made major advances relating surfaces and
foliations in the 1980's. Giroux's discovery of the interplay between convex
surfaces and contact topology in the 1990's has been extremely useful. In 1998,
Eliashberg and Thurston discovered a surprising connection between foliations
and contact topology that has been very influential and is the starting point
for the proposed research. The PIs propose to better understand the relationship
between foliations and contact topology. This includes extending the
applicability of approximation theorems, and sharpening the conclusions of such
theorems. This includes also an investigation of existence and uniqueness
questions, for both taut foliations and tight contact structures.