* 1612650
* Promoting Lifelong STEM learning through a Focus on Conservation, Geospatial Technology and Community Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Cary Chadwick, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,995,133.00

Community education with regard to science comes in many forms and is usually
designed to address issues within that community. In this proposal, land use is
the focus. This is a general topic and applicable in nearly all locations within
communities and in the State. In this case, the topic is used to educate adults
and high school students providing each with unique identities. Using satellite-
enabled tools, the topology of an area can be mapped in detail and assessed for
use thus enabling science education for both adults and high school students.
The studies will involve intergenerational learning which is an area needing
additional study. Also, the proposers are going to broaden the scope so that it
impacts several different areas in the State of Connecticut. This is important
because in doing so it will include the diversity of cultures within the State
and the education results will reflect this diversity. As a part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and innovative resources for use in
a variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed effort aims to promote
lifelong STEM learning through a focus on conservation, geospatial technology
and community engagement. The goals are to: (1) develop particular STEM
knowledge and skills, and foster STEM identity authoring/learning in two
disparate groups of lifelong learners, and (2) gain a deeper understanding of
the ways that this learning occurs through research and evaluation. The project
will develop an educational program that focuses on conservation science and
recent advances in web-enabled geospatial technologies (geographic information
systems, remote sensing, and global positioning systems) that, for the first
time, make these technologies accessible and attainable for the public. The
focus will be on urban and rural areas with underrepresented populations of STEM
learners. Two groups of lifelong learners will be targeted: adult volunteers
involved with community land conservation issues, and high school-aged
adolescents enabling the project to investigate the processes and impacts of
intergenerational learning.