* 1612282
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Kojun Kanda, Kanda                   Kojun
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Kojun Kanda

Proposal Number: 1612282

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Kojun Kanda is
"Reconstructing global beetle phylogeny one museum at a time: using high-
throughput sequencing of museum specimens to resolve relationships between rare
taxa." The host institution for this fellowship is Northern Arizona University,
and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Aaron Smith.

This goal of this study is to elucidate the evolutionary history and species
boundaries in the darkling beetle tribe Asidini (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae),
using molecular and morphological data from museum specimens. Many species of
insects are described from relatively few specimens, thus hindering studies
reliant upon DNA sequence data such as evolutionary analyses and identifying
cryptic species. Recent advances in DNA sequencing and analysis techniques have
opened the door to accessing molecular data in museum specimens, but these tools
are not yet regularly applied to studies of the most diverse group of eukaryotic
organisms, the insects. Because specimens of this group are extremely rare in
collections, the Fellow is using the majority of the world's holdings of Asidini
from African, European, North American and South American museums including the
Ditsong Museum of South Africa, California Academy of Sciences, and National
Museum of Natural History. In addition to elucidating the phylogeny of an
important insect group, the Fellow is refining protocols to use molecular data
from insect specimens preserved in collections and providing a framework for
molecular-based taxonomic and evolutionary studies for rare groups that are
reliant upon natural history collections.

The Fellow is being trained in techniques used to acquire DNA sequence data from
small museum-preserved insects, such as extracting and sequencing highly
degraded DNA, and utilizing bioinformatics techniques to maximize recovery of
phylogenetically useful data. Broader impacts to the scientific community
include developing protocols and pipelines to help synthesize different data
types extracted from museum specimens, including morphology, biogeographic and
seasonality information, and molecular sequence data. Additionally, the Fellow
is training undergraduates in modern collection-based research techniques by
mentoring them in research projects and through collection- and specimen-based
courses. A public online portal is also being created to share results of the
project with the broader public.