* 1612512
* Broad Implementation of the Better Environmental Education, Teaching, Learning, and Expertise Sharing Professional Learning Model for Outdoor Science Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Craig Strang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,998,091.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program supports new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This project will meet this goal through rigorous
research and the broad implementation of an environmental science literacy
professional development and learning program for informal educators and youth
engaged in outdoor science programs (OSP). With growing support from the
literature and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), much attention has
been placed on creating and leveraging interdisciplinary science learning
opportunities beyond science classrooms. As such, an estimated 300 residential
OSPs currently exist in the United States. Unfortunately, the informal educators
often charged with facilitating these deep and impactful science learning
experiences often lack robust formal training in evidenced-based, age-
appropriate environmental science content knowledge and pedagogy specific for
the youth in their programs. This issue is often more pronounced in under-
resourced and under-served programs and communities. This project will directly
address these pervasive challenges in the field by not only providing much
needed science focused professional development and resources to informal
educators but also by specifically targeting and training informal leaders and
educators serving youth in predominately rural areas, low-income communities,
and underrepresented communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 200 OSP
leaders at 100 OSPs around the country will participate in a week-long,
intensive training in the professional development model at one of five regional
residential leadership institutes. OSP leaders will then redeliver the training
to the approximately 1,500 OSP educators/field instructors in their home
institutions. The OSP educators/field instructors will then use what they learn
through the professional development to facilitate the environmental science
learning program (i.e., curriculum, field experiences, resources, pedagogy) to
over 1 million youth (grades 3-8) enrolled in their residential outdoor science
programs. In addition, a rigorous implementation study, efficacy study and
evaluation will be conducted. The implementation study will investigate: (a)
Which of the professional learning model practices were implemented and (b) What
successes and challenges the programs faced implementing the model. The mixed
methods efficacy study will explore: (a) if outdoor science programs contribute
to the development of science learning activation and environmental literacy?
and (b) what are the features of these experiences that are correlated with
increases in science learning activation and environmental literacy.
Approximately 25-35 youth will be randomly selected from each of 50 randomly
selected sites to participate in the efficacy study. The data and findings from
the research and evaluation produced by this project will contribute to a
relatively sparse knowledge and research base specific to youth efficacy and
implementation processes and practices across nearly 1/3 of the estimated 300
existing residential outdoor science programs in the United States.