* 1612717
* I-Corps:  Advanced Optical Disdrometer for Precipitation Observations
* TIP,TI
* 10/31/2015,04/30/2017
* Firat Testik, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 22,254.00

Disdrometer is an instrument that is typically used for measurement of
precipitation microphysical characteristics such as raindrop/snow size
distributions, shapes, and fall velocities as well as identification of
precipitation type (e.g. snow, hail, rain). Disdrometers are used in various
applications related to geophysical sciences (e.g. meteorology, atmospheric
sciences, hydrology) and engineering (e.g. civil engineering, environmental
engineering). Potential user segments for disdrometers include federal agencies
and similar international agencies, research institutes, universities, airports,
and weather stations. Majority of the disdrometer systems are either optical or
impact type disdrometers, which are associated with various instrumental
measurement artifacts. Although optical disdrometers have a much greater
potential for commercial success over other disdrometer types, this potential
has been mainly hampered due to measurement accuracy issues related to the
optical depth of field.

This team has developed the Advanced Optical Disdrometer (AOD) with high-speed
image recording capability. The high-speed imaging capability of the AOD
provides an ability to monitor the actual shapes and motions of the
hydrometeors. Using image processing, the AOD provides information on the shapes
(e.g. diameter, vertical to horizontal axis ratio, canting angles) and motions
(e.g. fall velocity, acceleration) of hydrometeors with high accuracy. There are
two critical innovative components of the proposed system: volume confinement
principle and the high-speed (up to 1000 frames per second) image recording
capability. Volume confinement principle overcomes the measurement accuracy
issues that are pertinent to optical disdrometers and the high-speed image
recording provides an ability to monitor the actual shapes and motions of the
particles.