* 1612113
* Diversifying CS with a Biology-themed Introductory CS Course at a Large, Diverse Public University
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Robert Sloan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,525.00

This project will create an introductory Computer Science course with a Biology
theme, by adapting and modifying an existing course developed at a small private
college, for use at the University of Illinois at Chicago. The goal of the
project is to attract more women to computer science and enable biology students
to use the power of computing and computational thinking. Implementing this
course at a large scale, in a different academic setting, will result in a
version of the course that will be more widely adoptable. A robust dissemination
plan will raise awareness of the work, and will result in broader adoption of
the course at a national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of
this project will make significant contributions to the knowledge base about
what attracts women and under-represented groups to computing and whether or not
the results that were obtained when this course was taught in a small college
setting can be replicated at a large public institution. The project will
measure student attitudes and capabilities in computing using a variety of
methods including the Computer Science Attitudes Survey. The result will be a
measure of student confidence learning computer science, their attitude toward
success in computer science, their view of computer science as a male domain,
their view of the usefulness of computer science, and their motivation in
computer science