* 1612540
* NSF LSAMP Pre-Alliance Planning:   Mapping a Pathway to Increase College Completion of Minority STEM Students to Meet Regional Workforce Needs
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Victor Vialpando, Community College of Aurora
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2017
* USD 86,817.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program provides
funding to alliances of institutions that implement comprehensive, evidence-
based, and sustained approaches to broadening participation of students from
racial/ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM (African Americans,
Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and
Native Pacific Islanders) primarily at the undergraduate level. These approaches
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.

Beginning FY2016, LSAMP now accepts proposals for "pre-alliance planning grants"
that would support the planning necessary for developing the partnerships and
activities required to form new alliances (including Bridge to the
Baccalaureate). The expected outcomes of these grants include: (i) commitment
from institutional leaders and STEM faculty at partner institutions; (ii)
evidence of cohesive partnerships between institutions; (iii) creation of a
vision and/or theme for a future alliance; and (iv) comprehensive plans for
alliance activities that would lead to the submission of an LSAMP (alliance)
proposal.

With the ultimate goal of forming a Bridge to the Baccalaureate alliance in the
Denver metropolitan area, the Community College of Aurora (lead institution) is
partnering with four other community colleges in the Colorado Community College
System to determine how to collectively build on the successes in STEM at the
individual campuses and expand the evidence-based practices implemented at the
collaborating colleges. Thus, the five partner institutions(Community College of
Aurora, Arapahoe Community College, the Community College of Denver, Front Range
Community College, and Red Rocks Community College) in their proposed "Mapping a
Pathway" project will use the pre-alliance planning grant to collect baseline
data, identify barriers that are inhibiting the progress and graduation of
students underrepresented in STEM, analyze the recruitment and retention
strategies as well as transfer processes, and evaluate institutional
infrastructure for supporting alliance objectives.