* 1612313
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Shanadeen Begay, Begay                   Shanadeen      C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Shanadeen Begay

Proposal Number: 1612313

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Dr. Shanadeen Begay is "Enzyme Design
Principles for Elucidating Enzyme Function." The host sponsoring scientists are
all at Northeastern University (NU): Drs. Mary Jo Ondrechen, Lee Makowski, and
Penny J. Beuning.

The goal of this research is to understand the role of distal amino acids in the
structure and function of enzymes. Understanding the functional roles of all
amino acids in a protein structure, including distal amino acids about which
little is currently known, is key to understanding protein structure and moving
forward the new field of enzyme design. However, there does not exist a natural
enzyme that can act as a catalyst for most synthetic reactions, and it remains a
major challenge to develop the capability to design such enzymes. The Fellow is
exploring the contribution of distal amino acids to: 1) the electrical potential
in the active site; and 2) the dynamic motion, of the human enzyme
phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI). The Fellow is also developing computational
tools that will integrate x-ray solution scattering data with computed molecular
dynamics (MD) trajectories to enhance the understanding of the role of dynamics
in enzyme catalysis. The results will inform the biological community of the
importance of distal residues in enzyme function and design, and help to develop
the basic principles to enable enzyme design.

The Fellow is engaged in several training activities in areas such as: 1)
protein expression and purification techniques; 2) quantum mechanical molecular
electronic structure calculations and protein electrostatics computational
methods; and 3) x-ray solution scattering techniques for protein solution
structure determination. The Fellow is increasing the participation of under-
represented groups, specifically promoting the inclusion of Native Americans in
the sciences, by participating in an NSF-sponsored future faculty development
program administered by the American Indian Science and Engineering Society
(AISES) entitled 'Lighting the Pathway to Faculty Careers for Natives in STEM.'
The Fellow also serves as a role model and mentor to dozens of undergraduate
STEM majors, and is helping promote careers in biology to minorities served by
the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) institutions. Further
benefits to society will result from the Fellow's outreach efforts to broaden
the participation in biology of K-12 students at the North American Indian
Center of Boston (NAICOB).