* 1612858
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* April Wright, Wright                  April          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to April Wright is
"Building a time-calibrated tree of ants using the fossilized birth-death
process." The host institutions for this fellowship is Iowa State University and
the Field Museum of Natural History, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Tracy Heath (Iowa State) and Carrie Moreau (Field Museum).

This project uses the Field Museum's extensive collection of ant fossils to
estimate both the phylogeny (evolutionary tree) of ants and the timescale of
their evolution. Ants are an important presence in the most terrestrial
ecosystems, providing vital ecosystem services of ecological and agricultural
relevance. An estimate of the phylogeny of ants forms the basis for comparative
studies of every aspect of their biology. The newest methods for inferring the
timescale for evolution use the fossil record much more efficiently than
previous approaches, making them more powerful and precise than older methods.
However, these new techniques have not been thoroughly tested. In this project,
the Fellow is evaluating the state-of-the-art methods for estimating the timing
of evolutionary events, in order to generate recommendations on how to best
perform these analyses. This project will involve building software to analyze
the phylogenetic data, which will be made freely available.

The Fellow is receiving advanced training in computational biology, including
experience with C/C++ programming and software development. Furthermore, the
Fellow is using the knowledge gained through these training activities to engage
in outreach activities to women and underrepresented minorities. Thus, the
Fellow is teaching workshops on computational biology at both host institutions,
through the networks afforded by her supervising scientists, including the Field
Museum Women in Science group and the Iowa State Women in Science and
Engineering group.