* 1612861
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Karan Odom, Odom                    Karan          J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

Postdoctoral Fellow: Karan J. Odom Proposal Number: 1612861

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2016, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow to engage in
research and training that will increase the participation of groups
underrepresented in biology. The title of the research plan for this fellowship
to Karan J. Odom is "Investigating elaborate trait evolution in female and male
song across songbirds." The host institution for this fellowship is Cornell
University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Mike Webster, Irby Lovette and
Aaron Rice.

The goal of this project is to reconstruct and understand the evolution of
elaborate bird song in female and male songbirds. Bird song, an elaborate
acoustic trait, is often thought to have evolved primarily in males to gain
access to mates. However, previous research shows that female song is widespread
in songbirds and has been lost in certain major lineages. Therefore, song likely
evolved early in female and male songbirds and the current male-female
differences in song must have resulted at least in part from the evolutionary
loss of song in females. The fellow is using bird song recordings from the
extensive collection of the Cornell University's Macaulay Library, to determine
how song structure has changed over time in both males and females. The Fellow
is developing quantitative methods to allow male and female song to be compared
on a phylogenetic tree, assessing how gains and losses of song structure
contribute to dimorphism, and comparing song dimorphism to a broad range of
ecological and natural history correlates.

The Fellow is receiving training that supports her career goal to obtain a
university faculty position in which she can develop an innovative and dynamic
research program on the evolution of complex animal communication. The use of
existing collections and other resources available through Cornell?s Lab of
Ornithology (CLO) allows the Fellow to build strong computational bioacoustic
and phylogenetic skills while conducting cutting-edge research within her field.
The Fellow is also implementing a substantial outreach and citizen science
component to promote use of biological collections. The Fellow is developing
materials for observing and recording female song that are being disseminated
through a project website that links to Macaulay and CLO?s resources for citizen
scientists. She is also writing popular articles for wildlife magazines and
participating in recording workshops to educate volunteer recordists and
wildlife enthusiasts. Finally, the Fellow is also promoting involvement of girls
in STEM by participating in local science fairs and career days.