* 1612009
* ACCESSS: Adapting Collaborative Classrooms to Equally Support Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Cherie Yestrebsky, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,930.00

Project Adapting College Classrooms to Equally Support Science Students (Project
ACCESSS) will take an important and significant step towards increasing the
impact of improved instruction in active learning courses, particularly for
students with executive function disorders such as attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder or autism spectrum disorder. Active learning
techniques have been shown to benefit the majority of students; however, the
effects of these strategies have not been extensively explored for students with
executive function deficits. Project ACCESS will identify barriers and supports
experienced by students with executive function disorders in science courses
using active learning. Furthermore, the project will help instructors develop
strategies based on a Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework that lead to
improved learning for students with disabilities, as well as students overall;
measure the effects of training on faculty implementation of these strategies;
and disseminate successful strategies for supporting the learning of students
with executive function disorders in active science
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of Project ACCESSS are to stimulate
improved instruction for students with disabilities and to generate knowledge
about effective teaching strategies as well as effective instructor training
models for postsecondary STEM instructors. The project will focus on designing
strategies that support active learning in line with Universal Design for
Learning (UDL) because UDL responds to the inherent variability among all
learners. During the first year of the project, researchers will observe active
learning courses and interview students with disabilities about their
experiences in these courses to identify existing supports and barriers and
develop recommendations for instructors based on UDL principles. In the second
and third years, ACCESSS Learning Communities consisting of faculty and graduate
teaching assistants in the physics and chemistry departments at the University
of Central Florida will learn about and implement these recommendations. The
ACCESSS project team will measure the effects of training on instructors'
implementation of UDL-aligned strategies and will examine student learning
outcomes for students with disabilities as well as for students in other
specific sub-groups, such as women, underrepresented minorities, veterans, and
first-generation college students. Successful strategies developed through this
project will be disseminated through existing university structures and
partnerships, scholarship of teaching and learning projects by Learning
Community participants, and scholarly presentations and workshops by the ACCESSS
project team.