* 1612577
* Developing Guidelines for Designing Challenging and Rewarding Interactive Science Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Christine Reich, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,802,876.00

The project will research how informal science learning can be supported while
museum visitors are engaged in "productive struggle" with interactive exhibits.
Often informal science learning projects focus on developing positive affective
outcomes. Research has shown, however, that negative affective experiences such
as struggle and challenge can be particularly powerful for learning. Learners
who experience struggle and effort are likely to adopt a growth mindset, in
which they attribute their mastery of skills and understanding to effort rather
than innate ability. This been shown to be an important factor in lifelong
learning, academic achievement, and persistence. The research will develop and
refine a model of productive struggle and its impact in designed informal
science learning experiences, and will elaborate a flexible set of evidence-
based design guidelines and strategies for eliciting and supporting visitor
engagement in productive struggle. This project is supported by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which funds research and innovative
resources for use in a variety of settings as a part of its overall strategy to
enhance learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
suggests that productive struggle, which manifests itself as confusion or even
frustration, can occur when learners actively engage in challenges that push
them just beyond the limits of their existing capabilities. For learners to
engage in productive struggle, they must perceive that their efforts will be
worthwhile. The research will (1) explore the individual and contextual factors
associated with the emotional experience of productive struggle during informal
learning experiences, (2) elaborate how learning experience design strategies
can be implemented to support diverse learners to successfully engage in
productive struggle, and (3) examine the relationships between productive
struggle experiences, learner characteristics, and desired learning outcomes.
Through an iterative research process involving qualitative comparative
analysis, design-based research, and descriptive quantitative analysis, the
proposed project will develop an empirically-tested theoretical model and a
refined and tested set of guidelines and strategies for designing informal
learning experiences which encourage productive struggle.