* 1612445
* Exploring the Relationships Among Metacognition-based Study Practices, Student Learning and Retention in an Undergraduate Engineering Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Patti Wojahn, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,942.00

Due to fast-paced technological advances and competitive global economy,
engineering education in the US must impart competencies and skills at all
cognitive levels to an increasingly diverse population. Educators must not only
strive to enhance learning in engineering and the preparedness of our graduates,
but also strive to diversify the engineering workforce. This project, housed at
a Hispanic-Serving Institution, draws on a population of first-generation,
academically-disadvantaged, and economically-disadvantaged students to explore
the relationships of metacognition practices on learning and retention. It is
known that many freshmen students do not fully comprehend the importance of
effective strategies for college and lifelong learning. The proposed research
will develop and study growth in metacognitive self-awareness, and self-study
strategies of freshmen engineering students in the College of Engineering at New
Mexico State University. This project has the potential to positively impact
student retention in engineering, especially with many under-represented
populations, through the investigation and dissemination of effective
metacognitive practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research
program is to enhance student academic performance and improve retention in
engineering. The objectives are to (1) investigate and implement metacognitive
strategies and study practices leading to increased learning and critical
thinking, (2) Investigate the impacts of metacognitive study practices
engineering student retention, and (3) disseminate and provide awareness of such
strategies among engineering faculty. The project will involve activities such
as: (a) the use of a Metacognition Awareness Inventory (MAI) and study practices
self-assessment survey, (b) employment of instructional content and tools to
support freshman engineering students with understanding fundamentals of
metacognition, (c) investigation of correlations between metacognitive
strategies and academic achievement, (d) evaluation of instruments and
interventions for validity and reliability using quantitative and qualitative
research methods, and (e) provision of annual faculty development workshops on
metacognitive practices. Findings on the relationships among student study
practices, learning performance, retention and metacognition in engineering, as
well as validated instruments will be of value to STEM education in general.