* 1612978
* From Approximate to Exact Designs with Applications to Big Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Wei Zheng, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2018
* USD 149,983.00

Design of experiments is an integral part of the scientific process in many
areas of research with a direct impact on society, such as the biological
sciences, the health sciences, the social sciences, engineering, marketing, and
education. A well-chosen design facilitates the collection of data that, at a
minimum cost, maximizes the information for the scientific questions of
interest. Many scientific studies allow for repeated use of conceptual units, so
that developing tools for optimal design for these problems has great potential
impact. Particularly in the realm of big data, there is much room for
improvement of existing methods for design of experiments, and the tools and
concepts under development in this research project have potential to lead to
significant gain of information without increasing computational cost. Results
from the project will be made available to researchers in other areas through
easy-to-use software that implements the algorithms to be developed. Graduate
students will be trained to become researchers in design of experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to result in a major leap forward in
understanding and knowledge of optimal design of experiments. Recent work in the
field has had a significant impact on the advancement of optimal crossover
designs and designs for interference models for arbitrarily given covariance
structures and design size configurations. However, these results have for the
most part been limited to approximate designs for relatively simple models.
While these results are arguably important in their own right, this project will
extend methods and tools to achieve the ultimate goal of deriving exact designs
for a wider spectrum of practical models. The results will be a much needed
addition to our collective design toolbox. Most importantly, this project will
go beyond the territory of design and apply the tools and ideas from design of
experiments to subsampling problems emerging in big data with both statistical
and machine learning methods under consideration. Preliminary results indicate
that this is an opportune time to make these challenging but critical steps.