* 1612144
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Network Coordination Office
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Billy Edge, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 4,662,120.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards engineering research
community with access to research infrastructure. NHERI will be comprised of
separate research infrastructure awards for a Network Coordination Office
(NCO)-this award, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities for earthquake and wind hazards engineering
research, including a post-disaster, rapid response research (RAPID) facility.
NHERI awards will contribute to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.
NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake engineering research infrastructure
previously supported under the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but now broadens that support to
include wind and coastal hazards engineering research infrastructure. NHERI has
the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience and
sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other structures,
underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the natural
hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to minimize loss of life,
damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be available
on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide the NCO component for NHERI. The NCO will serve as the leader and focal
point for NHERI, building a global, multi-hazard, collaborative research
community and research infrastructure focused on mitigating the impacts of
earthquakes, windstorms, and related hazards of tsunamis and storm surge on
civil infrastructure. The NCO will provide the following activities for NHERI:
(a) convene and support the governance groups, (b) schedule NSF-supported users
at the NHERI Experimental Facilities, including the RAPID facility, (c)
coordinate an annual NHERI-wide work plan, (d) develop and maintain the NHERI
Science Plan, (e) form national and international strategic partnerships that
can leverage and broaden NHERI resources, and (f) implement an education and
community outreach (ECO) program. The ECO program will include an annual NHERI-
wide research experiences for undergraduates (REU) site program, an annual NHERI
Summer Institute, broadening participation of groups underrepresented in natural
hazards engineering research, and dissemination of information about NHERI
accomplishments and impact. The NHERI Science Plan will incorporate the Science
Plans of the individual NHERI components, as well as contributions from the
broader stakeholder community, to identify the grand challenges, key questions,
and objectives for earthquake and wind hazards engineering research. Through the
NCO's community coordination of NHERI's human, experimental, and cyber
resources, researchers will be empowered to build new knowledge and innovation
for national resilience and sustainability of civil infrastructure with fewer
fatalities, less interruption to societal functions, and reduced economic loss.