* 1612872
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Hiding Hay in a Haystack: Integrating Censorship Resistance into the Mainstream Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 07/26/2015,08/31/2018
* Vitaly Shmatikov, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 515,026.00

Freedom and openness of the Internet are under threat. Government censors in
non-democratic countries are deploying network filters to block sources of
uncensored information, suppress dissent, and prevent citizens from using the
Internet to exercise their human rights such as freedom of speech and freedom of
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to deliver robust censorship-
resistant communication systems for today's and future Internet. The main
principle behind this research is that censorship resistance must cease being an
ad-hoc, add-on component and instead become a first-class property of the
networking infrastructure. In contrast to the existing circumvention tools,
which are easy to recognize and block, censoring the communication technologies
developed by this project comes at a significant technical, economic, and social
cost to the would-be censors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses
several research thrusts. The first thrust is integrating support for
censorship-resistant communications directly into popular networked services
(for example, cloud storage and streaming video) that already provide encrypted
channels and cannot be easily blocked without causing significant disruption.
The second thrust is devoted to new multi-streaming transport protocols and
ubiquitous proxying systems that, by design, hide the contents of transmitted
information and thus resist censorship. The third thrust is the study of
censorship risks in future Internet architectures, as well as the design and
implementation of censorship resistance mechanisms for these
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this project aims to produce
censorship-resistant communication systems and networking protocols that help
make free Internet accessible to millions of potential users, encouraging and
fostering democracy and human rights throughout the world.