* 1613653
* RUI: Scaffold or Assembly Line: How Does Atg11 Organize its Binding Partners for the Initiation of Selective Autophagy?
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Steven Backues, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 297,384.00

The subject of this research project is selective autophagy, a cellular clean-up
and recycling process used by animals, plants and fungi to maintain cellular
function. This project will improve America's competitiveness by contributing to
the education of a diverse and technically literate workforce. It will create a
research-rich learning environment for biochemistry students at Eastern Michigan
University, a primarily undergraduate institution that serves a racially and
socioeconomically diverse population of students. It will do this by supporting
a cutting-edge research program that will directly engage ~10-12 undergraduate
and Master's level students in mentored scientific research projects as well as
creating semester-long guided research experiences for ~30-36 additional
undergraduates as part of a research-based senior-level biochemistry lab.
Multiple studies have shown that the most effective way for students to learn
science is by participating in authentic scientific research. Therefore, this
project will not only advance our fundamental understanding of the natural world
but also train the next generation of scientists.

Selective autophagy targets damaged or unwanted cellular components, such as
toxic protein aggregates or malfunctioning mitochondria, and delivers them to
the vacuole/lysosome where they are destroyed and their constituents recycled.
This research focuses on understanding the basic mechanisms of selective
autophagy in the model organism baker's yeast. One of the key proteins that
guides the process of selective autophagy is Atg11, which interacts with a
number of other autophagy proteins and organizes them into a functional protein
complex. This research will explain how Atg11 organizes this complex by
determining the characteristics of Atg11's interactions with its protein
partners. Specifically, it will determine whether Atg11can bring together all of
its partners at once, in the manner of a scaffold, or whether it interacts with
them one at a time, in the manner of an assembly line. This information will
help us to understand how selective autophagy actually occurs, not only in yeast
but also many other organisms that share a similar machinery, including humans.