* 1613452
* Meeting: High-throughput Plant Phenotyping and Data Analysis, A Series of Workshops at the Plant and Animal Genome Conference XXIV, January 9-13, 2016 San Diego, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Carolyn Lawrence-Dill, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2017
* USD 48,033.00

An interdisciplinary group of researchers will meet to discuss and identify key
challenges in plant biology and applied breeding at the Plant and Animal Genome
Conference in San Diego, CA, January 10-11, 2016. Three workshops will focus on
developing data standards for the use of so-called "high through-put
phenotyping" tools, such as remote sensing, rover/robot field assistance,
deployment of unmanned aerial device and other recent developments. These
emerging technologies are powerful tools capable of generating large scale
datasets that researchers and breeders can use to understand plant growth and
responses to the environment. However, to make use of the data effectively,
researchers must establish standards of data acquisition and develop best
practices for managing and sharing the massive datasets these technologies
produce. The goals of these workshops are to identify gaps in technology and
develop a roadmap for managing and sharing data. On the first day, 8-12 invited
speakers will deliver presentations at two workshop sessions on the broad topics
of phenotyping, data collection and information management to catalyze broad
discussion. A panel discussion will engage the audience in open dialogue to
establish best practices and develop research trajectories. The second day will
include a brainstorming session aimed at refining topics raised during the prior
workshops and culminating in the development of a whitepaper, or roadmap,
designed to guide research over the coming years.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
workshops will encourage interdisciplinary discussions to develop data standards
and recommend key priorities for strategic Federal and International investment.
The workshop will include participation from researchers using both reductionist
(controlled environment) and holistic (field-based) approaches, as well as the
data scientists who enable broad access to research outcomes via information
resources. Participants will be from across disciplines such as plant biology,
genomics, genetics, plant breeding, systems biology, computer science and the
data sciences. Scholars will also participate from diverse career stages,
institutional types, geographical locations, gender, and ethnic backgrounds. As
an outcome of the workshops, a whitepaper will be prepared that identifies gaps
in knowledge, infrastructure, participation, and educational opportunities. The
whitepaper will further identify potential research directions, propose
solutions to fill the identified gaps and emphasize strategies for training the
next generation of plant breeders. Both short- and long-term goals for
integrating plant sciences, agriculture, and the data sciences will be
articulated. The whitepaper will serve as a community gold standard to be widely
disseminated through publication, meeting presentation and made available
through web portals.