* 1613152
* Computational and Communication Efficient Distributed Statistical Methods with Theoretical Guarantees
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Xiaoming Huo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

In many contemporary data-analysis settings, it is expensive and/or infeasible
to assume that the entire data set is available at a central location. In recent
works of computational mathematics and machine learning, great strides have been
made in distributed optimization and distributed learning (i.e., machine
learning). On the other hand, classical statistical methodology, theory, and
computation are typically based on the assumption that the entire data are
available at a central location; this is a significant shortcoming in modern
statistical knowledge. The statistical methodology and theory for distributed
inference are underdeveloped. The PI will develop new distributed statistical
methods that are computation and communication efficient. He will study the
theoretical guarantees of these distributed statistical estimators. The
applicability and need of these methods in a wide spectrum of application
domains will be explored and demonstrated. This research can have impacts in
healthcare, supply chain industries, retail and services, and many more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on recent works in applied mathematics and machine
learning, the PI is to explore theory, algorithms, and applications of
statistical procedures that are developed for distributed data and aggregated
inference (i.e., distributed inference), with considerations on the storage,
computational complexity, and statistical properties of the relevant estimators.
The project will develop practical models, statistical theory, and
computationally efficient and provably correct algorithms that can help
scientists to conduct more effective distributed data analysis. Statistical
properties of these methods will be thoroughly studied, including analysis of
asymptotic properties, simulation studies in finite sample cases, and
establishment of effectiveness in some real applications. PhD students will be
involved in the research. Course modules will be developed and made available
publicly.