* 1613965
* 2016 Gene Golub SIAM Summer School at Drexel University
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Ambrose, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,500.00

The 2016 Gene Golub SIAM Summer School will be held from July 25 to August 5,
2016, at Drexel University, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, with the theme being
Stochastic Differential Equations and Wave Propagation. Stochastic differential
equations give a mathematical description of many natural phenomena from fluid
dynamics to interaction of particles and growth of crystals. Several recent
scientific breakthroughs (marked by the latest Fields Medal) brought renewed
attention to the area. This summer school will be a two-week intensive
experience in which approximately 50 graduate students will learn from leading
experts in the field of stochastic partial differential equations. The
activities for the students include lectures, theoretical tutorials in which
they will work out exercises in stochastic differential equations, and hands-on
computational tutorials in which they will learn to simulate wave-like behavior
in the presence of randomness. The address of the conference website is
http://www.math.drexel.edu/~song/Gene%20Golub%20Summer%20School/homepage1.html

The lectures and tutorials of the summer school will have three areas of
emphasis: randomly forced partial differential equations, invariant measures,
and partial differential equations with random coefficients. Specific
applications from fluid dynamics and materials science will be treated. Students
will work with tools such as stochastic calculus, rough path theory, measures on
infinite dimensional spaces, and stochastic homogenization, in addition to a
variety of tools of modern scientific computing.