* 1613190
* Group-Specific Individualized Modeling and Recommender Systems for Large-Scale Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Annie Qu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,001.00

This research project aims to develop new statistical theory, methods, and
computing algorithms to solve practical problems where the data present unique
features such as large volume, large velocity of dynamic changes, and highly
heterogeneous information from different individuals. The traditional one-model-
fits-all paradigm may not have sufficient power to detect important predictors
for heterogeneous subgroups. This research aims to develop alternative methods
applicable to electronic health record data and valuable for assigning effective
personalized treatments for more effective medical care. It is anticipated that
the project will stimulate interdisciplinary collaborations with other
scientists from disparate fields and that the work will also have applications
in marketing, business, and financial services. The software under development
will be disseminated to facilitate applications for large-scale complex data,
and will be made available to industry in a timely manner to maximize the impact
on society. Training of graduate students through involvement in the research is
a part of this project. This project aims to develop a new collaborative
filtering method utilizing cluster information from users and items to provide
more efficient recommender systems. The research also targets the development of
personalized variable selection, while improving the estimation efficiency of
the personalized variable coefficients and the prediction power. In addition, a
mixed-effects estimating equation approach will be developed to reduce the
estimation bias for informative missing data. Another research goal is to
develop efficient computational algorithms and tools applicable for large-scale
complex data. Each component of the research plan contains a range of topics,
from methodological and computational development to applications in real world
problems. In addition, the project will help to tackle fundamental questions in
statistical science and will stimulate interest from large groups of scientists
in the fields of recommender systems, random effects modeling, high-dimensional
model selection, subgrouping and clustering, longitudinal/correlated data,
informative missing data, and refreshment sampling. The development of advanced
optimization techniques, algorithms, and computational technology will be
valuable for other types of complex data problems as well.