* 1613122
* RAPID: Exploiting El Nino to Test for Shear Dilation in a Slow Moving Landslide
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Noah Finnegan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2016
* USD 14,242.00

Landslides are a natural hazard that can potentially damage infrastructure and
cause loss of life. Some landslides are rapid and catastrophic, occurring over
periods of seconds to minutes. Others are sluggish, sometimes moving only
millimeters per year and only when activated by rain. Over years to centuries,
these slow-moving landslides, also known as earthflows, can contaminate
waterbodies with sediment and damage dams and other types of civil
infrastructure. This project will examine a long dormant earthflow in California
that is expected to move this winter as a result of the coming El Nino that
meteorologists are predicting. The data collected may lead in the future to the
ability to predict the conditions that result in earthflow movement. This
knowledge could be useful for construction and management of civil
infrastructure. In addition, this project will provide training to a Native
American Ph.D. student. The project results will be shared with a public utility
commission to inform their management decisions.

This project will use new measurements from a continuous Ground-Penetrating
Radar (GPS) station and a shallow groundwater monitoring network in combination
with an existing network of 40 established benchmarks on the Oakridge earthflow
near San Jose, CA, to test the Principal Investigator's hypothesis for the
physical process that regulates the deformation of earthflows and prevents them
from failing catastrophically. The proposal addresses the lack of transport laws
for predicting landslide motion, identified as a key knowledge gap in the 2010
National Research Council report "Landscapes on the Edge". Given the possibility
that the coming El Nino event may be among the strongest ever recorded, this
project offers a unique, time-sensitive opportunity to examine widespread
landslide activity.