* 1613640
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Ultrasonic Wave Mixing Techniques for Detecting Localized Fatigue Damage in Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,07/31/2018
* jianmin qu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,707.00

It is well known that a significant number of catastrophic disasters involving
airplanes, bridges, and damns, for example, were due to the inability to
identify impending fatigue damage of certain critical components. Therefore, in
order to improve the safety, reliability, cost, and performance of structures
and components, it is necessary to develop techniques that are capable of
characterizing and quantifying the amount of material damage induced by cyclic
loading. To meet this need, a suite of new ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation
techniques have been proposed. These new techniques will have the unique
capability of detecting localized fatigue damage in metallic materials with
dramatically improved accuracy, resolution and selectivity over existing
ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation techniques. Such capabilities are critical
in many engineering applications including aircraft, automotive vehicles,
nuclear power plants and civil infrastructures. The nonlinear wave mixing
technique developed in this project will add one more tool to the existing
toolbox for safe and sustainable operation of aerospace, mechanical and civil
engineering systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation
techniques have been used extensively during the last half century. The vast
majority of these techniques utilize only the linear behavior of the ultrasound.
These linear techniques are effective in detecting discontinuities in the
materials such as cracks, voids, interfaces, inclusions, etc. However, for
ductile materials such as metals, it is the accumulation of fatigue damage that
leads to crack initiation and eventual failure of the component. Unfortunately,
linear ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation techniques are incapable of
characterizing or quantifying such damage. To overcome this critical shortcoming
of the existing technologies, new techniques based on nonlinear ultrasound will
be developed in this project. Specifically, the project will develop the
fundamental theories for the wave mixing phenomena in nonlinear elastic solids,
and the measurement techniques for nondestructive evaluation of localized
fatigue damage in metallic materials by utilizing the nonlinear wave mixing
phenomena. The project consists of two tasks. Task 1 focuses on advancing
knowledge of wave mechanics by developing mathematical models and conducting
numerical simulations of the mixing of various types of waves in nonlinear
solids. Based on the knowledge gained from Task 1, Task 2 will develop novel
nonlinear wave mixing techniques for nondestructive evaluation of localized
fatigue damage in metallic materials and structural components.