* 1613007
* Paramagetic metal ion based ESR distance methods for measuring ion-channel conformations in cells and in vitro
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Pei Tang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 850,000.00

Proteins are large biopolymers made up of amino acids and participate in most
processes within cells. Their structure and the dynamics or flexibility of that
structure is essential to protein function. This project will develop Electron
Spin Resonance (ESR) methodology to measure precise distance constraints that
are reporters of protein backbone structure and flexibility. In this project, a
Copper ion based spin probe will be developed for the ESR measurements. The
copper spin probe can be assembled without modification of the protein, and is
much smaller that conventional probes and thus will enable more precise distance
measurements. This project will measure changes in protein structure directly in
cells under conditions where functional measurements can be performed. While
training a number of graduate and undergraduate students, this project will
expand access to pulsed ESR instrumentation to undergraduates and graduate
students at regional colleges in Pennsylvania including those serving
predominantly African American populations. This project will also provide hands
on science experience, career awareness and academic advising to assist pre-
college historically under-represented students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop strategies to exploit
native protein residues to site-specifically and selectively attach Copper(II)
for pulsed ESR distance measurements both in-vitro and in cells; and probe
initial steps in the gating mechanism of ELIC, a prokaryotic, pentameric,
ligand-gated ion channel from Erwinia chrysanthemi in lipid vesicles and in
cells. A Copper(II)-based spin probe that can be assembled in situ from natural
amino acid residues and a metal salt, without the need for post-expression
synthetic modification, will be developed and used. This probe will be used to
determine distance constraints that are more narrowly defined and overcome the
inherent limitation of the current technology which relies on a spin label with
a highly flexible side-chain. Conformational changes in the extracellular domain
of ELIC that lead to the opening of the pore upon ligand binding will be
determined and such changes will then be measured directly in cells under
functional conditions. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.