* 1613923
* Lipid Network Flux Cartography for Quantitative Control of Oil Accumulation and Composition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Jay Shockey, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 629,535.00

Plant oils are a vital part of human life and are utilized as food, chemicals,
and fuels. It is predicted that world output of plant oils must double by 2040
to meet the needs of the growing human population, and even larger increases are
needed if plant oils will be used to increasingly replace petroleum as fuels and
chemicals. To meet this rising demand we need a better understanding of the
metabolic reactions that control plant oil biosynthesis and oil composition. The
goal of this project is to quantitatively describe the control exerted by key
oil and membrane lipid biosynthetic proteins over the flux of vital
intermediates into either oils or membrane lipids in the model plant,
Arabidopsis. To prepare the next generation workforce the PIs will incorporate
their research into training of undergraduate and graduate students and a post-
doctoral fellow. Since plant oils are valuable renewable resources used for
food, fuels, and chemicals this research will further our ability to guide plant
lipid metabolic networks for the production of designer
oils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about what controls the flux of de
novo diacylglycerol into alternative branches of the lipid biosynthetic network
in different plant species. The PIs hypothesize that a crucial control point is
the partitioning of de novo synthesized diacylglycerol between
phosphatidylcholine and triacylglycerol synthesis. The aims of the research are:
1) deciphering the roles of the non-redundant diglyceride acetyltransferase 1
and diglyceride acetyltransferase 2 triacylglycerol synthesizing enzymes in
partitioning of de novo diacylglycerol between direct oil production and
membrane lipid synthesis; 2) characterize the role of phosphatidylcholine
synthesis enzymes in partitioning of de novo diacylglycerol into different
branches of the lipid biosynthetic network; 3) develop quantitative kinetic
models for the control of glycerolipid fluxes in Arabidopsis; and 4) explore
protein:protein interactions to characterize the molecular components that make
up the lipid metabolic complexes that control diacylglycerol fluxes. The above
approaches will be combined with computer modeling to produce a quantitative
description of the control of metabolite fluxes through the plant lipid
metabolic network that can then guide the production of designer plant oils.