* 1613081
* GEM:  Study the Precipitation of Radiation Belt Electrons during the Rapid Dropout Events
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Weichao Tu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2017
* USD 152,286.00

With the launch of the Van Allen Probes in 2012 a new era in radiation belt
studies has begun. This is a project to investigate the scientifically and
societally important issue of radiation belt electron dynamics. The emphasis in
this research will be on understanding the losses of electrons that occur during
magnetic storms. These are significant in that the flux of relativistic
electrons decreases by an order of magnitude in a few hours. There are two
possible explanations for this: One is loss to the solar wind through the
magnetopause and the other is loss to the atmosphere due to precipitation. The
former is relatively easy to evaluate but the latter is much more difficult
because the loss cone is small in the magnetosphere and because satellite
observations provide a limited picture. This proposal will apply a creative
approach combining satellite observations from the Van Allen Probes and NOAA
POES satellites and a new Drift-Diffusion simulation to quantify the losses. The
team will start by determining which observed events are candidates for
magnetopause loss, which are candidates for precipitation loss and which are
combinations of both types of loss. Then they will use the observations and the
simulation iteratively to improve the simulation. They will determine the pitch
angle diffusion coefficients as a function of magnetic local time and from that
the local time and L shell (radial) dependence of the plasma waves responsible
for the precipitation. They will compare this with Van Allen Probes wave
observations. They plan a detailed calibration of the POES observations and
those from the NSF Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment
(CSSWE).&lt;br/&gt;Understanding electron dynamics is important societally for
understanding space weather. In addition this project will support a young woman
scientist and a graduate student. Finally the detailed calibration of the POES
and CSSWE data will be useful well beyond this application.