* 1613926
* Magneto-Active Elastomers:  Homogenization, Instabilities and Relaxation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports the research program of the Principal Investigator on the
mathematical modeling of soft composite materials responsive to magnetic fields.
Magneto-active elastomers (MAEs) are composite materials consisting of nearly
rigid, magnetically susceptible particles embedded in a soft, magnetically
insensitive elastomer matrix (a rubber-like material). MAEs exhibit field-
dependent strains (changes in length) and changes in stiffness. However, the
strains that have been achieved experimentally to date are still relatively
small (on the order of 1%). The reason for these small strains can be traced
back to the nature of the forces between the particles. Large particle
concentrations are required to generate strong forces, but large concentrations
also lead to large overall stiffness for the composite material, which, in turn,
tends to reduce the overall strain. Generating large actuation strains and
stresses in MAEs for successful application as "artificial muscles" requires
novel strategies. This project will be concerned with the possible excitation of
a particular instability in a certain class of MAEs that will allow the
generation of large strains by means of externally applied magnetic fields. The
work will result in novel and highly efficient multi-scale, multi-physics
modeling techniques of broad application.

The development of constitutive models for MAEs undergoing such field-generated
instabilities will require the use and appropriate generalization of several
powerful and sophisticated mathematical tools. First, nonlinear homogenization
methods will be developed to obtain estimates for the macroscopic "pre-
bifurcation" response. For this purpose, a partial decoupling of the magnetic
and mechanical energies will be implemented by means of a variational statement
involving a purely magnetic problem in the deformed configuration, as determined
by the unknown particle rotations, and a purely mechanical problem with
prescribed torques on the particles. The average particle rotations will then be
obtained by minimizing the total magneto-elastic energy of the system. The
resulting constitutive model is expected to lose strong ellipticity, and to lead
to the development of domain mesostructures, when the magnetic field and
mechanical loading conspire to generate sufficiently large compression along the
long axes of the fibers, which can in turn be relieved by collective rotation of
the fibers within their respective domains. Making use of multi-layered
structures, the rank-1 convexification of the magneto-elastic energy will be
computed, thus leading to an upper bound for the "quasi-convexification" or
"relaxation" of the energy in the "post-bifurcation" regime. Attempts will then
be made to show that the rank-1 convexification is polyconvex and therefore
quasi-convex. The resulting models will be used to explore the parameter space
of microstructural variables (e.g., fiber volume fraction and aspect ratio) for
enhanced magnetostriction and other coupled magneto-elastic properties (e.g.,
field-dependent moduli).