* 1613378
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Guenon face patterns and the maintenance of primate reproductive isolation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2019
* USD 22,611.00

Reproduction and mate choice are key components of evolution because they affect
how species are formed and maintained. In primates, there are several examples
of closely-related primate species living in overlapping geographic ranges. How
do these animals distinguish between members of their own versus other species
when looking for mates? This doctoral dissertation project is an investigation
of the role of face patterns and behavioral displays in maintaining reproductive
isolation in the guenons, a group of forest monkey species in Africa that
exhibit an extraordinary variety of colorful face patterns. Innovative methods
will be used to measure and analyze the monkeys' appearance and their behavior
related to members of their own species and closely-related species. Computer
code and methodological details will be made freely available, and the project
will support education and diversity in science through undergraduate training
and K-12 science education outreach. The investigators will also be involved in
scientific and biodiversity conservation outreach programs at their research
site, and the project will foster international collaborations between research
and conservation organizations in the USA and Nigeria.

Identifying appropriate mates is potentially challenging for closely-related
species with overlapping geographic ranges. One mechanism for preventing matings
between different species is the evolution of signals that advertise species
membership and that are used in mate choice to maintain reproductive isolation.
Previous research has demonstrated that guenons can be classified by species
based on images of their faces, and that facial distinctiveness increases with
the degree of range overlap. However, the behavioral mechanisms by which a
system of facial distinctiveness and associative mate choice might operate
remain unclear. In this project, researchers will assess if and how guenons
discriminate between species, and how variation in face patterns and behavioral
displays influences mating decisions. To answer this question, researchers will:
(1) identify regions of guenon faces critically important for species
classification using computer vision algorithms; (2) assess guenon visual biases
for same versus different species faces using a discrimination task with live
guenons; (3) quantify behavioral displays and investigate their relationship
with facial morphology using computer vision algorithms; and (4) document the
ways in which guenon morphology and behavior are used in the wild using
behavioral observations. This research will help to clarify the extent to which
guenon face patterns function as signals of species membership, and how guenon
morphologies and behaviors interact to influence their mating decisions.
Ultimately, the results of this project will help us understand the relationship
between phenotypic diversity and reproductive isolation.