* 1613473
* EAPSI:EAPSI: Investigation of the Reactions of Human Originated Pollutants with Gas-Phase Pine Forest Emissions in Seoul, Korea and Consequences for Atmospheric Particle Formation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Michael Link, Link                    Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Reactions of human originated pollutants with gas-phase emissions from plants
have been found to enhance the production of climate-relevant atmospheric
particles in environments with urban/rural interfaces in the United States. This
mechanism of atmospheric particle formation is also expected to be important to
the Korean peninsula which experiences local sources of pollution, but also
frequent influences of pollution transported across the Yellow Sea from China.
The extent of particle formation from human originated gas-phase sulfur will be
assessed for an urban/rural interface in Seoul, South Korea through comparisons
of results from laboratory studies of plant emission reactions and ambient
measurements from Taehwa Research Forest. The Taehwa Research Forest emits an
abundance of gas-phase compounds and frequently experiences local and long-range
transported sources of pollution. Collaboration with Dr. Taehyoung Lee, a noted
expert in measurement of atmospheric particles, at Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies will provide access to a unique suite of instrumentation to perform
experiments and ambient measurements which will help place the role human
originated pollutants have, with respect to particle formation, into a global
context. This research is expected to improve the fundamental understanding of
how atmospheric particles form which is necessary to understand and predict
climate-relevant processes. Additionally, understanding what processes control
the formation of atmospheric particles in Seoul is necessary to mitigate air
quality to standards established by the Special Act on Metropolitan Air Quality
Improvement which currently sets air quality standards for the city of
Seoul.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactions of anthropogenic emissions (NOx, SO2) with
biogenic volatile organic compounds have been found to enhance the production of
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) through the formation of organosulfate compounds
in environments with urban/rural interfaces in the United States. The extent of
organosulfate formation from anthropogenic sulfur will be assessed for an
urban/rural interface in Seoul, South Korea through comparisons of results from
laboratory studies of monoterpene oxidation with ambient measurements from
Taehwa Research Forest. The Taehwa Research Forest is a site with dominant
monoterpene emissions that frequently experiences local sources of pollution,
but also episodic pollution transported across the Yellow Sea from eastern
China. Laboratory experiments of monoterpene oxidation in the presence of SO2
will be performed to measure and speciate organosulfates as well as quantify
their enhancement of SOA. Speciated organosulfates observed in the lab will be
compared to organosulfates measured at Taehwa Research Forest to determine the
ambient relevance of organosulfate SOA enhancement. Collaboration with Dr.
Taehyoung Lee, a noted expert in measurement of atmospheric particles, at Hankuk
University of Foreign Studies will provide access to a unique suite of
instrumentation to perform experiments and ambient measurements. The results of
this study will describe the contribution of organosulfates to organic aerosol
in an area dominated by monoterpene emissions and perturbed by anthropogenic
emissions and are relevant for other areas with similar urban-rural interfaces.
The results of this study are expected to help inform air quality legislation
such as the ?Special Act on Metropolitan Air Quality Improvement? by accessing
the extent to which biogenic emissions contribute to SOA formation in the
metropolitan area of Seoul.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia
and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the National Research
Foundation of Korea.