* 1613866
* EAPSI: Using Optical Methods to Determine the Role of Organic Nitrogen in Stimulating Harmful Algal Blooms and Contributing to Water Quality Impairment in Freshwater Lakes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Alexandria Hounshell, Hounshell               Alexandria     G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Rapid urban, agricultural, and industrial expansion in watersheds worldwide has
led to increased nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) loading to freshwater lake
environments including Lake Erie and Lake Okeechobee in the US and Lake Taihu in
China. Harmful effects of increased nutrient loading include fish kills, oxygen
depletion, and harmful algal blooms, which disrupt both the resources (drinking
water source, fisheries habitat, recreation and tourism use) and sustainability
of lake ecosystems. Historically, lake management strategies have focused on
controlling inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus loading. In recent years, the role
of organic matter as a nitrogen source for algal blooms and microbial growth in
aquatic systems has been recognized. Evidence suggests organic nitrogen
constituents from urban run-off, agriculture, industry, and wastewater treatment
plant discharge promote algal and bacterial growth. This project will explore
the role organic nitrogen plays in sustaining toxic cyanobacterial harmful algal
blooms and contributing to water quality impairment in Lake Taihu, China. The
study will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhu Guangwei at the Nanjing
Institute of Geography and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, a noted
expert on harmful cyanobacterial bloom dynamics in Lake Taihu.

The development of optical techniques (excitation emission matrices coupled with
parallel factor analysis, EEM-PARAFAC) to identify and track fluorescent organic
matter through aquatic systems has allowed for rapid and detailed information on
organic matter dynamics in freshwater ecosystems. This study will use optical
techniques and organic matter addition experiments to expand the understanding
of the role organic nitrogen plays in eutrophication and bloom dynamics in
nitrogen-sensitive freshwater lakes. By enriching natural lake phytoplankton and
bacterial assemblages from Lake Taihu with watershed organic matter sources, the
role organic nitrogen plays in fueling primary productivity, specifically as
cyanobacterial blooms will be explored. Results can be broadly applied to
geographically-diverse nutrient-enriched freshwater and coastal plain ecosystems
experiencing the effects of harmful algal blooms and water quality impairment.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.