* 1613440
* The Micro-Process of Social Responsibility in Organizations:  A Bottom-Up Perspective Workshop; April 12 and 13, 2016; Anaheim, California
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Deborah Rupp, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Nontechnical Description of Significance and Importance
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is more pressure than ever before for organizations
to actively evidence their social responsibility. This pressure comes from a
variety of stakeholders, including employees, consumers, interest groups, and
various industry and regulatory bodies. Corporate social responsibility (CSR)
comes in many forms, including corporate philanthropy, volunteerism programs,
compliance to voluntary codes of conduct, environmental sustainability
initiatives, and personnel practices focused on diversity, fairness, and well-
being. CSR has become both ubiquitous and entrenched within firm practices, and
therefore represents a major operational consideration for organizations.
Despite the omnipresence of CSR within organizations, as well as the increasing
demand for CSR among stakeholders, there lacks a robust scientific literature
focused particularly on the various multilevel influences involved in CSR
decision making, implementation, participation, and evaluation. That is, whereas
CSR research has largely focused on the relationship between firm social
performance and economic performance, as well as the sociological predictors and
outcomes of CSR, far less attention has been placed on the structural
characteristics of CSR initiatives, as well as psychological phenomena
influencing socially responsible and irresponsible behaviors within
organizations. This includes a) the motives of leaders and top management teams
in building CSR portfolios; b) the drivers of employee compliance with, advocacy
for, and/or participation in CSR initiatives; c) the mechanisms by which firm-
level CSR actions influence the attitudes and behaviors of organizational
members; and d) the impact of CSR initiatives on society. The rich literatures
on motivation, decision-making, pro-social behavior, ethics, program evaluation,
etc. can be fruitfully applied to more fully understand CSR phenomena. The
purpose of the proposed workshop is to identify key conceptual rifts, integrate
diverse perspectives, and develop a research agenda focused on "micro" CSR
processes, as well as CSR research that is both multi-disciplinary and
multilevel in nature. As CSR activities connect organizations to government
agencies and other regulatory bodies, a more integrated and multilevel
understanding of CSR can aid understanding and facilitation of relations between
the public and private sectors. Discoveries in this area can also help to
facilitate diversity, fairness, and health within organizations and society at
large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed workshop will bring together leading corporate social responsibility
(CSR) scholars with scholars from other areas within the organizational sciences
(e.g., leadership, individual differences, cross-cultural psychology, human
resource management, humanitarian work psychology, occupational health
psychology, diversity). The lack of direct communication among these sets of
researchers is unfortunate insofar as work from both groups can meaningfully
contribute to the other. The focus will be on cross-pollination, as well as the
sharing and joint-development of new ideas. The workshop will include keynote
presentations, topical presentations, facilitated discussions, group work,
multidisciplinary discussant comments, and networking opportunities. A key goal
will be the identification of new directions for research in this area, the
catalyzing of new collaborative and multidisciplinary projects among scholars
who might otherwise remain isolated from one another, and the application of
advanced research methodologies that have yet to be applied within this domain.
Publically disseminated workshop outcomes will include a) a workshop website,
containing the program, speaker bios, and where permitted, presentation
materials and recordings; b) a press release with information about the event
and the link to all of the corresponding materials, c) an overall report
summarizing the conclusions, recommendations, and agenda items generated
throughout the workshop.