* 1613132
* Spatial Localization in Several Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Edgar Knobloch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 310,000.00

This research project will study spatially localized patterns such as fronts,
spots, or pulses that arise in fluids, nonlinear optics, chemical catalysis, and
other continuum systems. Examples include vortices, drops, and solitary waves in
fluids, spots in optical and chemical systems, localized buckling of slender
structures under compression, pulses propagating along nerve fibers, and
localized oscillations in vibrating granular media. These diverse systems have
two things in common: (i) they dissipate energy and need to be sustained by
external forcing, and (ii) they are sensitive to this external forcing and small
changes may lead to distinctly different outcomes (patterns). This project seeks
to extend existing theory to similar systems in two and three dimensions and to
provide a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms responsible for growth
of patterns when the forcing is varied. It will apply the results to improved
understanding of vortices in rotating convection and crystal growth from a melt.
The project will involve a graduate student in the research.

Spatially localized structures are common in solutions to many partial
differential equations arising in physical modeling. This research project
studies dissipative systems driven by periodic forcing in which different
forcing amplitudes can lead to distinct localized states. The project seeks to
extend existing theory to higher dimensions and to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the mechanisms behind the different types of growth of the
structures that are observed when parameters are varied. The structures of
interest include not only spatially localized pulse-like states, but also fronts
connecting two distinct states and defects or holes in otherwise spatially
periodic structures. In addition, the project aims to apply the results to
several systems of importance in physics and engineering, including vortex
structures in rotating convection and crystallization from a supercooled liquid.
The techniques used include bifurcation theory for reversible and near-
reversible systems, coupled with numerical branch-following and direct numerical
simulations of realistic systems.