* 1613994
* EAPSI: Investigating how Social Values, Language, and Physical Environment Explain Differences in how People in Japan and the United States Look at Visual Scenes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Samuel Spevack, Spevack                 Samuel         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

While people both in Japan and the United States are more likely to attend to
objects in the foreground than the background of a visual scene, several studies
show that people in the United States attend more to objects in the foreground
than people in Japan. This difference has profound effects on how people
interact with others and their surroundings. The underlying reasons for this
difference are unexplored. Possible explanations include differences in social
values (e.g. group cohesion vs. self-independence), language background (e.g.
English vs. Japanese) or physical environment (e.g. the way buildings and roads
are structured in Japan vs. the U.S.). This award supports research to explore
how these factors influence differences between the visual attention of people
in Japan and the United States. The work will be performed in collaboration with
Dr. Jun Saiki, an expert in vision science at Kyoto University.

To explore the underlying causes for visual attention differences between people
in Japan and the United States, the fellow will conduct an eye-tracking
experiment. The experiment will measure the eye movements of people living in
Japan as they look at visual scenes. The experiment will assess each
individual's alignment towards individualism-collectivism, linguistic
background, and their familiarity with particular physical layouts of cities in
Japan and the United States. The data collected from participants in Japan will
be compared to results from participants in the United States. By assessing how
individual scores on measures of individualism-collectivism, language
background, and physical environment familiarity predict differences in
attention, this research will contribute to the understanding of how the
interaction of these large-scale cultural factors modulate the visual attention
preferences of individuals.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.