* 1613366
* EAPSI: Ecological Context for Bioavailable Phosphorus in Sub-Boreal Forest Soils of Northern Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Melissa Pingree, Pingree                 Melissa        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Fire is an important driver of ecosystem processes yet very little is known
about its effects on phosphorus (P), which is an essential nutrient for plant
and animal life and limited in northern Japanese soils. Soil microbes and fauna,
such as earthworms, provide an essential function in forest ecosystems by
digesting organic matter to make P and other nutrients available for plants that
otherwise exist in unavailable forms. At the same time, plants chemically alter
their immediate root zones to enhance the availability and uptake of P from
soils. The common measurement of soil P does not account for the variety of
root-zone acquisition techniques and very little is known about earthworm
alteration of soil P availability. This research project will measure soil P in
contrasting soil types of northern Japan with an advanced method that mimics the
variety of plant P acquisition techniques. In a laboratory experiment, we will
combine soils with a common earthworm species and charcoal from wildfires in
order to provide a context for biological activity and forest disturbance that
is likely to alter soil P availability. The project will be conducted in the
extensively studied Teshio Experimental Forest located in northern Hokkaido,
Japan, in collaboration with Assistant Professor Dr. Kobayashi Makoto and
Associate Professor Dr. Kentaro Takagi of Hokkaido University. The Teshio
Experimental Forest is an ideal field research center that provides 22,550
hectares of undisturbed sub-boreal forests.

The unique forests of northern Japan represent a transition from the far
northern, cold boreal forests to warmer, biologically diverse temperate forests.
The sub-boreal forests of northern Japan can provide an example for the future
forests in the boreal zone. Previous research conducted in the Teshio
Experimental Forest provides a valuable baseline for plant-soil interactions,
nutrient cycling, forest ecology, and fire history. The area also contains a
unique compilation of soil types and that can be extrapolated to different
regions and environmental conditions. Total soil P concentrations are low in
both serpentine and sedimentary soils of northern Japan; thus, rapid uptake by
plants and soil microbes is likely. Research conducted by Dr. Makoto suggests
that both plants and microbes employ specialized mechanisms to acquire P in the
presence of charcoal, a ubiquitous residue of wildfires. Furthermore, the high
earthworm density and activity in northern Japan forest soils may induce
processes that have the capacity to directly or indirectly alleviate soil P
limitations. With this collaboration, we will build on previous research from
Hokkaido University to clarify the understanding of plant-soil and plant-soil
fauna interactions in the availability of P in forest ecosystems.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.