* 1613882
* EAPSI: Development of a Stable Transformation System in the Red Alga Porphyra Umbilicalis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Charlotte Royer, Royer                   Charlotte      J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Bacteria are critical to the normal development of multicellular organisms,
including algae, and bacteria may help algae survive environmental stresses, but
these associations remain poorly understood. The red alga Porphyra umbilicalis
('laver') experiences intertidal stresses that include high temperature, high
light, and desiccation, but the alga recovers quickly when submerged again at
high tide. Laver is currently the subject of an extensive bacterial microbiome
study, and now has a fully-sequenced genome, making it an ideal candidate for
investigations of how bacterial associations confer stress tolerance on a
molecular level. One way to enable these investigations is to create a system to
manipulate laver?s genes, i.e. stable genetic transformation. This work is
proposed in collaboration with Dr. Hiroyuki Mizuta and Dr. Toshiki Uji of
Hokkaido University, Japan. Dr. Uji is a leading expert on genetic
transformation in red algae, and he and his colleagues recently developed a
stable transformation system for nori (Pyropia yezoensis), a Pacific cousin of
laver. A stable transformation system will allow research to be conducted on
stress responses in laver, including possible effects of the microbiome, and
will provide an invaluable tool for other scientific studies based on the
Porphyra genome.

The primary goal of this work is to establish the first stable transformation
system in P. umbilicalis. Plasmids containing a heat shock factor (HSF) gene and
a selectable marker (hygromycin B resistance) will be inserted via particle
bombardment into both P. umbilicalis and P. yezoensis. Germination and
development of transformed protoplasts or neutral spores will be evaluated, and
transformants of both species will be subjected to comparative heat shock
treatments and their HSF expression analyzed. This comparison is useful because
P. umbilicalis and P. yezoensis are related members of one of the oldest
eukaryotic groups (Bangiophyceae), and they are both economically and culturally
important algae.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.