* 1613029
* Dynamics of quantum many-body systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Victor Galitski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
theoretical condensed matter research and education aiming to extend our
understanding of nonequilibrium quantum matter. A typical material or electronic
device contains an immense number of electrons, which constitute a quantum many-
body system - the subject of condensed matter research. The corresponding
configuration space, the set of possible states the system can find itself in,
is unimaginably large. In thermodynamic equilibrium, the situation is somewhat
simplified in that the system occupies states that are close to the lowest-
energy state in a rigorously prescribed manner, exploring only a tiny corner of
the entire configuration space. This leads to a material with well-defined
properties that are dictated by nature and are "non-
negotiable."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, a nonequilibrium system can
explore the totality of the huge configuration space and may potentially find
itself in a state with drastically modified electronic properties compared to
those at equilibrium. Therefore, the ability to control dynamical properties of
driven electronic states could open opportunities to design nonequilibrium
electronic materials with desired properties, instead of relying on serendipity
in equilibrium material physics. This project is focused on exploring
fundamental aspects of the underlying physics that would make such
nonequilibrium quantum control of electronic materials possible. Of particular
interest in this project are many-body quantum systems under the influence of
perturbations that are periodic in time, which in practice is often achieved by
irradiating electronic materials by light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
achieves broader impacts by bringing together ideas from different fields of
physics and mathematics, integrating them into teaching, and communicating them
to a wide audience, building on the PI's prior efforts. Mentoring of students
will continue and will include a continuing collaboration with the Science
Magnet Program at Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, MD, and the
historically black Howard University in Washington, DC. The outreach component
will also include further development and refinement of PI's massive open online
course "Exploring Quantum Physics."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical
condensed matter research and education aiming to extend our understanding of
nonequilibrium quantum matter. The emphasis is on relating exciting theoretical
results and ideas to experiment, and communicating them to a broad audience. The
research effort is focused on studies of dynamics of quantum many-body systems.
Below is a list of three key research foci: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A
periodically-driven rotor is a prototypical model that exhibits a transition to
chaos in the classical regime and dynamical localization in the quantum regime.
The Principal Investigator will explore interacting many-body generalizations of
such nonlinear, periodically driven systems, which are expected to exhibit
transitions from many-body quantum chaos to dynamical
localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Recent experiments have observed
interesting light-induced states in topological materials, such as Floquet
reconstruction of electronic bands by light and a photovoltage and gigantic
surface life-time in topological insulators. Motivated by this experimental
progress, this project aims to develop a theory of Floquet systems coupled to a
heat bath. An ambitious goal here is to identify general principles of Floquet
thermodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Solitons are fascinating nonlinear
phenomena that occur in a diverse array of classical and quantum systems.
Relying on a series of exact results, obtained recently by the PI, it is
proposed to consider dissipative dynamics of quantum solitons in superfluids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of nonequilibrium many-body systems would
provide new insights into several classes of physically interesting and
technologically important materials and has the potential to deliver results of
fundamental and practical importance. For example, an understanding of the long-
lived photoexcited states in topological insulators may provide a roadmap for
creating novel devices, such as an optical p-n junction and a solar cell, based
on light-induced topological surface states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
achieves broader impacts by bringing together ideas from different fields of
physics and mathematics, integrating them into teaching, and communicating them
to a wide audience, building on the PI's prior efforts. Mentoring of students
will continue and will include a continuing collaboration with the Science
Magnet Program at Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, MD, and the
historically black Howard University in Washington, DC. The outreach component
will also include further development and refinement of PI's massive open online
course "Exploring Quantum Physics."