* 1613708
* Phenomenology of Astrophysical Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Cecilia Lunardini, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project sits at the boundary between theoretical nuclear physics and
particle astrophysics. Specifically, this research concerns the physics of
neutrinos, elementary particles that are produced abundantly in stars and
galaxies. These "astrophysical" neutrinos have been observed at Earth already
and many more observations are expected in the near future. In this context, the
theoretical research to be performed by the PI will play an important role in
understanding the experimental data and will allow for new insights regarding
the fundamental processes that take place in stars and the specific role played
by the neutrino properties. In addition, this state-of-the-art research project
will provide excellent opportunities for the training of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major area of investigation in particle astrophysics
concerns the physics of O(10) MeV neutrinos from core-collapse supernovae that
presents a strategic opportunity for upcoming neutrino detectors. It is planned
to study the potential of these detectors to measure the oscillation
probabilities of neutrinos from a galactic supernova burst, with minimal
theoretical priors, to distinguish different oscillation scenarios. Hours before
a star becomes a supernova, neutrinos from the Silicon burning phase might be
detectable. The flux of these neutrinos will be modeled in detail, using a new
calculation method that includes the nuclear beta processes. Supernova neutrinos
can also be detected in the form of diffuse flux from the cosmic population of
supernovae. The study of this flux will be revitalized in the light of recent
developments, with focus on detectability, and on the potential to measure
important physical quantities from the diffuse flux. At higher energies, E ~ TeV
- PeV, extraterrestrial neutrinos were discovered in 2013. This project
considers star formation as a possible origin of these neutrinos. Positional
coincidences of the neutrino data with known high-star formation regions will be
studied quantitatively, and theory models of neutrino production in these
regions will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Division of Physics and the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate
of Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences.