* 1613527
* EAPSI: Evaluation and Comparison of the Collapse Vulnerability to Earthquakes of Steel Frame Buildings in the U.S. and Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* John Buyco, Buyco                   John           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

This research will be conducted at Kyoto University in Japan under the
supervision of Dr. Masayoshi Nakashima, professor (and former director) at the
Disaster Prevention Research Institute of Japan and a leader in U.S./Japan joint
research programs in earthquake engineering since the 1980s. The project will
investigate the vulnerability to earthquake-induced collapse of steel frame
buildings in Japan. Representative 6-story steel frame buildings that
incorporate Japanese design codes and common design practices will be designed
and corresponding computer models will be simulated by the researcher. The
researcher has completed a similar project with 6-story buildings designed based
on U.S. building codes and design practices, so comparisons will be made between
buildings from both countries. This research project will demonstrate the
relative earthquake safety of buildings in the U.S. and Japan and is part of a
larger effort to help communities better understand the risk for collapse of
their buildings.

The project will provide a framework to estimate the collapse vulnerability of
6-story steel moment frame buildings in Japan. The researcher?s past work has
developed a framework for estimating the ultimate strength and ductility of
6-story steel moment frame buildings in Los Angeles based solely on the
construction year and location within the city. The project will extend this
work to Japanese buildings. Representative buildings will be designed based on
the main seismic zones and soil types in Japan according to design codes and
practices before and after 2000 (a year of major changes in the seismic code of
Japan). Pushover analysis will be conducted to determine the ultimate strength
and ductility of these buildings. A relationship will be developed between these
two parameters and the design base shear and/or construction year. As this
framework develops, it will allow researchers to computationally efficiently
conduct large scale simulations on the city-wide scale to scenario earthquakes
in order to accurately determine the city?s earthquake resiliency. Comparisons
will be made to U.S. buildings to see how the different design codes and
engineering practices affect building performance with regards to collapse.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.