* 1613388
* Equilibrium thermodynamics of semiconductor nanocrystal ligand and ion exchange via calorimetry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Andrew Greytak, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2020
* USD 420,779.00

Equilibrium thermodynamics of semiconductor nanocrystal ligand and ion exchange
via calorimetry

This grant supports Dr. Andrew Greytak of the University of South Carolina in
the effort to develop an improved understanding of colloidal quantum dot
chemistry through the use of isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). Nanocrystal
quantum dots (QDs) are soluble, nanometer-scale particles composed of
semiconductor materials. QDs can have bright and size-tunable fluorescence, and
have current applications in flat-panel displays and in bio-imaging. QDs are
also of interest for solution-processable solar cells that can be scaled
sustainably to meet worldwide energy needs. However, the performance of QD solar
cells remains far below the theoretical limit. There is considerable variability
in fluorescence performance among QD samples of similar size and composition,
due to structural differences at the QD surface. It is important to connect
emerging analytical methods and theoretical models to the design of stable QDs
with desirable surface properties. This project takes a new approach to
developing a fundamental understanding of QD structure and chemistry by
measuring the heat that is emitted or absorbed when chemical transformations of
QDs take place. The ITC approach is expected to be broadly applicable to
semiconductor nanocrystal science. The technique is being used here to advance
knowledge that could lead to improved QD solar cell performance. Dr. Greytak's
research program at the University of South Carolina engages students at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. He has demonstrated nationally-
recognized leadership in chemistry education. He also serves as the head judge
for chemistry at the South Carolina Midlands Regional Science Fair for high
school students.

Colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) are complex assemblies of a crystalline core and an
interfacial layer that, given time, may exchange matter with the solution and
other NCs. It is highly advantageous to have a set of metrics that allows
different NC samples to be profiled, both so that they can be characterized with
sufficient precision to predict synthetic and physical behaviors. It is also
adventitious to have a sufficiently rich experimental description of the system
to constrain models that begin to capture the complexity of NC-ligand and
ligand-ligand interactions. In this program, Dr. Greytak is being supported to
measure equilibrium constants, enthalpies, equivalencies, and interaction terms
associated with representative ligand exchange and ion exchange reactions at NC
quantum dot (QD) surfaces in anhydrous solvents. Purification techniques such as
gel permeation chromatography are used to provide QDs in a well-defined initial
state. The knowledge acquired from these types of measurements represents a
fundamental advance in QD chemistry that hastens the discovery of higher-
performing and more sophisticated QD assemblies and solution structures. In
particular, the performance and material scope of QD-based photovoltaics can be
expanded through improved understanding of ligand exchange and ion exchange
reactions. This project also provides research training opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students, who are building expertise in nanocrystal
preparative chemistry, calorimetry, and other analytical techniques that are
necessary to advance the field of nanoscience into practical technologies. Dr.
Greytak has been active in broadening research participation through the
Scientific Advocate Network and the American Chemical Society's Project SEED
program. He has also initiated an annual USC Sustainability Research and
Practice Showcase that creates a focal point for research groups, graduate and
undergraduate students, and staff to educate each other about opportunities for
research participation, entrepreneurship, integrative learning, and outreach
that advances regional and national competitiveness.