* 1613421
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Characterization of a modern East African ecosystem to inform reconstructions of hominin diet
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* John Fleagle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 28,269.00

Diet is an important factor in studies of human evolution because it is linked
to behavior, morphology, and ecology. This doctoral dissertation project seeks
to increase our understanding of the diets of early human ancestors through
analysis of modern East African ecosystems. The student co-PI will evaluate the
nutritional and mechanical properties of dominant savanna and wetland plants, in
addition to commonly eaten and avoided baboon foods, across gradients of
seasonal and microhabitat variability. Previous work has shed light on broad
habitat and food preferences of early humans, and this project's focus on
seasonality and microhabitat will provide important new data to augment past
studies. This project will support student and research assistant training in
ecological field methods, public science outreach activities designed to reach
students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields, and conservation efforts
at the research site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the lack
of ecological data currently available for reconstructing diet in Plio-
Pleistocene hominins by studying the mechanical properties of foods that may
have been accessible to hominins. The researchers will conduct fieldwork across
both the wet and dry seasons in Amboseli National Park, Kenya, a site known for
its high microhabitat heterogeneity and large yellow baboon (Papio cynocephalus)
populations. They will establish sampling transects in different microhabitats
(grassland, wetland, scrubland, etc.) and collect dominant tree, forb, herb,
grass, and sedge species in each transect (where applicable). Commonly eaten and
avoided baboon foods will also be collected within each transect; baboons are a
suitable ecological analogue for early humans because of their wide dietary
niche and preference for savanna habitats. A portable mechanical tester will be
used on fresh plant material to measure the hardness and toughness of the
component parts (root, stem, leaf, etc.) of each sampled species. Once
mechanical testing is complete, remaining plant samples will be dried and
analyzed for fiber, lignin, fat and oil, protein, and trace metal content. The
resulting nutritional and mechanical properties data incorporating both seasonal
and microhabitat variability can be used to build predictive models of early
human foraging behavior.