* 1613880
* EAPSI: Comparative Biodiversity and the Hermit Crab Tree of Life: An East Meets West Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Catherine Craig, Craig                   Catherine
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In the wake of environmental disasters such as the Deepwater Horizon oil spill
in the Gulf of Mexico, thorough surveys documenting the makeup of sea-floor
animal communities have observed changes in the health and diversity of crabs,
shrimp, and lobsters. The primary objective of this project is to use DNA
sequences to determine the true number of hermit crab species in the western
Pacific and understand the genetic relationships among them. The results from
this project in the West Pacific will be combined with results from similar
studies in the Gulf of Mexico to identify any trends in hermit crab diversity
that may be related to environmental impacts.

Lack of knowledge about the number of hermit crab species in the West Pacific
prevents broader study of the health of sea-floor animal communities and, by
extension, overall ecosystem health in the region. Studies show that
determinations of species identity based on DNA sequences provides the highest
standard of sensitivity to species diversity. With the guidance of Professor
Peter Ng and experienced researchers at the National University of Singapore,
DNA sequences for numerous West Pacific specimens stored in the Lee Kong Chian
Natural History Museum in Singapore will be collected using modern laboratory
techniques. The resulting DNA sequences will be analyzed algorithmically to
establish both the species identity of the specimen, and the genetic
relationships among specimens. The primary impact of the proposed research is
that it will increase our understanding of world-wide hermit crab diversity and
information about the correspondence between geographical distribution,
diversity, and evolutionary relationships among marine hermit crabs in the
western Pacific. An additional outcome is the formation of a multinational
working group that will combine the efforts of the applicant and key authors in
the field from Singapore and the United States. The establishment of this
collaborative effort represents an opportunity to increase the impact of
National Science Foundation funding within the international science community.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.