* 1613983
* EAPSI: Preventing Traffic Accidents based on Driving Behavior with Engineering and Statistical Models
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Rex Cheung, Cheung                  Rex
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Predicting driving behavior is an important component for developing safer and
more reliable driver assistance systems. Modern technologies such as the Google
Self-Driving Car and the Mobileye system are good examples on using sensors or
cameras to detect road conditions and send out instructions to the cars and
drivers when potential dangers are about to occur. However, these technologies
can be less reliable when driving in extreme weather conditions, such as heavy
rain or darkness at night. Thus many researchers in the engineering field have
attempted to analyze driver behavior to predict what will happen next. This
project proposes the use of driver behavior data to predict the possibility of
an upcoming traffic accident. The project is in collaboration with Professor
Kazushi Ikeda from Nara Institute of Science and Technology in Japan. Professor
Ikeda and his laboratory are experts in analyzing traffic data.

Hidden Markov Models (HMM) is a popular technique used in the engineering field
to analyze traffic data. One can view HMM as an unsupervised clustering
technique, where one tries to cluster the different driving states into groups
exhibiting similar data pattern. Much work has been proposed on estimating and
predicting the different driving states using HMM, however, little work has
extended this idea to predicting the occurrence of accidents. This project
attempts to close this gap by combining existing methods with an additional
change point detection procedure from time series analysis to predict the
occurrence of an accident if the driver behaves abnormally. In brief, HMM will
first be used to learn the different driving states. Once the states are
estimated, a global trend within each state can be obtained and removed, then
change point analysis will be applied to analyze the residual of the data, where
the goal is to detect sudden changes in drivers? behavior which might signify an
accident is about to occur. This can be viewed as a preprocessing step using
unsupervised learning (HMM) followed by a statistical modeling approach (change
point detection) to build the prediction model.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.