* 1613831
* Analysis of Models in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Walter Rusin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 137,463.00

Rusin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1613831&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The problems addressed in the
project involve mathematics of an interdisciplinary character. Analytical study
of the nonlinear phenomena in equations describing flows of fluids is essential
to areas that range from weather prediction, climate and environmental studies,
turbulent and combustion (as for instance in engines) to the cosmological
question of mass distribution in the universe. The aim of the project is to
develop applicable mathematics theory that yields progress in understanding of
fluids and that facilitates efficient computational tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main objective of the project is the investigation of
well-posedness of partial differential equations arising in fluid dynamics. The
primary emphasis is placed on the incompressible three-dimensional Navier-Stokes
equations in the context of large initial data. In particular, the analysis
focuses on the existence and properties of solutions with axial symmetry and
time-periodic solutions. The research extends to related models such as a class
of active scalar equations that arises in the geophysical fluid dynamics. Here,
the main aim is to investigate ill/well-posedness phenomena of nonlinear
problems, where the nonlinearity is based on even or singular symbols,
additionally equipped with some intrinsic anisotropy. The project concerns
furthermore the problem of uniqueness of solutions to the primitive equation of
the ocean. The last objective addresses a local model of the Euler equations and
its analysis, in particular related to singular limits and vorticity stretching
in the three-dimensional Euler equations.