* 1613161
* EAPSI: Ecosystem-Friendly Engineering can Enhance Fisheries Production in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Carter Smith, Smith                   Carter         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Two of the most pressing environmental management concerns on a global scale are
maintaining fishery stocks and preventing shoreline damage and erosion in the
face of sea level rise and increased storminess. Typically, these two goals are
at odds, as traditional methods of erosion protection (bulkheads, revetments,
seawalls) have been shown to have negative effects on habitats and the fish and
invertebrate populations living in them. This project will provide the first
assessment of the effects of shoreline stabilization structures on the growth of
a commercially important shrimp species and it will determine which existing
structural designs have the highest amount of edible invertebrates and algae
growing on them. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Masahiro Nakaoka, a renowned coastal ecology, at the University of Hokkaido,
Japan, and it will provide a basis for determining the preferred construction
parameters for shoreline stabilization structures.

Nowhere are the issues of shoreline hardening and fishery stock declines more of
a concern than in Japan, where the per capita consumption of fish is nearly 5
times the global average and where more than 40% of the shoreline has been
artificially ?hardened?. In recognition of this growing concern, environmental
engineers have begun to develop and incorporate more ecosystem-friendly design
elements into coastal infrastructure; however, scientists need a more
comprehensive understanding of the cumulative effects of shoreline hardening and
the value of different types of construction (both ecologically and
structurally). For this project, researchers will: 1) survey modified shoreline
structures to determine which existing construction parameters maximize
recruitment of target fishery species; and, 2) conduct a manipulative field
experiment to determine if shoreline hardening reduces penaeid shrimp growth in
different habitat contexts. By exploring how effective different types of
construction are at maintaining and potentially enhancing fisheries, this
project will bridge the gap between the priorities of coastal protection and
fish habitat enhancement.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.