* 1613079
* 2016 Conference Support for the 5th International Conference on Engineering Frontiers in Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Alain Kassab, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 02/28/2017
* USD 20,020.00

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of death for infants born
with birth defects and represents 1% of births in the USA, and according to the
NIH that is 8 out of every 1,000 newborns. Successful treatment of CHD offers
opportunities to improve quality of life for individuals afflicted with this
disease with consequent benefit to society. Over 1 million adults in the USA are
living with congenital heart defects. The field of engineering application in
congenital heart disease has undergone an explosive growth in both application
and development nationally worldwide over the past decades. The cutting edge
problems that are the subject of this conference are at the interface of
engineering and medicine. The 5th International Conference on Engineering
Frontiers in Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease brings together leading
professionals in both the engineering and medical disciplines to foster
collaboration between these two communities in the study of treatment of
congenital diseases. The close interaction of medical doctors and engineering
researchers is critical to achieving advances in the treatment of this disease
and to bring engineering to bear as an aid to physicians in understanding the
complex blood flow and resulting from this congenital disease, in improving and
developing diagnostic tools, and in improving treatment planning. This
conference aims to impact improved treatment and understanding of this age-
related disease that afflicts a significant segment of the US population with
the consequent improvement in patient quality of life and reduction of medical
costs associated with CHD treatment. This conference also aims to expose and
engage emerging researchers in a common forum to exchange the latest in
developments in the field and to further establish domestic and international
collaborations. These researchers will be recruited from the pool of current and
recent Ph.D. graduates, Post-Docs and Fellows. The PIs will preferentially offer
support to members of underrepresented groups involved in biomedical engineering
research in pediatric and congenital heart disease, thus upholding the national
goal of engaging underrepresented groups into the STEM disciplines. This
conference as well provides successful role models for women who have
established vibrant research programs and labs in this field, for instance,
there are two female researcher professors on their international organizing and
steering committees. The conference offers many more opportunities, invited
speakers, session chairs, and panel discussions, for beginning and established
female engineering and medical researchers engaged in CHD research to network at
the national and international level, and thereby actively promotes recruitment
of females in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is vital to maintain the continuity
of the International Conference on Engineering Frontiers in Pediatric and
Congenital Heart Disease series that effectively brings together leading
researchers in engineering and medicine who are engaged in cutting edge research
in pediatric and congenital heart disease. The conference provides a forum to
exchange of ongoing and latest breakthrough research, to expose innovative
ideas, and to build research collaborations between leading researchers from
across the USA and Europe. Moreover, the conference promotes new researchers
becoming engaged in the field through the Young Investigator podium speaker
program and its young investigator poster competition. This series of
conferences has historically attracted both USA and international participants.
Specifically, through this award, NSF will support: (1) Invited Speaker Program:
support travel expenses of ten (10) distinguished university faculty and medical
professionals who are foremost experts in congenital heart disease to attend
Frontiers 2016 and deliver invited podium presentations on their on-going
research and (2) Travel of Young Investigators and Graduate Students: the PIs
will support Young Investigators (4 non-UCF investigators) who will deliver
podium (oral) presentations and graduate students (6 non-UCF students) to
participate in Frontiers 2016. Young investigators present podium talks and PhD
students participate in the poster presentation and competition. There will be a
poster competition with awards for 1st-3rd place judged by a panel selected from
the invited speakers. Moreover, there will be a panel-led debate to address the
pros and cons of the issue: will CFD ever reach the bedside and should it? The
conference organizers have made every effort and have achieved the goal of
keeping a 50/50 balance between engineering faculty and medical professionals in
all invited and keynote lectures as well as panel-led debates. The PIs have also
secured a special issue of the World Journal for Pediatric and Congenital Heart
Surgery to collect a series of selected papers from the invited speakers as a
follow-up to the conference. The NSF funds will leverage financial sponsorship
that has been secured from academic and two medical institutions in support the
conference program.