* 1613842
* EAPSI: Improvement of Neutrino Simulation Software for High-Precision Measurements at T2K
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jacob Morrison, Morrison                Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Neutrino physics probes a wide range of unknown physics, including the nature of
neutrino oscillations and the ordering of the neutrino masses. The T2K (Tokai to
Kamioka) experiment in Japan is making precision measurements of important
experimental values related to neutrino physics. As T2K tries to improve the
precision of their findings, better modeling methods must be included in order
to keep pace with experimental measurements. This award support research at the
University of Tokyo with Dr. Yoshinari Hayato to improve the simulation
software, NEUT, used by T2K. Dr. Hayato is the maintainer of the simulation
software used by T2K, providing direct access to the person who best understands
how the software should work. The current model for deep inelastic scattering
(DIS) used in the simulation software for T2K is likely to be outdated and needs
to be updated. The PI will compare the DIS model in NEUT against T2K data and a
large variety of other data available, so that an understanding can be developed
as to where the model excels and where it begins to break down. By understanding
where the model begins to break down, work can be done either to improve the
current model itself, or create a new model that correctly represents the
world's data in the region(s) where the model breaks down. While not the
dominant interaction process, DIS is still a key interaction mechanism between
neutrinos and nucleons at the T2K experiment. Because of its importance, finding
a model that accurately portrays the process, both in predicting outcomes and
fitting existing data, is crucial.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.