* 1613102
* Collaborative Research:   Advancing the Physics of Magnetized Dusty Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Marlene Rosenberg, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

This project will study the basic physics of the interaction of strong magnetic
fields with dusty (or complex) plasmas, which are four-component systems
consisting of the usual plasma constituents of electrons, ions, and neutral
atoms with the addition of a third charged component - nanometer to micrometer
sized solid particulates; i.e., "dust". Almost all naturally-occurring plasmas
contain dust, from planetary rings, to the charged ices that form noctilucent
clouds high in the Earth's atmosphere, to the presence of dust in star- and
planet-forming regions. Current work on the formation and control of nanometer-
sized particles in industrial plasmas has also led to improved techniques for
materials synthesis, which may have long term societal benefit. Nonetheless,
there are many aspects of dusty plasma research that remain untapped. One such
area is the role of magnetic fields. Because the constituent particles of a
dusty plasma are charged, it means that their dynamics can be modified and
controlled by magnetic fields. However, this requires the production of large,
steady state magnetic fields, and only with the recent advancements in
superconducting technologies has it become possible to build devices capable of
the experimental conditions required to explore the physics of magnetized dusty
plasmas. This opens up new and exciting research opportunities for dusty plasma
research to access experimental regimes that allow investigations with both
astrophysical and technological relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study,
which is a collaboration between experimental research at Auburn University and
the University of Iowa, and theoretical research at the University of California
- San Diego, will investigate the detailed physics that describes the coupling
between the plasma, magnetic fields and the charged dust. Investigations will be
centered on the Magnetized Dusty Plasma Experiment (MDPX) - a recently
commissioned multi-user, multi-configuration, high magnetic field device located
at Auburn University. Three main topics will be investigated: (1) the direct
influence of the magnetic field on the properties of the charged microparticles;
(2) the formation of self-organized and newly discovered imposed ordered states
in the magnetized plasma; and (3) the generation of new types of collective
phenomena (waves and instabilities) that occur in magnetized plasmas. This
project will support the training of undergraduate and graduate student
researchers at the partner institutions. Through collaborations, additional
research opportunities will be provided for domestic and international graduate
students to make use of the MDPX device to further their research. Further
research partnerships with colleagues at universities, national laboratories,
and international institutions will be established to broaden the user community
who seek to use the MDPX device for both dusty plasma and basic plasma research
projects.