* 1613033
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: S^2 Lab: Educational Platform and Resource for Smartphone Security
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Mohammad Husain, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 170,000.00

Although the smartphone market has grown rapidly in recent years, education
remains mostly in the realm of traditional computer designs, even when it comes
to security. One of the crucial factors hindering the adoption of smartphone
security in the educational domain is the lack of appropriate platform and
educational resources. One option is to use an emulator but emulators have no
good support for Bluetooth, USB, peripherals, network connected state, battery
charge level, and AC charging state; many of which could be integral components
of lab exercises. The goal of this project is to develop a smartphone security
education framework and to transition to education some of the emerging research
areas related to security issues in the smartphone
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a smartphone security
education platform; develop sample educational resources (labs) that can be
supported by the platform; and evaluate the efficacy of the developed platform
and resources in promoting experiential learning in the domain of smartphone
security education. The proposed platform will be a hardware-software integrated
system that will enable students to remotely connect to the platform, choose a
smartphone security lab exercise supported by the platform and learn by
performing the lab activities on real smartphone devices. This project will
enable other institutions of higher education to utilize the platform and
resources for smartphone security education. The project outcomes will be
disseminated via the NSF-funded SEED labs.