* 1613267
* Laboratory measurements of three deuterium substitution reactions important in interstellar chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Daniel Wolf Savin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2020
* USD 577,788.00

The extremely cold and tenuous clouds of gas and dust that occupy interstellar
space -- the space between the stars -- host a rich chemistry. This research
project will study chemical reactions of the simplest polyatomic molecular ions
that drive the chemistry of the interstellar gas. These ions can exist at the
very low temperatures at which most other molecules freeze out. The research
team will use a sophisticated laboratory experiment to accurately determine
reaction rates of the ions at very low temperatures. Results from the study will
allow astronomers to better understand the abundance of these ions in space and
to use them as probes of the coldest and densest regions within interstellar
clouds, which are birthplaces of stars and planets. The project will contribute
to the training and professional development of a postdoctoral scholar. The
project will also support a program that is known to have a positive impact on
middle school and high school science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will perform laboratory studies of the gas-phase reactions of
atomic deuterium with H3+ -- the simplest polyatomic ion found in the
interstellar gas -- and its deuterated forms H2D+ and D2H+. The three reactions
are important in the chemistry that drastically increases the deuterium content
of interstellar molecules; and the H2D+ and D2H+ ions probe the densest regions
of cold dark clouds where most other molecules freeze out. Understanding the
chemistry of these ions is therefore essential to understanding these regions,
which are potential sites of star and planet formation. The proposed studies are
challenging because atoms and molecular ions are difficult to produce in the
laboratory. The team will measure rate coefficients of the reactions of D atoms
with H3+, H2D+, and D2H+ using a dual-source, merged fast-beams apparatus, which
was built with prior NSF support (AST-0905832), that enables them to produce and
react beams of atoms and molecular ions. Collisional cross sections extracted
from the measured rate coefficients will be used to generate thermal rate
coefficients at temperatures relevant to cold interstellar clouds (10 K - 100
K). The rate coefficients are expected to be accurate to within 15% -- about an
order of magnitude better than those calculated for the three reactions. The
project will support a postdoctoral scholar at Columbia University. The project
will also allow team members to continue participating in the Columbia
University Summer Research Program that engages middle school and high school
teachers in scientific research, and has been shown to help retain teachers in
school and improve student performance in science courses.