* 1613754
* RUI: Uncovering Mechanisms of Spt16-gene Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Andrea Duina, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 511,622.00

The central objective of this project is to provide new insights into the
molecular mechanisms that control how the information contained within genes is
utilized by cells. Because genes are responsible for essentially all aspects of
cell and organismal biology, ranging from how cells divide to how animals
respond to hormones, these studies will shed new light into processes of broad
biological importance. The project will also have a wide-reaching impact on the
education of undergraduate students through the implementation of several
initiatives. First, 12 undergraduate students will be directly involved in
several aspects of the research. These students will be mentored by Dr. Duina
and will be trained in a variety of laboratory and scientific skills. Second,
30-50 undergraduate students will carry out part of this research in the context
of a course Dr. Duina teaches at Hendrix College. These students will be engaged
in the excitement of science through an authentic research experience in the
classroom. Third, students in Dr. Duina's laboratory will present their research
to their peers majoring in disciplines other than the sciences. These sessions
are designed to teach science students how to communicate science to the lay
public as well as to expose non-scientists to the thrill of scientific
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on elucidating the
mechanisms by which the transcription elongation factor Spt16 interacts with
transcribed genes in vivo. Within the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, DNA is
compacted through the formation of a protein-DNA complex known as chromatin, the
fundamental unit of which is the nucleosome. Nucleosomes consist of a short
stretch of DNA wrapped around histone octamers, themselves composed of pairs of
the four core histone proteins. Nucleosomes represent physical barriers during
the process of gene transcription and Spt16, as part of the FAcilitates
Chromatin Transactions (FACT) complex, has been shown to play central roles in
overcoming these barriers. In this project, Dr. Duina's laboratory will use a
combination of genetic, biochemical, and targeted proteomic approaches to assess
contributions of DNA sequences, histone modifications, histones, and other
proteins in regulating physical interactions between Spt16 and transcribed
genes. The model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be used for this
project, and given the high degree of evolutionary conservation in the factors
and processes under investigation, results from these studies will contribute to
our understanding of a process relevant to all eukaryotic organisms, including
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.