* 1613861
* Investigating Potential Singularities in the Euler and Navier-Stokes Equations Using an Integrated Analytical and Computational Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Hou, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,729.00

Navier-Stokes equations are used to model ocean currents, weather patterns, and
turbulent flows behind a plane or ship. Mathematicians and physicists believe
that an explanation for and the prediction of both breezes and turbulence can be
found through an understanding of solutions to Navier-Stokes equations. Though
most physicists and engineers believe that the smooth solutions of the Navier-
Stokes equations cannot break down without external forcing, currently there is
no theoretical guarantee that this is indeed the case. The investigator's recent
study with collaborators indicates that the Euler equations, which correspond to
the inviscid limit of the Navier-Stokes equations, could develop a catastrophic
behavior if one starts with a highly symmetric but perfectly smooth flow. Such a
scenario is like a perfect storm in which all things that could potentially go
wrong indeed go wrong. A potentially singular behavior of the fluid flows
described by the Navier-Stokes equations could negate the ability to forecast
the behavior of fluid systems accurately. The investigator studies conditions
under which the Euler or Navier-Stokes equations may develop a potentially
singular behavior. The ultimate goal of the project is to develop effective
analytical and computational tools that enhance our ability to model and predict
various complex fluid flows, such as those arising in engineering, oceanography,
and weather forecasting. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars are
included in the work of the project. The interdisciplinary training they receive
is important for their future careers in mathematics and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to understand whether the
incompressible 3D Euler and Navier-Stokes equations could develop a finite-time
singularity from a smooth initial condition with finite energy. A major approach
of the project is to study the spatial profiles in potential self-similar
singularities of the solutions, which can be obtained by solving a nonlinear
eigenvalue problem. A notable aspect of the project is the combination of highly
resolved numerical simulations and rigorous mathematical analysis. Numerical
computations are first conducted to detect potential finite-time singularity
scenarios and gain primary understanding about the singularity formation. Then
the evolution equations of spatial profiles in the solutions are studied using a
dynamic rescaling formulation both analytically and numerically. The theoretical
framework developed in this project introduces an appropriate notion of
stability for the self-similar profiles through the dynamic rescaling
formulation. Stability of the numerically constructed self-similar profile is a
crucial step in constructing a finite-time singularity of the Euler equations.
Another interesting aspect of the project is that the dynamic rescaling
formulation provides a natural framework to investigate whether the finite-time
singularity in the Euler equations may lead to a potential finite-time
singularity of the Navier-Stokes equations for certain type of singularities.
The stability of self-similar profiles of the Euler equations again plays a
crucial role in this study.