* 1613807
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Variations in Cloud Versus CO2 Radiative Forcing on Tropical SST Gradients, Atmospheric Circulation and Rainfall Patterns
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Alexey Fedorov, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2020
* USD 265,429.00

Simulations of the response of tropical climate to greenhouse gas increases show
a prominent role for clouds in determining how much the tropics warm, how the
warming is distributed geographically, and how it affects other aspects of the
climate. Many aspects of tropical climate, including the distribution of
rainfall and surface winds, are closely related to the east-west sea surface
temperature (SST) gradient along the equatorial Pacific, between the warm pool
of the western Pacific and the cold tongue extending from the eastern boundary.
Previous work by the PIs shows a strong relationship between the SST gradient in
the equatorial Pacific and the contrast in brightness, or albedo, between
tropical and extratropical clouds. The PIs have developed a theory to explain
this connection, in which extratropical clouds with higher albedo imply less
sunlight absorbed by the ocean at higher latitudes, which in turn requires
greater heat transport from the tropics, which is satisfied by greater oceanic
heat uptake in the cold tongue and subsequent oceanic transport, which requires
colder temperatures in the cold tongue and thus a greater temperature contrast
between the cold tongue and the warm pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by
this theoretical framework, the PIs test the hypothesis that latitudinal
variations in the response of cloud albedo to greenhouse warming play a key role
in driving changes in tropical climate associated with the east-west SST
contrast across the Pacific. The PIs perform greenhouse warming simulations with
the Community Earth System Model (CESM) in n fully coupled, slab ocean, and
prescribed SST configurations, in which cloud feedbacks and their effects on the
equatorial Pacific SST contrast are assessed. Complimentary analysis of
greenhouse warming simulations from the archive of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5) is also performed. As ocean heat
transport plays an important role, a water parcel tracking scheme is applied to
identify the location and time of last ventilation for water in the equatorial
mixed layer, which can then be related to cloud radiative effects felt by the
parcel during ventilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has broader
societal impacts as it addresses fundamental issues in tropical climate which
are essential for anticipating future climate changes in a populous region. The
work has broader scientific impacts because the results will likely be helpful
for understanding warm climates of the past, in particular the Pliocene, a
period 3-5 million years ago when carbon dioxide levels were as high as today
and the equatorial Pacific SST gradient is believed to have been weaker. The
work has additional educational broader impacts through the participation of one
of the PIs in National Center for Science Education "Scientists in the
Classroom" pilot project, in which she will work with a middle school teachers
and students. In addition, the project provides support and training to a
graduate student and a postdoc, thereby providing for the future workforce in
this research area.