* 1613772
* AF:Small:Resource-Competitive Algorithms for Building Robust Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Maxwell Young, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2018
* USD 157,608.00

Robustness to disruption, either unintentional or malicious, is a critical issue
in large-scale, decentralized systems. Resource-competitive analysis is a
promising algorithmic approach to providing this robustness under challenging
fault models. Here, costs are measured in terms of network resources such as
computational power, bandwidth, or energy. A resource-competitive algorithm
provides guarantees on the cost to a correct device as a function of the cost
incurred by the faulty components in the system.  By designing algorithms that
quantify this cost relationship, practitioners can provision networks with
sufficient resources to tolerate otherwise catastrophic failures. Furthermore,
in many cases, it is even possible to guarantee that faulty devices will deplete
their respective resources much faster than correct devices; therefore, any
disruption to the system will be short lived. For these reasons, resource-
competitive algorithms can play an important role in bolstering fault tolerance
in a variety of practical network settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following research challenges. First, robust multiple access (MA)
protocols for mobile systems are often difficult to design, and this can be
further complicated by wireless interference. Energy is a scarce commodity for
many mobile devices, and resource-competitive MA protocols are critical in this
setting. Second, interactive computation in the wireless domain is fragile given
bit errors that arise over unreliable communication channels. Given that
bandwidth is constrained, resource-competitive interactive communication is
important under random and adversarial bit errors. Third, insider attacks pose a
threat to the correctness of many open, decentralized, and dynamic wired
networks. In such settings, computational power may be utilized for outvoting
malicious users in a resource-competitive fashion. Finally, consensus is a
critical building block for many distributed protocols. However, achieving
consensus is difficult in wireless sensor networks where battery power is
limited and interference can arise due to faulty devices. A robust and resource-
competitive consensus algorithm is needed for this setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has practical impact on the design of robust
network, both wired and wireless. Additional broader impacts include curriculum
development and research training for undergraduates.