* 1613397
* EAPSI: Harnessing the Power of a Molecular Machine: A Bifunctional Supramolecular Switch Allowing for Multiple Catalytic Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* James BREWSTER, BREWSTER                James          T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Nature utilizes highly efficient and specifically designed enzymes to facilitate
the transformations necessary for life. The catalytic proficiency of these
systems allows for complex modifications with specificity and efficiency not
always accessible through synthetic methods. Thus, the design of supramolecular
systems with the ability to mimic the key catalytic function of enzymes has been
a chemist?s long-standing dream. This award supports development of a
bifunctional, supramolecular switch allowing for multiple catalytic processes.
This project is expected to result in a novel catalytic system allowing for the
selective functionalization of substrates achieved through macrocyclic-based
recognition with concomitant control of binding orientation. These studies will
be conducted in collaboration with Professor Hegui Gong and Dr. Zhan Zhang of
Shanghai University, both of whom are recognized as prominent researchers within
the fields of organic synthetic methodology and supramolecular chemistry,
respectively.

In recent years increasingly diverse arrays of supramolecular catalysts have
been developed. These systems utilize cooperative (geometric), steric, or
electronic effects, as well as aggregation, host-guest, and other non-covalent
interactions to bind and orient substrates for selective functionalization.
Currently appealing in supramolecular catalysis is the use of so-called
molecular switches, whose functionality can be altered by external stimuli. The
goal of this research program is to prepare a bifunctional supramolecular switch
with two separate catalytic functionalities that can be (de)activated by varying
the applied stimuli (light or addition of a competing cation). Supramolecular
catalysis shows promise of allowing for multiple switchable catalytic states,
thus enabling precise control over sequences of transformations in an
environmentally friendly manner (low catalyst loading, easily recoverable
catalyst, minimal waste and energy requirements, and single-pot tandem reaction
sequences). The pursuit of this project is thus expected to advance knowledge in
supramolecular chemistry and molecular switches while providing a new approach
to achieving catalysis.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.