* 1613674
* Unified Modeling of Galaxy Populations in Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Quinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,036.00

Understanding the history of galaxy and cluster formation fundamentally affects
our knowledge of the Universe as a whole, and sets the context for our place
within the Universe. This project will use Blue Waters to model the formation
and evolution of a population of galaxies in a Coma-sized galaxy cluster,
including their contribution to and interaction with the Intra-Cluster Medium
(ICM). Modeling galaxies and the ICM in galaxy clusters is a formidable
challenge. The morphology of the galaxies, and the energy and metal content of
the gas is ultimately controlled by star formation processes that happen on
molecular cloud scales of less than a million solar masses. On the other hand,
total cluster masses exceed 10^15 solar masses; hence a dynamic range in mass of
over a billion is necessary for consistently modeling galaxies within this
context. The investigation of such issues is appealing to many interested in
science and even in society at large. In particular, the results of the project
will be used in a program that will introduce the use of computer simulations in
astrophysics to science pre-majors, in the hope of ultimately attracting
underrepresented students into a STEM major.

Several advancements have now enabled the modeling of these systems. First is
the availability of supercomputers like Blue Waters that can sustained petaflop
calculations on real world problems. Second is the improvement of hydrodynamic
modeling in Lagrangian codes. These improvements include better modeling of
multiphase medium and the resulting instabilities, more accurate handling of
high Mach number shocks, and better modeling of the subgrid physics including
growth and feedback from supermassive black holes. Finally these algorithm
improvements have been implemented in codes that can scale to a large fraction
of Blue Waters even with very clustered datasets. This project will use the
highly scalable N-body/hydrodynamics code, ChaNGa, to model the formation and
evolution of a population of galaxies in a Coma-sized galaxy cluster, including
their contribution to and interaction with the ICM. This model will be compared
to observations of cluster galaxies to understand the physical and temporal
origin of their morphologies. The model ICM will be compared to X-ray and
microwave (via the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect) to understand the relation between
these observables and the underlying gas properties. Finally, the overall mass
distribution will be used to better understand how these clusters
gravitationally lens background galaxies.