* 1613449
* Hadron Resonances and Exotic States using Lattice QCD with the Stochastic LapH Method
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Protons and neutrons, which make up atomic nuclei, are made up of fundamental
particles known as quarks and gluons, whose interactions are described by
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This theory suggests that many other types of
composite particles, known as hadrons, should exist in Nature as unstable
resonances. The properties of excited hadronic resonances as predicted by QCD
will be investigated. Exotic particles, such as glueballs, hybrid mesons, and
tetraquarks are of particular interest. The proposed research lends support to
current experiments, such as in the Hall B N* program and the GlueX experiment
in Hall D at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab), which
are studying such hadronic resonances. Hadron scattering will also be
investigated. These computations rely heavily on resources provided by the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is
supported by the NSF. The proposed research incorporates the participation of a
graduate student whose education will be enhanced not only by involvement in
scientific projects at the forefront of nuclear theory, but also with high-
technology training in the use of state-of-the-art parallel computing resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of excited hadrons will be studied using Monte
Carlo estimates of path integrals involving quark and gluon fields on a space-
time lattice. In addition to conventional mesons and baryons, glueballs and so-
called hybrid mesons and baryons in which the valence quarks are bound by an
excited gluon field will be investigated. Exotic interpolating operators,
including tetraquark operators, will be used to explore the nature of the
excited states in quantum chromodynamics. Pion-pion, kaon-pion, and nucleon-pion
scattering phase shifts will be computed and used to determine the decay widths
of various resonances, such as the rho meson and the Roper and Lambda(1405)
resonances. A new methodology for dealing with multi-hadron operators, known as
the stochastic LapH method, will be used for these calculations. The newly
discovered XYZ mesons, whose constituents are believed to consist of a heavy
quark and antiquark plus a light quark and antiquark, will be studied using both
conventional lattice QCD techniques and using a Born-Oppenheimer treatment.