* 1613413
* EAPSI: Converting Ultraviolet Light to Chemical Energy in Small Organic Molecules on an Ultrafast Timescale
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Trevor Safko, Safko                   Trevor
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Proton and electron transfers are the simplest of chemical reactions yet much
about these fundamental processes still remains a mystery. One of the greatest
difficulties in observing these events is the fast timescale on which they
occur. A complex series of reactions can occur in under one billionth of a
second. Recent advances in optics and engineering have given scientists the
ability to observe previously invisible processes. Professor Gaolin Liang at the
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) has studied these 'simple'
reactions with resolution of up to 0.1 trillionth of a second (100
femtoseconds). This type of equipment is revolutionizing our understanding of
elementary reactions. This award supports a summer research collaboration in the
Liang lab. The unique compounds to be investigated at USTC convert ultraviolet
light into chemical energy. Monitoring this phenomena on a femtosecond timescale
will inform our understanding of energy transfer mechanisms. Potential
applications of this research include the design of more efficient solar cells,
sensitive chemical detectors, and better energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The compounds to be brought to USTC for this
investigation participate in a proton-coupled charge-transfer (PCCT) reaction.
The rapid, adiabatic transfer of a proton to the surrounding media is
facilitated by a partial charge-transfer reaction. This PCCT reaction leads to
the formation of an intramolecular charge-transfer complex (exciplex) which is
readily observed by fluorescence spectroscopy. In order to gather thermodynamic
and kinetic information about this rare phenomenon, transient absorption
experiments will be completed at USTC. This is the first exciplex mediated
proton-transfer event. It is imperative that the dynamics and extent of this
process are better understood to broaden the current understanding of energy
transfer mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology
of China.