* 1613854
* EAPSI: Investigating the Properties of Polymeric Nanoparticles Used for Separations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Julie McGettrick, McGettrick              Julie          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will investigate the properties of certain latex nanoparticles to
learn which work best for separating different compounds. Specifically, the
research uses nanoparticles with a cationic shell to separate analytes found in
explosives residues. Subtle differences between different polymers lead to
noticeable changes in the separation performance, so it is imperative to
characterize these polymers as much as possible to understand why. A better
understanding of the polymers will lead to a greater understanding of what
properties influence performance of electrokinetic chromatography (EKC), a
microscale analytical technique used in separation of neutral compounds found in
explosive residues. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Emily Hilder, a leading expert in the field of separation science, at the Future
Industries Institute at the University of South Australia.

Separations occur when compounds of interest interact differently with a
material, and to get the best separations it is important to understand the
material?s properties. This project will investigate how the properties of
polymeric latex nanoparticles affect their ability to separate neutral compounds
when used as a pseudostationary phase in electrokinetic chromatography (EKC).
The research aims to advance three aims: 1) to investigate the latexes by
capillary capillary electrophoresis in the critical condition, which makes one
block in the diblock polymer ?chromatographically invisible?; 2) to investigate
chain branching in the hydrophobic block by 13C NMR; and 3) to investigate the
nanoparticle size and morphology by transmission electron microscopy. By better
understanding the properties of different nanoparticles, they can be tailored to
separate specific types of compounds, including environmental contaminants,
pharmaceutical ingredients, or explosives residues.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.