* 1613895
* EAPSI: How Early Experiences in a Critical Life Stage Cascade into Stereotyped Adult Singing Behavior in Songbirds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jacob Edwards, Edwards                 Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Infants pick up their native language with remarkable ease, whereas learning a
second language in adulthood is laborious. This period of heightened sensitivity
in youth, often called a ?critical period?, is a common feature of animal
development across diverse taxa. Similarly, many songbird species learn their
characteristic song during a critical period, beyond which no further learning
can occur. Much work has been done on the molecular and environmental drivers
that open and close the song-learning critical period, but it is not clear how
variation in the quality of the juvenile?s experience influences the timing of
this important developmental phase. In collaboration with Dr. Yoko Yazaki-
Sugiyama at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, this project will
investigate how such experience alters plasticity in the brain. Understanding
this process has important therapeutic implications for treating early language
acquisition disorders, and potentially a range of other early-life social
learning disorders.

Understanding the temporal dynamics of the song-learning critical period has
further potential to explain how constraints on neural plasticity develop and
evolve. Zebra finches undergo a triphasic critical period. This consists of a
sensory phase where song information is encoded in memory, a sensorimotor
integration and refinement phase, and a period of overlap. Using fine-scale
neuronal silencing techniques developed by Dr. Yazaki-Sugiyama, the project will
explore the relative contribution of each phase to the timing of later phases
and song crystallization. This will be the first study to selectively and
reversibly perturb individual components of the critical period to determine
their influence on the timing of critical period closure. Further, the project
will generate song data as well as brain anatomical data to connect behavioral
outcomes to their underlying neural mechanisms. Such work is needed to
understand how critical periods and constraints on plasticity evolve, and to
what degree they can be manipulated.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.