* 1613890
* EAPSI:Modeling the Surface of Nanoparticles during the Conversion of Carbon Monoxide to Transportation Fuel
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Greg Collinge, Collinge                Greg           B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Development of new transportation fuels by reacting carbon monoxide and hydrogen
over engineered catalysts will help the United States meet our future energy
needs. Current efforts to effect this transformation are hindered because of our
poor understanding of the chemical reaction at the catalytic surface. Working
with Professor Catherine Stampfl, an expert in nanoscale modeling at the
University of Sydney, this project will model how this chemical reaction occurs.

The hydrogenation of carbon monoxide (CO) to long-chain hydrocarbons via
Fischer-Tropsch (FT) synthesis is hindered by a critical knowledge gap: the FT
mechanism is unknown. Determining this mechanism requires computational models
that accurately reflect the reaction environment of FT. Lattice gas (LG) models
can provide this information by revealing the relevant configurations of the FT
reactants and key intermediates on the catalyst surface. Professor Catherine
Stampfl, of the University of Sydney, Australia, first proposed how LG models
could be constructed from first principles calculations. Our collaboration will
identify the most probable FT reaction environment from a LG model of CO and H2
on Co(755), which can later be used to model the initial steps of the reaction
and subsequently determine the FT mechanism of chain initiation, eventually
pushing research past the knowledge gap that prohibits the successful
implementation of FT.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.