* 1613857
* EAPSI: Determining Disk Galaxy Evolutionary State through Spatially-Resolved Gas Mass Fractions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Zachary Pace, Pace                    Zachary        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Current research in galaxy formation and evolution seeks to answer one main
question: how did the heterogeneous universe we observe--with its vast tracts of
virtually-empty space between immensely compact islands of stars and hot gas--
form from an overwhelmingly homogeneous beginning, the Big Bang? This is
indicated robustly in individual galaxies by the gas mass fraction, the
percentage of mass contained in both hot plasma and cool atomic & molecular
hydrogen--as opposed to mass contained in stars. A small gas fraction indicates
--in general--an evolved system with reduced capacity for forming new stars,
while a large gas fraction suggests the potential for large star formation and
metal-enrichment of the interstellar medium. In collaboration with Prof. Yanmei
Chen (Nanjing University: Nanjing, Jiansu, China), the PI will construct
statistically-robust estimates of stellar mass, and compare to his existing
measurements of spatially-resolved gas mass. The radial variation of gas mass
fraction will be compared with estimates of total galaxy mass, star formation
rate, and galaxy environment density.

In the new era of integral-field spectroscopic surveys (such as MaNGA, SAMI, and
CALIFA), responsive, robust, and cheap methods of stellar-continuum fitting are
necessary counterparts to large, nightly datastreams. Most methods of stellar-
mass estimation are computationally costly, and do not take advantage of modern
advances in statistics and machine learning. Prof. Yanmei Chen has developed a
method of fitting the stellar continuum, which relies on the one-off principal-
component analysis (PCA) of a library of single stellar population (SSP) models,
which yields order-of-magnitude improvements in compute time and will enable the
use of larger, more flexible SSP libraries. The PI has obtained a set of fully-
theoretical SSP models, with a spectral resolution exceeding that of MaNGA. Such
SSPs include near-IR features like the CaII triplet (necessary for breaking the
age-metallicity degeneracy), and improve on existing models of the thermally-
pulsating asymptotic giant branch (TP-AGB). Combining the high-resolution
stellar library with Chen's PCA code (translated by the PI from IDL to Python)
will yield measurable improvements in resolved stellar-mass estimates. When
paired with resolved total gas mass (HI + H2), estimated using new optical-
spectroscopic methods (rather than from expensive, radio-band follow-up), a
census of stars and gas in nearby galaxies will result. These single-source
estimates of galaxy evolutionary state will improve current knowledge of
galactic chemical evolution and mass assembly, and place the Milky Way in a
cosmic context.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.