* 1613942
* EAPSI: Does Clay Content in Soil Exacerbate the Effects of Climate Change in Arid Ecosystems?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Hannah Yokum, Yokum                   Hannah         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Climate change is one of the leading factors behind the range expansion or
contraction of species. Through climate models, researchers are able to predict
temperature change and rainfall patterns on a local scale. However, to determine
what effect these changes will have on plant communities, there needs to be a
connection between climate models and in situ plant response variables. The
combination of both create species distribution models. In dryland regions of
the world where species are currently water-limited, predictive species
distribution models are critical to understanding the survival of indigenous
plant species in the changing climate. This research will provide information
about soil-water-plant relationships, which will be incorporated into predictive
models to assess landscape changes in the presence of global climate change.
Research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. John Morgan from La Trobe
University in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The main question of this research project is: does high clay content in soil
increase woody shrub mortality through plant-water stress. This project involves
two research aims: 1) spatial sampling of remotely-sensed data, and 2)
corresponding field studies. In the field, clay content in critical soil layers,
stem water potential of shrubs, soil infiltration, and soil bulk density will be
measured. Correlations will be formed between clay content and plant-water
stress which will be compared to other dryland regions in the western United
States. These data will be added to, and overlayed with, remote sensing images
of the area. These results will show how climate change, moderated through the
effects of soil clay content, may affect community assemblage in two different
dryland ecosystems. These data will inform climate and water models in their
prediction for species at risk. Several studies have predicted that shrub
distributions will increase with climate change. If shrub increase or decline is
linked to precipitation regimes through clay content, inclusive models will be
better able to predict areas where shrubs are threatened.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.