* 1613185
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reproductive trade-offs in female primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Melissa Thompson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,727.00

Female primates, including women, expend considerable energy during pregnancy
and breastfeeding, limiting the energy that can be allocated to other
physiological functions, and potentially shaping long-term trends in well-being,
aging, and mortality. This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the
physiological impacts of female reproduction for wild female chimpanzees, using
non-invasively collected demographic, hormonal, genetic, parasitic, and viral
data in two chimpanzee populations. Chimpanzees, our closest living primate
relatives, provide an important comparative model of female reproductive trade-
offs, especially given that human studies are confounded by fertility control,
infant supplementation, medical care, and childcare assistance. The information
generated by this research will help to inform the basic biology underlying
women's health. The student co-PI will conduct science education and
conservation outreach through a number of venues, including mobile discovery
stations on primates and parasites designed for K-9 school children from
communities that are underrepresented in the STEM fields, and workshops on
project outcomes and the importance of field guides in scientific research and
chimpanzee conservation.

Energy allocation to producing and caring for infants is predicted to generate
costs for long-term health and survival in humans and non-human primates, and
these types of trade-offs are potentially important for understanding modern
human life history. This proposal tests three hypotheses in wild chimpanzees,
including that 1) high costs of reproduction will negatively impact immune
function in female chimpanzees; 2) females with higher available energy
experience reduced immunological costs of reproduction, and, 3) female genetic
quality mediates immunological costs of reproduction. Two parasite systems will
be used as proxies for immune function, including a helminth and a virus. This
study is highly interdisciplinary, offers novel data on age-associated patterns
of disease in chimpanzees, and potentially targets factors salient to the
evolution of extended lifespan in humans.