* 1613869
* EAPSI:Understanding the Genetic and Protein Dynamics Involved in the Seasonally Breeding Japanese Macaque
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Cody Ruiz, Ruiz                    Cody           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Research that works to enhance the understanding of the genes, proteins, and
processes involved in primate reproduction is important for shaping both
evolutionary and biomedical knowledge. This award supports research to examine
the Japanese macaque as a primate model for gamete production, with emphasis on
the genetic and protein dynamics involved in its seasonal-breeding ability. Male
Japanese macaques shut down reproductive functions in the birthing season and
resume function in the breeding season, challenging previous thinking that
gamete production was highly conserved across mammals. Recent research has shown
differences in genetic and molecular dynamics between rodent and primate models.
This emphasizes the need to develop primate models, which are more closely
related to humans, in order to make more accurate extrapolations to human
reproductive biology. This project will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr.
Hirohisa Hirai, a noted molecular biologist and primatologist, at the Primate
Research Institute (PRI) in Inuyama, Japan, home to extensive collections of
preserved Japanese macaque tissue which will be invaluable to this research.

Previous research has focused on the hormonal and cellular pathways involved in
the suppression of testicular function in Japanese macaques, but the underlying
genetic and molecular mechanisms remain elusive. The project will focus on three
potential mechanisms: i) the quiescence of sperm proliferation, ii) apoptosis in
the testes, and iii) stage-specific cessation of sperm production. Testis tissue
collected from males in both the breeding and birthing seasons will be analyzed
for spermatogenesis genes, germ cell markers, and epigenetic states using RT-
PCR. Then, the researcher will use HE-staining and immunofluorescence microscopy
to gain a clear spatiotemporal understanding about the dynamics of primate
reproduction.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).