* 1613401
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Modeling hominin variability in Australopithecus africanus
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Frederick Grine, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 21,875.00

One of the fundamental goals of anthropological research is to understand
humanity's biological origins and evolution, for which the hominin fossil record
is a primary source of data. However, it is difficult to determine, for a given
time period and location, whether the relatively limited and fragmentary hominin
fossils represent one or multiple species. Such is the case for South African
fossils attributed to the species Australopithecus africanus. The variability in
this assemblage of fossils has been proposed to represent more than one species,
but there is little agreement about how to sort the various fossils. Determining
species designations for this assemblage is important because it affects
interpretations of A. africanus as a direct ancestor of our own genus Homo and
therefore our understanding of how and where the genus Homo evolved. By
incorporating methods from systematic biology and developing new statistical
methods, this research will provide a necessary framework to define hominin
fossil species and address diversity in hominin evolution. This project will
also support training and mentoring of students, including from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields, science outreach to high school students, and
scan data that will be made available through Morphosource.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recognition of species in the fossil record is of
critical importance to understanding hominin evolution and diversity. A vast
literature exists on species concepts, but process-based definitions cannot be
easily applied to fossil species. Accordingly, levels of variation within
purported hypodigms have typically been used to delineate hominin species, but
such approaches rest on the problematic assumption that these parameters are
comparable in extinct and extant species. Elsewhere in biology, methods have
been developed that use the structure of variance within a sample to detect the
presence of discrete species. Despite continued controversy over hominin species
delineation, these methods have yet to be employed in anthropology.
Australopithecus africanus exemplifies this problem. Resolving its alpha
taxonomy is critically important to interpreting human evolution, but it remains
a contentious issue. The possibility that A. africanus subsumes two or more
species has significant implications for the interpretation of the hominin
phylogeny and the evolution of the genus Homo. The goal of this research is to
quantitatively model species variation in extant primates and fossil hominins in
order to re-evaluate the taxonomic heterogeneity of the A. africanus assemblage.
This will be accomplished by using phylogenetic comparative methods to estimate
an appropriate null hypothesis model of hominin variability. Data will be
collected from 3D surfaces of extant primate and fossil hominin teeth using
landmarks, semi-landmarks, and GIS-based approaches. The data from this study
will provide a detailed model of hominin variability using both mixture models
and matrix correlation analyses.