* 1613729
* Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulation of Nanoalloy Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Timothy Schulze, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2019
* USD 245,180.00

The goal of this research project is to develop realistic, accurate, and
efficient computer-simulation techniques for modeling alloy materials. The
project focuses on simulation of the growth of nanoclusters, especially alloys,
ranging in size from a few hundred to a few million atoms. Interest in
nanoclusters is broad, arising in large part due to the tunable nature of their
properties. The morphology, structure, and stability, along with the thermal,
electronic, and chemical properties of clusters can vary dramatically with size,
composition, and atomic ordering. Often, there are "magic sizes" that exhibit
particularly unusual structures and properties. In some cases, the addition of
as little as a single dopant atom can create a dramatically different material.
Applications are diverse, including optics, catalysis, nanoelectronics, and
biomedicine. While there is a large body of work on nanoclusters, the techniques
under development in this project are new and uniquely suited to simulating the
growth and evolution of atomistic-scale structures. The successful development
of these techniques will fill a significant gap in existing simulation methods.

This project focuses on kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulation of the growth of
nanoclusters. Essentially all of the work on nanocluster simulation to date is
based on either global optimization (the search for ground states) or
equilibrium Monte Carlo simulations. In contrast, KMC simulation is designed for
following the dynamics of nonequilibrium processes and is therefore uniquely
suited to simulating the growth and evolution of atomistic-scale structures. KMC
methods fall into two broad categories: lattice and off-lattice, both of which
will be used in this work. Lattice-based models are much simpler and orders of
magnitude faster, allowing them to work with much larger systems for longer
simulation times. This type of simulation will be used to study the growth of
dendritic clusters containing several million atoms. This portion of the project
also contains a significant modeling component, the main thrust of which is to
derive general results for the way surface energy and equilibrium crystal shapes
are determined by the formulation of various growth models. These results will
then be used to identify parameter values and model configurations that are
likely to yield interesting dendrite morphologies during the subsequent
simulation of the growth. The off-lattice portion of the project will be focused
on the growth of smaller clusters, containing hundreds or perhaps thousands of
atoms. The main focus here will be on developing faster methods. The testing
ground for these new methods will be simulating the growth of alloy
nanoparticles with core-shell structures. This can be viewed as the nanoparticle
analog of heteroepitaxial thin films.