* 1613564
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diet, cognition, and nutrient cycling in wild orangutan habitats
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Erin Vogel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 31,000.00

Primate cognitive evolution is thought to have been shaped, in part, by the need
to navigate complex and variable environments in order to find food. However,
the relationship between ecological variability and cognitive complexity is not
fully understood for living primates. This doctoral dissertation project will
use innovative and interdisciplinary methods to study the travel paths of
Bornean orangutans through their environment, in order to understand how these
primates fulfill specific nutritional targets and navigate their environment
using prior information to reach those targets. A better understanding of what
one of our closest living relatives knows about their resources, and how they
utilize this information to make foraging decisions, provides a unique
opportunity for deepening our understanding of the origins and evolution of
complex cognition in our own species. This research will also support academic
training and mentorship for students under-represented in STEM fields, foster
international collaboration and scientific capacity building at the field
location, and contribute to local conservation initiatives by providing a method
to predict how, why and when orangutans will move through different parts of
their habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing interest in the study of
primate spatial cognition by analyzing travel paths of animals through their
environment. Researchers tend to examine travel decisions through the lens of
classical foraging theory, but the observed spatial behavior of animals rarely
reflects the expectations set by foraging models. This may be because
interpretations of foraging and travel decisions typically focus on calories,
when in fact foragers may also have specific nutritional targets and navigate
using prior information to reach those targets. This project will examine how
spatial cognition facilitates nutritional balancing in primates by studying
Bornean orangutans. Orangutans are an ideal model system because they live in
highly variable environments, do not live in social groups, and thus make
independent travel and foraging decisions. Most prior studies addressing spatial
memory and diet have lacked the ecological correlates of cognition, or have
struggled to quantify cognitive foraging in the wild. In this project, data on
food distribution, availability, and nutrition will be quantified using a
combination of manual sampling and modern remote sensing techniques. Data on
ranging and foraging will be collected via focal observations in which dietary
and GPS data will be collected at two minute intervals. Urine samples will be
collected opportunistically to monitor nutritional and energetic status. These
data will be analyzed by integrating a set of novel spatially explicit
statistical techniques from movement ecology with the nutritional geometric
framework from nutritional ecology.