* 1613897
* EAPSI: The Role of China in Induced Innovations in the Solar Photovoltaics Industry
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Long Lam, Lam                     Long
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

To address grave environmental concerns, the Chinese government has responded
swiftly and aggressively by seeking to build domestic industries capable of
producing and implementing new renewable energy technologies through various
government support programs and policies. This project will investigate the role
of these policies on China's photovoltaics (PV) industry, and how the emergence
of China's PV industry has affected the innovation capabilities of the global
supply chain. This research will be conducted for eight weeks in collaboration
with Prof. Jianxua Xu, an expert in environmental and energy policy, at Peking
University, Beijing. Results of this project can aid policymakers in analyzing
policy options as the US seeks a balanced response to Chinese solar PV firms.

Many authors previously examined China's solar photovoltaic industry and
concluded that the industry has undergone dramatic transformation in its
innovative capabilities. However, the market dominance of monocrystalline
silicon, a technology first developed in the 1950s, and the recent well-
publicized consolidation of the domestic industry suggest that China's PV
industry has yet to develop the level of cutting-edge innovative capabilities
suggested by others. On the other hand, the competitive nature of the downstream
cells/modules segment of the supply chain, dominated by Chinese firms, may have
induced upstream firms to find ways to satisfy the demanding, cost-conscious
downstream customers. By bringing together data on the expansion of solar PV
sales by firm and region, data on regional policies to promote solar power and
solar PV manufacturing, and data on innovation activities in China's solar
industry, this project will build econometric and engineering models to evaluate
the importance of innovation in driving the expansion of the Chinese solar
industry, focusing especially on the interaction effects of various segments
within the complex supply chain.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.