* 1613434
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Phylogenetic relationships of Mid-Late Miocene hominoids: implications for understanding great ape and human evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Kelsey Pugh, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,166.00

Great apes, humans, and their ancestors have been the subject of substantial
research, but there is much more to be learned about their shared evolutionary
history leading up to the advent of the hominin lineage and upright walking.
This project aims to more accurately determine relationships among fossil and
living apes, and to use this information to better understand the evolution of
characteristic ape and human locomotor behaviors, including those of our recent
fossil ancestors. The project has broader impacts that include the generation of
a large anatomical dataset that will be made freely accessible for future use,
and the promotion of diversity in biological anthropology by the co-PI, a female
graduate student and active member of several organizations aimed at engaging
young girls in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
study is to generate a robust phylogeny of stem and crown Hominidae to be used
as a basis for testing competing phylogenetic hypotheses, and exploring
questions about the polarity, geography, and evolutionary timing of the
locomotor and positional behaviors characterizing great apes and humans using
ancestral state reconstruction. Characters will be sampled from the skull and
postcranium, with particular emphasis on the inclusion of novel quantitative and
polymorphic characters from the postcranial skeleton. Parsimony and Bayesian
methods will be used to infer phylogeny and to measure the relative support for
competing phylogenetic hypotheses. This project represents the most
comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of Mid-Late Miocene hominoids carried out to
date and will provide a necessary foundation for future research in early
hominin and ape systematics and paleobiology.