* 1613110
* Robust Bayesian Analysis with Model Uncertainty for Massive Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Steven MacEachern, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Two fundamental problems in Statistics, and in science more generally, are how
to extract information from massive data sets and how to exploit this
information to make predictions of future uncertain events. By modeling and
predicting market behavior, economists can better control financial risk; by
modeling and predicting climate change, scientists can better manage the
environment; by modeling and predicting health care needs, policy makers can
better allocate resources to meet the needs. Massive datasets bring a wealth of
information, but this information is accompanied by a host of problems -- the
most salient of which is varying data quality, ranging from "good data" to "bad
data". The proposed research will develop methods which provide robust, stable
inference and prediction for massive datasets of varying quality. The general
methodology will be applicable to many fields, including environmental sciences,
medical sciences and corporate decision analytics, where massive datasets are
collected and robust predictive analysis is needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian methods have enjoyed extraordinary success in the
past two decades, and they are widely used throughout the scientific and
corporate communities. Their success has been driven by their unique ability to
combine information from an experiment or observational study with extra-
experimental information, expressed through the prior distribution. However,
this success hinges on the quality of the data and the quality of the prior. The
proposed research takes aim at these two issues. For the first, the research
develops formal predictive methods in the Bayesian framework which are suited to
use with data of modest quality; for the second, the research develops Bayesian
methods for model comparison and model averaging which provide robust and stable
inference when little prior information is available. The two portions of the
project naturally combine to yield complete, cohesive Bayesian analyses with
methods which are robust to model misspecification and outliers, and which
require only modest prior information. The project will provide several students
with opportunities for training in research and data analysis, and much of this
will be interdisciplinary in nature.