* 1613940
* EAPSI: Forging Trans-Pacific Partnerships to Investigate Terrestrial Transitions in Tropical Land Crabs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Victoria Morgan, Morgan                  Victoria       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Understanding how organisms utilize genetic variation to adapt to new habitats
is an open question in evolutionary biology. Land crabs are a group that have
repeatedly colonized terrestrial habitats, yet little is currently known about
the underlying genetic machinery that has led to the impressive physical and
physiological adaptations that have allowed them to live successfully on land.
This project will connect the researcher with one of the world?s leading
authorities on land crab biology, Professor Peter Ng at the National University
of Singapore (NUS), and also with leading researchers in the field of crustacean
evolutionary biology at the mid-year meeting of The Crustacean Society (TCS).
The researcher will examine crabs housed in the collections at the Lee Kong
Chian Natural History Museum (LKCNHM), and will collaborate with Prof. Ng and
his research group to learn about the biology and taxonomy of the crabs. The
results from this project will serve as a solid foundation for a larger research
project that seeks to further understand one of the most important life-history
transitions in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For her dissertation work, the
researcher plans to explore the mechanisms underlying the marine-to-terrestrial
transition exhibited by brachyuran land crabs by integrating taxonomy,
phylogenetics, and next-generation sequencing technologies, but prior to
undertaking this larger project, she will first construct a solid taxonomic and
systematic understanding of the group. For EAPSI, the researcher will be trained
in these topics under the guidance of the world?s leading authority in crab
systematics, Prof. Peter Ng at the NUS. She will examine and collect DNA
subsamples from the land crab specimens preserved at the LKCNHM, which houses
one of the largest collection of preserved land crabs in the world.
Additionally, she will present at the mid-year meeting of TCS and network with
other carcinologists to form additional international collaborations and
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the National Research Foundation of Singapore.