* 1613724
* EAPSI:EAPSI: Multicomponent Crystals for Applications in Organic Electronics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Evgheni Jucov, Jucov                   Evgheni
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Organic semiconductors based on a single molecular building block have been
extensively used in recent years for optoelectronic applications. However,
systems made of two or more different molecules provide additional possibilities
to tune the optical and electrical properties, increasing as result the range of
applications of organic materials. This project will focus on synthesis of novel
multicomponent materials with the abovementioned properties. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Christian Leo Kloc, known for his
achievements in the area of crystal growth of organic semiconductors and the
technology of organic devices, at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.
This project will make a large positive impact to the current knowledge of
obtaining the most efficient semiconducting materials that will be used in
future in organic semiconductors industry.

This award is dedicated to the crystal growth, structural and computational
studies of the binary charge transfer (CT) organic co-crystals, made of two or
more different molecules which act as electron donor and acceptor. Such
compounds will become better, more efficient and more tunable organic
semiconductors with a broad range of applications in organic electronics. The
main goal of this project is to obtain several chemically different co-crystals
of good quality. The researcher plans to study the following two-component
materials with 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and
2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) as acceptors, and
aromatic hydrocarbons like anthracene, tetracene, pentacene, perylene as donors.
During proposed research a deep understanding of the complex CT mechanisms will
be obtained. This will provide a basis for development of a broad range of
compounds for electronic and optoelectronic applications. The rapid growth of
the field of organic electronics assures that these findings will prove valuable
to the community of scientists engaged in the development of practical organic
semiconductors devices.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.