* 1613836
* EAPSI: Correlating Planet Discoveries to a Bias in Binary Star Orientation with New Large Data Surveys
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Nolan Grieves, Grieves                 Nolan          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will test for an alignment in the orbital orientation of binary
stars, specifically with respect to the Galactic disk, a claim made by several
previous studies dating back to the 1830s. However, even recent studies have not
had sufficient evidence to fully support this claim due to a lack of data and
statistical significance. Unlike previous studies, which relied on stars being
relatively close in proximity to the Sun to determine orbital orientations, this
project will use two large sample planet surveys with different sky orientations
in order to determine binary orbital orientation. This research will be
conducted at Nanjing University, one of China?s premier Astronomy programs, with
Dr. Jiwei Xie. Dr. Xie specializes in binary star systems and planet formation
around these systems. He has unique expertise for this project including
experience with both of these planet surveys. The project results will not only
have significant implications on star formation theory, but will also affect
exoplanet characterization, including the occurrence rate of Earth-like planets
in the Milky Way Galaxy.

Although previous studies found evidence for a bias in binary star orbital
planes with respect to the galactic disk, these findings are based on only a
small number of systems relatively close to the solar system. This project?s
technique does not rely on close proximity and will allow a significantly larger
sample to be analyzed. This research will develop a model to compare the all-sky
radial velocity survey MARVELS and the transit survey Kepler, which is
positioned near the Galactic plane. The project will develop code to build
several simulated binary populations and models to statistically compare them to
the real observations of both surveys. The results will be analyzed to determine
an orientation bias and the implications it has on the field of Astronomy
including factors in planet occurrence rates.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.