* 1613133
* EAPSI: Maintaining Cohesion Among Tibetan Macaques: How Followers Affect Collective Decision Making
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Amanda Rowe, Rowe                    Amanda         K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The researcher will investigate how a group of wild Tibetan macaques at Mt.
Huangshan National Park in Anhui, China use collective decision making in an
effort to stay cohesive and reap the benefits of sociality. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jin-Hua Li and Dr. Dongpo Xia of Anhui
University, who are notable experts of Tibetan macaques. The hosts will provide
aid in identification of individuals and essential information regarding age,
sex, dominance rank and kin relationships. The award will allow for the
completion of novel research in collective decision making. The research will
lead to the discovery of collective decision making models that can be applied
to a variety of animal taxa and an increased understanding of complex group
movement which allowed for the expansion and success of
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will examine the mechanisms driving
collective decision making during group movement in the YA1 group of wild, but
provisioned Tibetan macaques. Specifically, the researcher will use a
combination of all occurrence and focal animal sampling to investigate the
utilization of a quorum threshold during collective movement, and how this
quorum is related to the number of fans an individual has. A fan will be defined
as an individual who joined within the first half of a movement (based on time)
during at least 70% of movements initiated by a specific individual. The
researcher will determine whether the movement initiator?s number of fans
effects movement efficiency, what makes an individual a fan and what factors
cause an individual to have more fans. The researcher hypothesizes that a quorum
threshold of 60 percent of the group exists, leaders with more consistent
followers will drive a more efficient movement, consistent followers will be
macaques in the core of the social network and dominant females with a greater
number of kin will have more fans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the
East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a
U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science
and Technology of China.