* 1613892
* EAPSI:  Creating Fast and Accurate Data Mining Algorithms that Preserve Privacy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Benjamin Fish, Fish                    Benjamin       S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will use new techniques to create fast and accurate algorithms that
preserves the privacy of people's data in big data mining, i.e. tasks that
require large amounts of data. While big data mining has extraordinarily broad
and important uses, releasing the output of data mining algorithms to data
analysts and the public can result in leaking the private data of individuals
whose data is being used. Even when data mining techniques are able to keep data
private, they may be too slow or inaccurate to be used widely in practice.
Previous approaches to big data mining tasks have typically either focused on a)
keeping private data private or b) achieving fast and accurate algorithms, but
not both. This research aims to find algorithms for big data mining tasks that
are simultaneously privacy-preserving, fast, and accurate, to the degree that
this is possible. This project will be conducted at The University of Melbourne
with Benjamin Rubinstein, a leading expert in fast techniques for achieving
privacy-preserving algorithms.

Focus will be on finding such fast differentially-private techniques for the
Frequent Itemset mining problem (FI), a fundamental question in knowledge
discovery about extracting frequently occurring sets of items in a database, and
related problems. Recent approaches have demonstrated fast and accurate
approximation algorithms for these types of problems. Previous methods for
solving this problem were not necessarily amenable for achieving privacy-
preservation quickly and accurately. These new approaches, however, which
involve sampling techniques and using under-utilized tools from the theory of
machine learning, are especially helpful for creating privacy-preserving
algorithms. This research will leverage this approach to create algorithms that
are not only fast and accurate, but also keep individuals' data private. This
research will also analyze the tradeoffs between speed, accuracy, and privacy in
such solutions.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.