* 1613264
* Role of Fronto-Parietal Cortex in Delay Discounting
* SBE,SES
* 08/24/2015,05/31/2017
* Samuel McClure, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 05/31/2017
* USD 205,310.00

Choices made between outcomes available at different points in the
future&lt;br/&gt;(intertemporal choices) constitute an important and common set
of decisions&lt;br/&gt;encountered in everyday life. How people respond to such
choices is also known&lt;br/&gt;to be predictive of a number of important life
outcomes, and can be summarized&lt;br/&gt;using laboratory measures of delay
discounting. Understanding the cognitive&lt;br/&gt;brain processes that underlie
delay discounting, and particularly our ability to&lt;br/&gt;resist immediate
temptations, is an important area of research in
cognitive&lt;br/&gt;neuroscience. Significant progress has been made in this
area over the past&lt;br/&gt;decade. It is now well established that brain
reward areas, including the&lt;br/&gt;ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC),
encode the subjective value of&lt;br/&gt;prospective rewards. It is also
established that a network of regions in lateral&lt;br/&gt;prefrontal (lPFC),
dorsomedial frontal (dmFC), and posterior parietal cortex (pPC)&lt;br/&gt;are
engaged when making intertemporal choices. However, the role of
this&lt;br/&gt;fronto-parietal cortical network (FPN) remains debated and less
understood. The&lt;br/&gt;current research project builds on recent
computational modeling work done by&lt;br/&gt;McClure and his colleagues to test
and unify competing theories of FPN function&lt;br/&gt;in delay discounting.
This work promises to further our understanding of the brain&lt;br/&gt;basis of
important cognitive processes related to the exertion of willpower
and&lt;br/&gt;self-control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will conduct three studies
that employ both fMRI and EEG to investigate the&lt;br/&gt;role of different
frontal and parietal regions in intertemporal decision-making.
In&lt;br/&gt;preliminary work, we have used our computation model framework
to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate that (1) the pPC interacts with the vmPFC during the
valuing of&lt;br/&gt;choice options, and (2) value information is accumulated in
the dmFC during&lt;br/&gt;action selection. This project will further test how
the FPN functions under&lt;br/&gt;conditions of temptation and cognitive load
and how these manipulations&lt;br/&gt;influence choice outcomes. A number of
disorders, including attention deficit&lt;br/&gt;hyperactivity disorder and drug
addiction, have been directly associated with&lt;br/&gt;delay discounting. The
proposed studies of delay discounting therefore represent&lt;br/&gt;a clear
example in which cognitive neuroscience approaches promise to
directly&lt;br/&gt;impact and improve our understanding of normal and aberrant
behavior. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;decision neuroscience is a highly interdisciplinary
field that combines elements of&lt;br/&gt;economics, psychology, and
neuroscience. It offers an exciting training&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for the
students at various levels of training who will be directly&lt;br/&gt;involved
in the project.