* 1613938
* EAPSI: Developing Fast and Accurate Methods for Grouping Objects in a Dataset Using Inconsistent Labels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Luke Veldt, Veldt                   Luke           N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In today's information-rich age, it is relatively easy to collect large amounts
of data when attempting to solve problems and answer questions in almost any
field. It is often very challenging, though, to analyze and extract useful
information from these datasets, due to their massive size and lack of
organization. This project will investigate special techniques for organizing a
dataset into groups of similar objects to allow for easier analysis. This task
is called clustering, and can be applied in vastly different settings, such as
the study of protein interactions in biology, or the categorization of webpages
in a large database. The research will be conducted at the University of
Melbourne in collaboration with Professor Anthony Wirth. Dr. Wirth is an expert
in data analysis and a pioneer in the study of "clustering with advice," a
technique for clustering data when the only available information is a list of
inconsistent labels that mark data points as "similar" or "dissimilar." In
general, exactly solving this clustering problem on a large dataset is slow and
computationally expensive. This research aims to explore basic assumptions on
the input dataset that can lead to more efficient methods for clustering with
inconsistent labels. Developing faster methods for this problem will expand
current theoretical understanding of clustering with advice, as well as making
this useful technique more achievable in practice.

The researcher will apply techniques in integer-constrained linear programming
and numerical linear algebra to obtain a solution for the clustering with advice
problem when the input data can be represented as a low-rank matrix. The primary
objective is to develop a polynomial time algorithm for solving the problem for
rank-2 matrices and prove complexity results about this special case of the
problem. Obtaining a fast solution under low-rank assumptions sheds light on
when an otherwise hard problem becomes tractable in practice, and will stimulate
research in showing similar results for other difficult problems.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australia Academy of Science.