* 1613507
* EAPSI: Changes in Gene Expression of the Lined Seahorse, Hippocampus Erectus, in Response to Temperature Stress
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Cara Johnson, Johnson                 Cara           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Seahorses (Family: Syngnathidae) are one of the most intriguing and recognizable
groups of fishes, with unique life history traits, morphologies, and cultural
importance. Natural seahorse populations are strained, not only because they are
directly targeted for display and medicinal uses; they are also extremely
vulnerable to many other threats in their environment, exacerbated by their
unique life histories. Seahorses are generally monogamous, are poor swimmers,
have limited dispersal ability and small home ranges, and are distributed in
small patches. These factors restrict seahorse responses to the unpredictable
effects of global climate change. The proposed project will examine the response
of the heat shock protein Hsp70 to increasing temperature in the lined seahorse,
Hippocampus erectus. This work will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr.
Qiang Lin, whose group sequenced the seahorse genome, at the Chinese Academy of
Science Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology in
Guangzhou, China. The experimental model developed under this project will
subsequently be applied to other seahorse and pipefish species to offer a more
complete picture of cellular stress response in the Syngnathidae family.

The lined seahorse, Hippocampus erectus, is listed as vulnerable by the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and is native to the South
China Sea. With the completion of the Seahorse Genome Project by Dr. Qiang Lin?s
laboratory in Guangzhou, China, there is now an encyclopedia of functional genes
with which to compare tissue samples and determine an individual seahorse?s
transcriptome. In an effort to understand how chronic and acute temperature
stress will affect these organisms, liver and muscle tissue samples will be
collected from groups of H. erectus that have been maintained at set constant
temperatures, as well as from separate groups that have been exposed to acute
heat shock for varying periods of time. Transcriptome analysis will be performed
following extraction of mRNA and synthesis of cDNA from each tissue sample to
determine the changes in gene expression between different heat stress events.
These findings will assist the development of management plans for these
threatened species, by providing a better understanding of how the cellular
stress response mechanism of these animals will respond and adapt to warming
oceans. Seahorses are often used as indicator species of the health of an
ecosystem, and the information gained from this research can better direct the
use of syngnathids as a representative focal species for dispersal-limited
populations.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.