* 1613415
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Epigenomics of Andean High-Altitude Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Abigail Bigham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 30,972.00

At high altitudes, most people show a decrease in blood oxygen levels, a spike
in blood pressure, and increased heart and breathing rates. However, long-term
resident populations at high altitudes have unique physiological adaptations
that allow them to survive and reproduce in this extreme niche. This project
will examine epigenetic changes, specifically changes in DNA methylation, to
understand how being born and raised at high altitude affects human biology. For
many years biological anthropologists have sought to understand the heritable
genetic variants that allow survival at high altitudes, and this project is
significant in moving from a genetic to an epigenetic focus. Unlike high
altitude gene variants that an individual either inherits or not, DNA
methylation can change during an individual's lifetime because it undergoes
reprogramming during early development and is therefore susceptible to the
effects of the environment. Project findings will contribute to our
understanding of how early development influences adaptive phenotypes to extreme
environments. Identification of epigenetic changes in the hypoxia (low-oxygen)
response pathway may also inform future research on the role of hypoxia in
cancer etiology, cardiac ischemia, and stroke. The project will also support
undergraduate and graduate training in laboratory research methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whole-genome and gene-specific DNA methylation signatures
will be measured in one high altitude population from the Andes - the Peruvian
Quechua. Study participants (n= 601) have been recruited to represent different
high-altitude developmental exposures including: 1) born and raised at low
altitude (n=150), 2) born at high altitude and moved to low altitude during
adolescence (n = 150), 3) born and raised at high altitude (n=301). This project
builds on the investigators' strong foundation of research to understand the
genetic changes that contribute to high-altitude adaptation in this same
population. This project allows the assessment of how genetics and epigenetics
interact to create the Andean altitude-adaptive phenotype. Understanding this
interaction has implications for the study of high-altitude adaptation
specifically and human biological adaptation more generally.