* 1613774
* 17th International Workshop on Plant Membrane Biology, June 5-10, 2016, Annapolis, MD
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Angus Murphy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

The International Workshop on Plant Membrane Biology (colloquially known as the
Plant Membrane Biology Workshop) is a gathering focused on the function and
trafficking of plant membrane proteins and the relevance of this knowledge to
nutrient management modeling. Since the late 1960s, the Plant Membrane Biology
Workshop has been the premier international conference for researchers
interested in plant transport and membrane biology. Management of nutrient use
in agriculture has become one of the most important global economic and
environmental issues. The transport and receptor proteins that reside on plant
membranes function on the front line of managing nutrient exchange and buffering
environmental stress. Surprisingly, the mechanistic understanding of plant
membrane protein function is limited compared to animal systems. Transporters
account for nearly 5% of plant genomes and impact plant growth, development,
defense and stress tolerance but also human nutrition and health. The goals of
the 2016 Workshop are to identify and bring together the top scientists working
on plant membrane proteins and to facilitate sharing research results and
approaches from experts across the spectrum of membrane protein research with
the next generation of scientists who are now graduate students and postdocs.
For this Workshop, a particular emphasis is extension of knowledge from
biophysicists and structural biologists working at the forefront of protein
structure and modeling to the plant community. Established scientists will
anchor and chair each session which will feature talks from early-career
scientists and talks by students and post-doctoral researchers selected from the
abstracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Workshop on Plant Membrane
Biology is a meeting organized in a workshop format focused on the function and
trafficking of plant membrane proteins and the relevance of this knowledge to
nutrient management modeling. The Workshop has a tradition of highly interactive
sessions led by senior scientists with a large proportion of the oral
presentations made by junior career scientists. The 2016 Workshop has a
particular focus on the application of new biophysical and protein structure
discoveries to the pressing issues of environmentally responsible management of
nutrient use in agriculture. There is also an increased emphasis on signal
transduction processes that are associated with plant membranes. Established
scientists will anchor and chair each session which will feature talks from
early-career scientists and talks by students and post-doctoral researchers
selected from the abstracts.