* 1613848
* EAPSI: Investigating Grain Boundary Strength of a Helium Implanted Engineering Alloy using Micron-Scale Tensile Testing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Cameron Howard, Howard                  Cameron        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

According to a NPR report, 14 percent of the world?s electricity is supplied by
nuclear power. The current fleet of 438 reactors spread across 30 nations in
addition to the 67 new plants under construction in 15 countries contain a large
breadth of specifications, design features, and structural materials. These
structural materials must withstand ever increasing amounts of neutron radiation
damage in addition to operating in a high temperature and pressure and corrosive
degradation environment. Their safety and reliability remain of first importance
as reactor lifetimes aspire to be extended. However, they become difficult and
expensive to safely handle and test because they become highly radioactive. This
radiation has been known to cause unwanted embrittlement and abrupt premature
failure. This project focuses on simulating the high dose radiation effect of
helium production by focusing a medium energy helium ion beam on a sample at
reactor operation temperature. Unlike neutron irradiation in reactors, this
technique does not cause the sample to become radioactive, but because the
shallow penetration depth of the helium is limited to microns in depth, test
samples must be manufactured on this length scale. Micro tensile tests will be
performed to investigate the effect of the helium on the grain boundary strength
of a structural material commonly used in many nuclear reactors. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Dhriti Bhattacharyya at the
Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) in Lucas Heights,
Australia who is a radiation damage specialist who has developed a novel in-situ
micro-scale tensile testing technique to investigate nuclear structural
materials.

Micro-scale tensile testing specimens will be manufactured out of helium
implanted engineering alloys using focused ion beam (FIB) milling techniques.
These specimens will be tested inside of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) in
a fashion that will effectively pull apart the material?s grain boundaries in
order to test how the helium has effected its grain boundary strength, a
strength determining feature crucial to the material remaining intact and
reliability during extended service. In addition to providing quantitative
mechanical stresses, this technique allows for real time observation of local
deformation in real time, providing valuable information concerning the ultimate
failure mechanism of reactor components. Selecting of specific types of grain
boundaries to investigate and different microstructural features can be made
using electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) and post-test investigations can
be performed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and EBSD to further
understand the deformation mechanisms and the distribution of the helium,
concerning whether it segregates along the material?s grain boundaries. The
methods development of micro-tensile testing will have a wide variety of
applications in materials research as a whole, and it will also allow a greater
number of labs worldwide to safely conduct research and obtain better statistics
with minimal radioactive sample material.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.