* 1613887
* EAPSI:Improving Understanding of Magma Storage and Transport Prior to the Minoan eruption at Santorini Volcano
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Taya Flaherty, Flaherty                Taya           T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Understanding the timescales of magma storage and transport beneath volcanoes is
vital to hazard evaluation and risk mitigation. Several recent studies have used
diffusion chronometry at Santorini volcano (Greece) to identify the timescales
associated with final magma chamber assembly prior to the catastrophic ~1628 BC
?Minoan? eruption. An intriguing aspect of these studies is that the timescale
estimates appear to vary depending on the mineral that is used. Orthopyroxene
(Opx) crystals suggest very short timescales ranging from days up to ~30 yrs,
whereas clinopyroxene (Cpx) crystals give much longer timescales of up to
several thousands of years. This project will test a hypothesis that the Cpx
have a deeper origin (thus a longer history) in the Santorini magmatic system
than the Opx. If this is the case, the Cpx timescales are recording a more
complete story of the magmatic processes related to the Minoan magma than the
Opx, which only retrieve the final assembly of the pre-eruptive magma chamber.
This research will be conducted at the Earth Observatory of Singapore (EOS) with
the guidance and technical expertise of Dr. Fidel Costa, a leading researcher in
the study of magmatic timescales and techniques used in this project.

The pyroxenes will be analyzed for a range of trace element abundances via laser
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) with a 193 nm
Photon Machines laser and a Thermo quadrupole mass spectrometer located at the
EOS. Using existing data on trace element partitioning between pyroxenes, the
Minoan Cpx and Opx will be tested to examine: (1) whether they grew in
equilibrium with each other, (2) whether they grew in equilibrium with the glass
matrix (suggesting crystallization in a shallow reservoir) and (3) the
equilibrium conditions (notably the pressure) of crystallization for each
pyroxene. It is expected that Cpx will be in disequilibrium with respect to Opx
and the glass, and will have a higher equilibrium pressure than that of Opx. The
outcomes of this project will have implications for the model of magmatic
storage at Santorini, the study of timescales of large explosive volcanic
eruptions in general and for the technique of Fe-Mg diffusion chronometry in
pyroxenes as a tool for understanding the timescales of magma chamber
development and the behavior of active volcanic systems.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.