* 1613878
* EAPSI: Refining Analysis Methods for Examining Human Gut Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Rachel Nettles, Nettles                 Rachel         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The human gut microbiome is the community of microbes living in the intestinal
tract, including the stomach, the small and large intestines, and the colon. The
composition of the gut microbiome affects many aspects of human health,
including the incidence of inflammatory diseases of the bowel (e.g. inflammatory
bowel disease) and other parts of the body (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis), various
cancers, and diabetes. Many researchers use a mouse model in their
investigations of the gut microbiome. However, the mouse model, while convenient
for research, is not necessarily a reliable model as a predictor of human
response to the microbiome. Therefore, it is imperative to be trained in
research on the human microbiome itself. This is possible in the laboratory of
Professor Gerald Tannock, at the University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. The
purpose of this research is to gain valuable expertise in human microbiome
research by refining the methodology used by Professor Tannock to analyze the
structure of infant gut microbial communities.

Studies involving the microbiome often require the use of next-generation, high-
throughput sequencing (HTS). Despite the ubiquitous use of sequencing, there is
no approved universal method for analyzing this data, as research-directed
questions will often call for different bioinformatic approaches. This can cause
problems when attempting to compare the results from two studies that used two
different methods for analyzing the data. This project will incorporate the
latest analytical tools to search for fine detail trends in microbiome data that
may be hidden when using default approaches. QIIME is a commonly used software
package that focuses on quality screening and analysis of HTS data from
amplified marker genes. We will utilize this package to test different
approaches of analyzing sequencing data, and will compare outputs in an attempt
to reveal previously hidden associations between individual microbiomes. This
study will allow us to suggest improved analysis pipelines that may be
implemented by other investigators working in the field of gut microbiome
research.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.