* 1613514
* EAPSI: Investigating the Performance of Perovskite Solar Cells Integrated with Graphene-Based Supercapacitors for Solar Energy Conversion and Storage
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Giovanni DeLuca, DeLuca                  Giovanni
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The objective of this work is to integrate next generation perovskite thin-film
solar cells with solid-state graphene-based supercapacitor storage devices. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hongzhi Wang at Donghua
University in Shanghai, China. Wang?s expertise with graphene materials,
specifically for energy storage devices, will allow the PI to evolve this
particular solar cell enormously with this 8-week program. Low-cost, ubiquitous,
environmentally sustainable solar cells with storage technology could transform
the world in which we live. In addition to providing access to sustainable
energy harvesting and storage devices, the current project provides
opportunities for the integration of research and education in technologies of
societal significance.

If the PI combines his knowledge and background on perovskite photovoltaics,
with the knowledge and expertise on highly crystalline photo-reduced graphene
oxide supercapacitors from the Wang Group, then an integrated device will be
developed in a timely manner. This work will continue after the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program with the PI optimizing the photovoltaic layers
through his thesis project, and the Wang group optimizing the supercapacitor
layers. The perovskite photovoltaic component will be fabricated using simple
spin-coating techniques, which will be followed by the assembly of the
supercapacitor layers using blade-coating techniques. In this device, during the
charging process, photons are absorbed by the perovskite active layer, and the
generated excitons dissociate to produce free charges. The difference in the
work function between the electrodes drives the holes along the valence band of
the perovskite, to the indium-tin-oxide anode. Simultaneously, electrons from
the conduction band of the perovskite are transported towards the low work
function hole transport layer (which will be in the range of 3.75-4.5 eV). Upon
reaching the electrodes, both electrons and holes are further transferred to the
photo-reduced graphene oxide electrodes, which then charges the supercapacitor.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.