* 1613894
* EAPSI: Quantifying Tectonic Controls on Changing Segmentation of Oceanic Transform Faults
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Thomas Morrow, Morrow                  Thomas         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Oceanic transform faults (TFs) are tectonic plate boundaries that are
fundamental to accommodating tectonic plate motions along mid-ocean ridges
(MORs). Although classically defined as a single boundary offsetting two
segments of a MOR, TFs can split into several fault strands and subsequently re-
unify to a single trace. Formation of segmented TFs is likely due to extensional
tectonic motions across the TF. Conversely, unification of segmented TFs may be
associated with compressional tectonic motions, however, the processes governing
this evolution are poorly known. Structural features on the ocean floor, such as
fracture zones (FZs), faults, and topography produced by lithospheric
deformation, record tectonic responses to plate motions oblique to the original
TF. In collaboration with Dr. Seung-Sep Kim of Chungnam National University, an
expert in marine geology, flexure, and tectonics, the PI will quantify the
processes that govern unification of the previously segmented Clarion FZ in the
central Pacific Ocean. Segmentation and unification of TFs can alter the
location of plate boundaries over time. Quantifying segmentation processes will
enhance our understanding of evolving plate boundaries as well as their magmatic
and seismic expressions.

The research has 3 primary goals: 1) Using recently acquired high-resolution
bathymetry over the Clarion FZ provided by the host researcher, Dr. Kim, we will
identify styles and distributions of deformation; 2) We will analyze flexural
evolution of a segmented FZ using 2D numerical models; 3) We will assess the
tectonic conditions of the Clarion FZ through time by comparing model-predicted
gravity anomalies (a proxy for flexural evolution of a FZ) to shipboard
measurements. To quantify the hypothesized effect of compression on TF
unification, our models will compare various rates and magnitudes of
compressional strain, age offsets across the FZ, as well as the number, age, and
geometry of intra-transform spreading segments to predicted flexural profiles.
Finally, using these results we plan to develop predictive scaling laws that
relate tectonic compression to the location and timing of TF unification.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.