* 1613902
* EAPSI:Investigating Human Perceptions of Groups of Robots to Enhance Human-Robot Collaboration and Robot Design
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Marlena Fraune, Fraune                  Marlena        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

In this project, the PI will work with Dr. Michio Okada?s robotics group at
Toyohashi University of Technology (TUT) in Japan to determine if people respond
negatively to groups of identical robots (like they do toward cohesive human
groups such as rival sports teams). The PI is currently conducting a similar
study in the United States and will compare the results of the two studies to
identify cross-cultural differences in responses. Comparing responses across
cultures will enrich roboticists? understanding of how people from different
cultures and backgrounds will view groups of robots. Understanding responses to
groups of robots is critical because robots are becoming more prevalent, washing
dishes, vacuuming floors, and educating children. Japan is the ideal location to
perform the study to contrast results to the USA because Japanese people are
more relationship-oriented (rather than independence-oriented) and have more
exposure to robots than US Americans. This study will also contribute to
developing our capabilities to design robots for both the US national and
international markets; Japan is expected to be a significant market for robots.

To understand how components of robot group cohesiveness or ?entitativity?
affects responses to them, this study manipulates Robot Type (Single, Diverse
Group, Entitative Group) in two Distinct Cultures (USA, Japan). In the
entitativity manipulation, appearance, behavior, goals, and outcomes will be
either diverse or identical (i.e., entitative). Survey and behavioral measures
will test for perceived entitativity, perceived threat, and aggression. Future
studies will examine how specific situations (e.g., competing versus cooperating
with robots) affect responses to entitativity. Findings will enhance
understanding of entitativity in social psychology and cross-cultural
literatures and enhance robots for future interaction with humans. The
researchers will disseminate the findings at Indiana University?s Science Fest
to children and families. This travel will also extend collaboration between
Indiana University and TUT.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.