* 1613023
* CSR: Small: Improved Memory Management for Object-Oriented Big Data Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Harry Xu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project seeks to develop runtime system support for improving the
performance and scalability of a wide verity of data-intensive systems written
in managed, object-oriented languages. It is clear that Big Data analytics has
become a key component of modern computing. Popular data processing frameworks
such as Hadoop, Spark, Naiad, or Hyracks are all developed in managed languages,
such as Java, C#, or Scala, primarily due to the fast development cycles enabled
by these languages and their abundance of library suites and community support.
However, a great deal of evidence shows that memory management in Big Data
systems is prohibitively expensive, severely damaging system performance. This
project develops a series of runtime techniques that can automatically reduce
the temporal and spatial costs of the managed runtime, allowing Big Data
developers to fully enjoy the simplicity of managed languages without having to
pay the performance price.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern life is relying
increasingly on Big Data analytics designed to support many concurrent users and
quickly answer their queries. Behind visible services are data-intensive
computing systems that need to quickly find useful information from a sea of
data records, and therefore, their performance is critically important to our
daily lives. This project provides an immediate performance benefit for such
data-intensive systems, leading to improved quality, usability, and user
satisfaction. The educational component of this project includes creation of new
course materials, recruitment of undergraduate students and students from under-
represented groups, and education of local programmers on how to develop highly-
efficient Big Data applications.