* 1613067
* Risk Retirement for WAMS: The Water and Ash MM-wave Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Amanda Clarke, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 72,577.00

1613067&lt;br/&gt;Groppi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, made in response to a
EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) proposal submission,
provides funds to allow for the acquisition of key electronic components
necessary to develop a proof-of-concept microwave radar system ultimately
intended to study volcano plumes. The so-called WAMS (Water and Ash MM-Wave
Spectrometer), would be a two-antenna, active-passive system. The low frequency
system would function as a water vapor radiometer, using the 22 GHz emission
line, while the high frequency system would estimate water vapor temperature
(via radiometry at 183 and 232 GHZ), and also function as a radar to study the
ash. The investigators at Arizona State University have experience in the design
and construction of similar instruments for radio astronomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successfully developed WAMS instrument with a dual
antenna active-passive radar capability for imaging volcanic plumes offers the
potential to measure path-integrated water vapor in a volcanic plume
concurrently with measurement of ash concentration in near real time and thus
might contribute to fundamental advances in our knowledge of basic volcanic
conduit processes leading to eruption. This support will allow for development
of a prototype instrument that will be laboratory tested by an ASU graduate
student. The potential of a realized WAMS instrument to yield a better
understanding of volcanic ash plume dynamics and evolution (e.g., particle
aggregation dynamics and transport) may have benefits for mitigating air traffic
hazards from volcanic activity. Coupled with the student training in electronics
testing that will be fostered by this award, these two aspects support NSFs
mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing the national
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EAGER project would directly engage a graduate
student in laboratory testing of the prototype WAMS instrument. The potential of
WAMS for better understanding volcanic ash plume dynamics and evolution (e.g.
particle aggregation dynamics and transport) may have benefits for mitigating
air traffic hazards from volcanic activity.&lt;br/&gt;