* 1613830
* I-Corps: Assessment of High Energy Density Flow Battery for Stationary Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Gary Koenig, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Reliable backup power is critical in our society to dealing with both minor and
major power interruptions. For example, when a storm results in a power outage
hospitals need to be confident backup systems will operate such that patients do
not have to be evacuated. Backup power is also needed to continue to provide
uninterrupted cell phone service and data center operations. Due to the number
of applications and businesses that require backup power, there is a substantial
commercial market for this service. This project will assess the commercial
feasibility of a new battery technology to replace diesel generators as the
market leader in backup power services. This new battery has advantages relative
to similar battery systems with regards to energy density and the flexibility of
extended operating times. An advantage relative to diesel generators is the lack
of a need for oxygen which provides inherent flooding protection and the lack of
undesirable emissions associated with diesel engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will assess the commercial feasibility of a new battery technology
developed by this I-Corps team, primarily in relation to backup power
applications. Substantial effort will be taken in customer discovery and
customer validation in the battery and stationary power industries with an
emphasis on backup power applications. The team will also devote some effort to
creation of a transportable prototype. The goal is to understand the market
potential, customer requirements, and market need at this time for the
technology being developed by the team. Most of this information will be gained
through interviews with necessary people and enterprises within the
&lt;br/&gt;battery and stationary power industry. Successful implementation of
this battery for stationary power could potentially provide a more robust system
for emergency backup power systems and reduce greenhouse gas and other emissions
from this critical function in our society.