* 1613091
* Combinatorial Optimization, Spin Models, and the Geometry of Sparse Random Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Amir Dembo, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 599,999.00

Networks and graphs are ubiquitous mathematical models to describe important
systems (social networks, transportation networks, and biological systems, among
others). A network is comprised of a certain number of objects (normally
referred to as 'nodes' or 'vertices') connected by links of various importance
('edges' and their 'weights'). Analyzing network data is notoriously
challenging. An important task is to group the vertices into subgroups such that
each subgroup is highly connected, and any two subgroups have only loose
interconnections. Even if one is only trying to identify merely two subgroups
(known as the min-bisection problem), no efficient algorithm is known to
partition the nodes of large graphs in general. The situation changes when one
considers that the graphs might have a random structure. Indeed, for many
reasonable probabilistic models on graphs, there appear to be efficient
algorithms to solve the min-bisection problem. This project will develop our
fundamental understanding of these probabilistic models and will study efficient
algorithms to treat them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on various
models of sparse random graphs, the simplest being the Erdos-Renyi (independent
edges) random graph, with bounded average degree. Many statistical inference
tasks can be addressed by suitably defined combinatorial optimization problems.
For instance, the min-bisection problem requires to find a balanced partition of
the vertex set that minimizes the number of edges across the partition. These
optimization problems are associated to certain Gibbs measures on the underlying
graph, from which the optimizers are recovered as ground states. Statistical
physicists conjectured that these Gibbs measures are asymptotically equivalent
(for random graphs) to Gibbs measures of suitably defined spin glass models.
This project aims at establishing this connection on a firm basis and exploiting
it to study the structure of large random graphs. It has also recently been
suggested that semidefinite-programming relaxations for the same problems can be
studied through other Gibbs measures (with vector spins). Studying these spin
models will improve our understanding of efficient algorithms for solving these
tasks.