* 1613637
* Broadening Participation of Latina/o Students in Engineering Using an Integrated Mathematics, Engineering and Computing Curriculum in Authentic, Out-of-School Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marios Pattichis, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,420,374.00

The goals of the project are to motivate the participation of middle school
students in urban and rural settings to pursue STEM and computing (STEM+C)
careers. The project will develop an integrated curriculum that supports the
learning of computing and engineering fundamentals through the underlying
mathematics concepts. The after-school learning experiences focus on authentic
work of computer engineers, student learning about computer programming,
engineering design, and mathematics concepts. The middle schools in the study
have high enrollment of Latina/o students, a population which is under-
represented in STEM majors in college and in STEM careers in the United States.
Student learning and their attitudes toward and interests in STEM+C careers will
make up the core focus of the research. The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C)
program seeks to advance multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM
teaching and learning through applied research and development across one or
more domains; integration of STEM in computer science; and broadening
participation in computer science. Investments are made in critical areas of
pedagogy, pre-service and in-service teacher professional development. This
project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address research questions that
investigate student learning about engineering, mathematics and computer
programming practices and concepts. The questions examine how the experience and
resources can be designed to help students collaborate on programming tasks and
learn about STEM+C related careers. The research design incorporates
quantitative and qualitative data. The baseline data for students will document
their knowledge, attitudes, and motivation related to computational thinking,
mathematics and engineering. Subsequent data collection will document their work
with a focus on their learning and engagement in computer engineering and
mathematics. The study will also collect data from undergraduate student
facilitators, middle school student co-facilitators, and teachers to understand
how learning environments can be designed to support student learning of
computer engineering integrated with mathematics with a particular focus on
Latina/o learners. Overall, the project results should inform further curriculum
design for integrating mathematics, computing, and engineering in middle school
settings and supporting Latina/o students' learning in these domains.