* 1613459
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Shifting co-residence, sharing, and contact networks in a transitioning hunter-gatherer society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Nathaniel Dominy, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2017
* USD 12,947.00

The size and composition of human groups varies widely between societies, from
the small bands of hunter-gatherers to the massive social networks of modern
mega-cities. To understand the origins of this extreme variation, this doctoral
dissertation project will study a small-scale society that is currently shifting
from a life of nomadic hunting and gathering to one focused on sedentary
agriculture. The co-PI will use innovative sensor technology to track the
movements of individuals in order to reconstruct social networks and understand
how those networks are related to demographics, food sharing, and residence
patterns. This study is expected to shed light on the historical importance of
living with close relatives and how the rise of agriculture has influenced human
social interactions, especially the exchange of resources and information.
Social networks also have major implications for health and the spread of
disease, and this research aims to identify how the structure of social networks
might mitigate disease susceptibility. This project will also provide student
research and training opportunities for field and research assistants, and will
include science communication and outreach activities at the home institution
and the field site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns of co-residence determine
which individuals cooperate, compete, or share information and resources. This
research will investigate the mechanisms that influence co-residence patterns
and inter-individual interactions in a small-scale hunter-gatherer society, the
Batek of Malaysia, for whom cooperation is critical for survival. The co-PI will
collect detailed demographic, co-residence, and food sharing data in permanent
settlements and forest camps, and analyze these data in conjunction with a rich
historical dataset collected in the mid-1970s on the same population. In
addition, the project will include the use of sensor technology to monitor
proximity interactions among individuals and reconstruct social networks. Given
the increasing sedentarization of the Batek, coupled with a shift towards male-
dominated gender relations, specific predictions include (i) an increase in
relatedness among co-residents, (ii) an increase in kin-biased and reciprocal
sharing interactions, and (iii) broader but less evenly distributed contact
networks. This project builds on a recent synthesis of research on human co-
residence patterns, and provides the first empirical test of a new theoretical
model proposed to explain these patterns. Findings from this project will
provide an important baseline for evaluating the effect of sedentarization on
fundamental human interaction patterns and how human social organization
mediates the spread of information and disease.