* 1613501
* Function and mechanism of action of plant-specific LINC complexes in pollen tube and guard cell biology.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Iris Meier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2021
* USD 954,409.00

This project explores the function of a new class of plant proteins that are
involved in positioning the nucleus with the plant cell. The manner in which the
position of the nucleus affects the function of plant cells is important for
their life cycle and for their response to changing environmental conditions.
This project will first explore the mechanisms by which nuclear position is
controlled in the pollen tube, a structure that is essential for fertilization
and thus the subsequent seed production in flowering plants. This project will
also explore the role of the nuclear position in the cells that control the
opening and closing of apertures (stomata) in the leaf of the plant, which
regulate the movement of carbon dioxide from the air into the plant, and the
loss of water (as vapor) from plant leaves into the air. The uptake of carbon
dioxide from the air and the loss of water from the plant are of added
significance in the face of increasingly frequent climate events such as
drought, temperature extremes and the rising levels of carbon dioxide in the
earth's atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-specific outer nuclear envelope
proteins (KASH proteins) are the functional equivalent of animal KASH proteins
of the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complexes. This project
will dissect how KASH proteins function in plant male fertility and guard cell
function. One plant specific LINC complex is required to move the vegetative
nucleus through the pollen tube and its disruption affects pollen tube
termination and male fertility. The connection of this newly discovered process
to known signaling pathways of pollen tube function will be determined. A second
plant-specific LINC complex is involved in anchoring the nucleus in guard cells
and its disruption changes guard cell actin organization, abiotic stress
responses, and guard cell dynamics. The connection between guard cell nuclear
position, cortical actin patterns and aperture regulation by biotic and abiotic
signals will be investigated. Mathematical modeling and targeted genetic and
biochemical approaches will be used to identify the motors, clarify the force
requirements and define the mechanisms that control nuclear movement in pollen
tube and guard cells.