* 1613849
* EAPSI: Development of a Powerful Protein Analysis Toolbox to Study Carbohydrate and Protein Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Nova Tasnima, Tasnima                 Nova
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Carbohydrate and protein interactions play important roles in biological events.
This project will study functionalities of different types of the enzyme alpha-
L-fucosidase, which interact with carbohydrate molecules containing L-fucose.
L-fucose is naturally abundant, and found in human milk oligosaccharides. In
humans, deficiency of alpha-L-fucosidase can give rise to a rare autosomal
recessive disorder called fucosidosis, and clinical findings indicate that
abnormal levels of it can be potentially associated with other rare diseases.
This project will investigate alpha-L-fucosidase activities by using multiple
carbohydrate structures as probes. The results from this project will provide
insights about the structure-activity relationship between alpha-L-fucosidases
and different types of carbohydrate molecules. This toolbox will be further
beneficial to characterizing newly discovered alpha-L-fucosidases. This research
work will be done with Professor Chun-Hung Lin, a distinguished scientist in the
field of carbohydrate chemistry, at Academia Sinica Research Institute of
Taiwan. Professor Lin's group has done extensive research work to study alpha-L-
fucosidases and this collaboration is an invaluable opportunity to learn further
aspects of this research area.

This project will develop a toolbox of molecular probes to study alpha-L-
fucosidase catalytic activities. Alpha-L-fucosidase is an important protein that
can cleave L-fucose, an abundant sugar molecule, from carbohydrate structures.
The L-fucose linkages may vary from one carbohydrate structure to another.
Deficiency or abnormal levels of alpha-L-fucosidase is related to several
medical conditions including fucosidosis, carcinoma of the stomach, and cystic
fibrosis etc. However, the roles of alpha-L-fucosidases are not well understood.
Under the plan for this project, alpha-L-fucosidases from collaborator's group
will be tested with the molecular probes which will allow to study catalytic
function(s) of the proteins. Additionally, discovery of alpha-L-fucosidases that
are catalytically active toward one specific type of L-fucose linkage will be
useful as it can be used as a tool to analyze complex carbohydrate structures.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.