* 1613812
* EAPSI: Classification of Fusion Categories with one Non-Invertible Object
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Henry Tucker, Tucker                  Henry          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Fusion categories are mathematical structures which are used to encode
invariants of a wide variety of mathematical systems. A mathematical invariant
is a quantity or other property of a mathematical object that remains unchanged
under transformations of that object. For example, the symmetries of a given
geometric object may be expressed as the data of a fusion category; certain
properties of these symmetries must remain the same under deformations of the
object, and this is reflected in the invariant theory of fusion categories. One
primary goal of this project is to unify several different approaches to the
study of fusion categories coming from both mathematics and physics. Kyoto
University Professor Masaki Izumi, the host scientist for this project, is a
leading international researcher in fusion category theory from the physics-
influenced point of view. This collaboration will further the interaction
between the two communities and will result in new mathematical questions
arising from established physical theories.

This project aims to classify fusion categories having one object that is non-
invertible under the tensor product: these are called the near-group fusion
categories. Izumi has developed a technique utilizing the theory of algebras of
operators on Hilbert spaces to make this classification; specifically, he
realizes their objects as endomorphisms on Cuntz C* algebras and classifies
their possible images. Together Izumi and the principal investigator (PI) will
realize the near-groups in this way and provide classification parameters for
the possible equivalence classes of fusion categories having the near-group
fusion rule. Several different important families of fusion category invariants
will also be computed, including the modular data for the Drinfel'd centers and
the Frobenius-Schur indicators.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.