* 1613798
* EAPSI: The Effects of Climate Change on Coral Larvae in Relation to Coral Reef Connectivity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jessica Bergman, Bergman                 Jessica        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Ocean acidification, or OA, is widely recognized as a climate change-related
threat to coral reefs. OA may affect processes related to the exchange of free-
swimming coral larvae between populations on a reef, and existing research
characterizes the importance of seawater flow in transporting these larvae among
reefs in order to maintain biodiversity. However, less is known about the
position of coral larvae in the water column and how this is affected by OA,
representing a critical knowledge gap in evaluating larval dispersal and
subsequent connectivity among populations. This project focuses on the behavior
and physiology of larvae from a common coral and how these features will be
affected by OA. The larger objective is to better understand how OA and climate
change will alter connectivity among coral reefs and mediate changes in species
composition. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Saki Harii
at Sesoko Research Station in Okinawa, Japan, as part of the Tropical Biosphere
Research Center, University of the Ryukyus.

This project elucidates the effect of ocean acidification (OA) on the early life
stages of Pocillopora damicornis, a brooding scleractinian coral, and focuses on
the behavior and physiology of their larvae in situ. The project employs a
threefold approach that: 1) determines the location of larvae in the water
column over a 24-hour period, 2) tests for an effect of OA on behavior of larvae
in situ (i.e., position in the water), and 3) examines the effect of parent
exposure to OA on larvae behavior. Dr. Harii has successfully conducted many
experiments on brooding events, and her expertise will aid in the capture and
transport of larvae to experimental in situ chambers. Additionally, the location
of Sesoko Research Station will allow for future cross-Pacific comparisons of
the physiological performance of P. damicornis larvae under OA, and will be
integrated with ongoing experiments conducted in Moorea, French Polynesia, as
part of a larger framework of collaboration between researchers in the United
States, Japan, and Moorea. Expanding cultural relations between Japan and the
United States through the exchange of scientific research will continue to
strengthen the academic partnership between the two countries.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.