* 1613879
* EAPSI: Sedimentary Record of Typhoon Ketsana from Vietnam: Implications for Long-Term Tropical Cyclon
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Walker, Walker                  Jennifer       S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

A better understanding of tropical cyclone processes is imperative in order to
predict and mitigate the effects of similar future storms on the environment and
expanding coastal communities. Southeast Asia, in particular, is susceptible to
frequent typhoons and severe damage, and rapidly expanding populations tend to
settle on the coasts where there is concentrated economic activity, exacerbating
the negative consequences of coastal hazards. The objective of this research is
to analyze sediment deposits left by the storm surge associated with Typhoon
Ketsana on the Vietnam coast near Da Nang in 2009. Microfossil data will be
combined with physical sedimentological data to characterize the impacts of the
tropical cyclone on Vietnam. This project will improve understanding of tropical
cyclone inundation characteristics and impacts and contribute to more accurate
risk assessment and coastal hazard planning for dense populations in coastal
communities. Research will be conducted at the Earth Observatory of Singapore,
Nanyang Technological University and will be supervised by Assistant Professor
Adam Switzer, who is an internationally recognized expert in tsunami and storm
deposits. The Earth Observatory of Singapore is in an ideal location to study
tropical cyclone events with state of the art facilities necessary to complete
this research.

Coastal sediments archive geologic evidence of tropical cyclones and these
sedimentary deposits improve our understanding of landfalling storm processes.
The documentation of the geological evidence of this catastrophic marine
inundation will contribute to a better understanding of tropical cyclones and
their associated processes. Microfossil (foraminifera) composition of the
deposits and physical sedimentological data will be compared with samples
collected from the beach face and offshore. A combination of foraminiferal
taxonomy and taphonomy data for the samples collected will assist in the
analysis of the marine inundation event of Typhoon Ketsana. The coastal
stratigraphic record in Vietnam can be compared with other depositional records
from tropical cyclones to help calibrate the characteristics of past storm
events in sediment records. Characterization of tropical cyclone events is
immensely important for advancing knowledge and understanding within geologic,
oceanographic, and environmental fields.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.