* 1613966
* EAPSI: Optical Characterization of Atomically-Thin Two-Dimensional Materials as Nanoscale Light Emitters
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* MOHAMMADHOSSEIN TAHERSIMA, TAHERSIMA               MOHAMMADHOSSEIN
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Light emitting components are used widely in modern technologies, processes and
applications such as computing, sensing, bio-medical applications, and
telecommunication. A fundamental limitation for active light emitting devices
exists due to the inherently weak interaction between light with matter. This
naturally leads to inefficient and bulky photonic device that are significantly
larger compared to electronic counterparts, slow device speeds, require higher
power consumption, and result in uneconomical component and system cost. This
award supports research to study a hybrid of atomically thin materials and
plasmonic metals as a potential candidate for nanoscale and fast light
amplification emitter. This technology can have great benefit to society by
enabling faster computing while reducing the power consumption incurred by
current technologies. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Cesare Soci, an eminent scientist in the field of nanotechnology and optical
spectroscopy at the Center of Disruptive Photonic Technologies (CDPT) at Nanyang
Technological University (NTU) in Singapore.

It is the aim of this award to explore transition metal dichalcogenides (in
particular, molybdenum disulfide) materials and demonstrate deep-sub wavelength
scale plasmonic enhanced light emitting devices. This work will utilize
cleanroom and imaging center at George Washington University to achieve
fabrication of nanoscale optical antennas. Next, the plasmonic enhanced emission
performance of the 2D material will be characterized by mirco photoluminescence
measurements, and time resolved measurement at CDPT. Also the optical spectrum
analyzer will be used to find the resonances of fabricated cavities excited by
the broadband source.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.