* 1613804
* RUI: Investigating the mechanisms regulating the formation of lysosome-related organelles
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Greg Hermann, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 469,411.00

The project will investigate how compartments are generated within some cell
types but not others in multicellular animals. The cells of complex organisms
contain compartments called organelles that endow cells with their specific
functional properties. While many organelles are common to all of the cells
within an organism, some are only generated in a subset of cell types. One of
these, called a lysosome-related organelle (LRO), plays varied and important
roles, however only certain animal cells generate them. The research will
investigate how this is achieved and identify factors that promote the formation
of LROs. Many undergraduates (25-55/year)will be mentored in collaborative,
investigative, and original research as part of the project. Many of these
students will come from underrepresented groups in the sciences. The work will
provide hands on scientific training for a large and diverse group of students,
most of who will progress on to careers in science and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many cell types, lysosome-related organelles
LROs co-exist with conventional lysosomes due to the activity of conserved LRO-
specific trafficking pathways that divert cargo away from endolysosomes. The
emergence of LRO biogenesis pathways likely result from the poorly understood
interplay of general endolysosome trafficking factors expressed in all cells
with key regulators that are only present and active within LRO-containing
cells. To identify and investigate the function of these regulators, the project
is analyzing the biogenesis of C. elegans gut granules, cell type-specific LROs
that co-exist with conventional lysosomes. Some LRO biogenesis factors
identified in this system have cell type restricted expression and likely
regulate the diversion of cargo to LROs. The research addresses the function of
one of these, GLO-3, which is proposed to redirect the function of CCZ-1, a
RAB-7 guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), away from conventional
endolysosomal pathways, toward the GLO-1 Rab to regulate LRO biogenesis. The
research will involve detailed phenotypic analysis of mutants, yeast 2-hybrid
screens, and in vitro GEF assays. The research will examine whether expressing
GLO-3 and other LRO biogenesis factors are sufficient to direct the trafficking
of LRO cargo away from conventional endosomes in cell types that do not normally
generate LROs. The research will employ a novel genetic resource to identify
nearly all of the genes necessary for LRO biogenesis in C. elegans.