* 1613294
* Dynamics and Properties of Hot and Dense Quark and Gluon Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jiangyong Jia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 525,000.00

It is a well-established fact that protons and neutrons are made up of smaller
constituents called quarks and gluons. In collisions using two beams of heavy
nuclei, a new state of matter is formed from these constituents, called the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP). This project will answer fundamental questions about
the QGP, such as the space-time dynamics of the matter and its transport
properties. The project will be carried out by studying the collective flow of
fluctuations and particle interactions with the QGP. Studies of high energy
density matter can have a profound impact on our understanding of the theory of
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), which governs the behavior of nuclei and the
evolution of the early universe, supernova explosions and the properties of
neutron stars. The research will be carried out at the Large Hadron Collider in
Europe, using the ATLAS detector, and at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider of
Brookhaven National Laboratory, using the STAR detector. Both the ATLAS and STAR
experiments provide excellent training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate
and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed measurements
include: 1. Comprehensive model studies of particle correlations in transverse
and longitudinal directions as compared with measurements to constrain the
dynamics and properties of the matter in A+A collisions. This effort requires
inventing new analysis methods, developing event-shape triggers to take
advantage of the upcoming high-luminosity Pb+Pb run, as well as carrying out
similar analyses at lower collision energy at RHIC. 2. Detailed investigations
of long-range ridge correlations in small systems such as pp and p+Pb
collisions, which require development of high-multiplicity triggers, improving
the multi-particle correlation method, as well as studying the particle mass
dependence of the ridge correlation. 3. Future efforts to understand the jet-
quenching response to the initial density fluctuations and to search for medium
response to quenched jets. The proposed efforts are built upon the group's
established expertise in various correlation measurements.