* 1613599
* A Game Changer-The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Program.
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* William McHenry, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,998.00

The LSAMP program began in 1991 as a multidisciplinary comprehensive
undergraduate program designed to increase substantially the number of minority
students receiving baccalaureate degrees in STEM field. Awards have grown from 6
alliances to 45 state and regional alliances which encompass more than 600
institutions. The program is considered by many to be the crown-jewel of
broadening participation programs. The knowledge of how LSAMP was able to
accomplish this incredible feat needs a forum where the stakeholders can
highlight to the nation NSF's LSAMP strategy and help to build the knowledge
base on models and evidenced-based approaches to recruitment and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an important step in advancing
the knowledge of underrepresented minority students in STEM through the LSAMP
project directors. The experiences gained by principal investigators working
with other science and education faculty will position them to address the
nation's great challenge of producing more minority scientists. Reviewing the
rich history of the past twenty five (25) years of a successful program will
contribute to the nation's understanding of effective practices that contribute
to the trajectories of minority scientists in both research and the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, through implementation of this
conference, broadens participation of underrepresented groups in graduate and
undergraduate education with the real prospect of increasing the number of such
groups attaining doctoral and other degrees in STEM and entering the
professoriate. Discovery and understanding resulting from this conference will
enhance the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.