* 1613763
* EAPSI: Laser Additive Approach to Rapid Assessment and Development of Promising Magnetic Alloy Compositions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Calvin Mikler, Mikler                  Calvin         V
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Additive manufacturing a technique for near-net shaping and rapid prototyping of
both industrial products and novel alloy systems. More specifically, direct
laser deposition techniques such a Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS) can be
used for depositing compositionally and functionally graded materials. This
research aims to optimize laser additive processing technologies such as LENS to
process a class of magnetic materials from elemental powders, and to use LENS-
deposited compositionally-graded magnetic alloys to assess the relationship
between microstructure and magnetic property. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Raju Ramanujan, an expert on magnetic alloys, at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore. The outcomes of this project would
include advancements in energy and power transmission sector, high efficiency
motors, as well as in solid-state refrigeration.

Laser Engineered Net Shaping allows for the use of elemental blends of powders
for novel alloy prototyping. By utilizing multiple powder feeders, it is
possible to alter alloy composition as a function of build distance and yield a
single system with continuum of compositions. Soft and semi-hard magnetic
alloys, and graded alloys of different types will be processed using LENS. These
include those of the permalloy type, based on Ni-Fe-V and Ni-Fe-Mo compositions,
compositions based on Finemet, Fe-Si-B-Nb-Cu, as well as magneto-caloric
compositions based on Fe-Mn-Ni. The scale of this microstructure in these LENS
processed alloys can be varied via the laser deposition parameters and this, in
turn, influences coercivity (Hc) and saturation magnetization (Ms) of these
laser-deposited magnetic alloys. Various instrumentation for magnetic property
testing including Anisotropic Magnetoresistance (AMR), Vibrating Sample
Magnetometer (VSM), and Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) are
available for use through collaboration with Dr. Raju Ramanujan and Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore. Furthermore, the Singapore Center for 3D
Printing (SC3DP) is conveniently located at Nanyang Technological University and
contains several other additive manufacturing systems such as Selective Laser
Melting (SLM) and Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) which can also be used during
this project.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.