* 1613028
* Collaborative Research:  Observations of High-energy Radiation Associated with Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* David Smith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2020
* USD 465,276.00

The project will conduct a series of field campaigns to observe phenomena
producing high-energy radiation in thunderstorms. These include terrestrial
gamma-ray flashes (TGFs), long-lived gamma-ray glows observed in many parts of
the thunderstorm charge structure, and x-rays associated with the stepping of
lightning leaders. The overall strategy is to locate probing sensors in or near
the high-field regions where these emissions are primarily generated. The
sensors to be used include two gamma-ray instruments developed at the University
of California, Santa Cruz, under previous NSF awards, as well as sensors
provided by our collaborators that sense lightning remotely via static and
dynamic electric and magnetic fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;All the phenomena under study were discovered within the last
30 years or so, with research only becoming widespread in the last decade. Some
of the many open questions that will be addressed by this project include:
whether downward TGFs occur in natural lightning, whether glows (an avalanche of
relativistic electrons) contribute significantly to the discharging of
thunderstorms, and whether positive lightning leaders emit x-rays and low-energy
gamma rays the way negative leaders do. The primary advantage the field
measurements have over others are 1) the proximity of the detection sites to the
radiation sources to be studied (thundercloud charge centers and lightning
leaders); and 2) the high time resolution and throughput capabilities of the
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The selected field
sites (an urban tower in Canada, a region of very low altitude storms in Japan,
and a very high altitude site in Mexico) represent the three situations in which
it is at least feasible that downward TGFs might produce high enough radiation
fields at the ground to represent a public safety issue (upward TGFs seen from
space produce dangerous levels of radioactivity within thunderclouds at 10--
15~km altitudes). Thus this program should allay (or justify) any concern about
radiation at ground level nearly comprehensively. Significant participation from
undergraduate and graduate students, including first-generation and otherwise
underserved undergraduates, is part of the program.