* 1613362
* Green's functions and the nuclear many-body problem
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Willem Dickhoff, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2019
* USD 425,000.00

The origin of the chemical elements is one of the fundamental problems in
nuclear physics and astrophysics, and the detailed understanding of the
structural and dynamical properties of nuclei is the key ingredient for progress
in understanding the nucleosynthesis process that allows for the formation of
atomic nuclei from constituent nucleons (protons and nucleons). One of the
challenges posed by this problem concerns the study of nuclei that feature a
large imbalance between the number of protons and neutrons. These nuclei are
generally unstable, leading to radioactivity, and have important societal
relevance for industry, medicine and defense applications. In that broader
context, this project will provide theoretical support for the science programs
at leading experimental facilities, such as the future Facility for Rare Isotope
Beams (FRIB) under construction on the campus of Michigan State University. In
particular, the PI and his students will continue the development of a
theoretical approach aimed at providing a consistent description of nuclear
structure and nuclear reactions needed to analyze the experimental data at FRIB
and other nuclear physics facilities. The PI will mentor graduate students in
this research and collaborate with experimental colleagues who will perform
related experiments.

This project aims at providing a simultaneous description of positive energy
nucleons, the domain of elastic scattering, and bound nucleons, the domain of
nuclear structure, using the framework of the propagator method of quantum
mechanics. The application of the propagator method will employ the nonlocal
implementation of the description of the potentials that allows for the accurate
description of ground-state properties using the method of dispersion relations.
Accompanying the implementation of the propagator method to describe all
relevant experimental data, including elastic scattering cross sections and
matter and charge distributions, will be the calculation of these properties
using the same framework but starting from the underlying interactions between
nucleons as constrained by the symmetries of the fundamental theory of quarks
and gluons, Quantum Chromo Dynamics, and the available data for the properties
of two nucleons. Such calculations will be applied with a new scheme that allows
the ab initio calculation of properties of heavier nuclei that have not been
studied in this way to date. The method will also be applied to calculations of
the superfluid properties of neutron stars.