* 1613278
* RUI: Benzoate and pH Stress in Experimental Evolution of Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 524,000.00

In all environments, bacteria experience change in pH. Low pH amplifies the
bacterial uptake of organic acids found in food, such as the aspirin-related
compounds benzoate and salicylate. Study of benzoate stress and adaptation
yields insights about microbial interactions with salicylate-rich food plants
such as fruits and berries. Plant salicylates are important defense molecules
which stress the bacteria of plant-associated microbial communities. For this
project, undergraduate researchers will investigate how the bacterium
Escherichia coli K-12 responds to acid-enhanced uptake of benzoate or
salicylate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results show that over generations
of benzoate exposure, bacteria undergo surprising adaptations including the loss
of drug resistance, more durable cell shape, and altered production of a variety
of organic compounds. Benzoate-adapted clones show selection for mutations that
enhance tolerance of organic acids at the cost of sensitivity to antimicrobials
such as chloramphenicol. Undergraduate researchers will perform genetic analysis
to test whether the fitness gains and chloramphenicol sensitivity are associated
with loss of organic acid-induced gene networks, or whether the fitness changes
derive from previously unknown mechanisms. A possible mechanism of fitness
increase is the loss of energy-expensive gene expression, to overcome the low-
energy stress caused by the benzoate depletion of protonmotive force. The role
of low-energy stress will be tested by treatment with uncoupler molecules such
as CCCP that deplete proton motive force; and by testing bacterial responses to
high pH, a different condition that incurs low-energy stress. Another mechanism
of benzoate-adapted clones may involve improvement of pH homeostasis.
Undergraduates will measure bacterial cytoplasmic pH using ratiometric
fluorescence microscopy, by a method used in the PI's lab and provided on
request to other labs. Benzoate-adapted clones also show changes in cell
morphology. Undergraduate researchers will test the role of mutant alleles in
maintaining cell shape in acid or in base. Unusual cell shape phenotypes can
yield clues as to mechanisms of cell division, a process important for human
control of microbial communities.