* 1613951
* Hadronic and Nuclear Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Jose Goity, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2021
* USD 289,812.00

The understanding of the strong interactions, the force that determines the
structure of atomic nuclei, is one of the most challenging problems in the
Standard Model of particle physics, which describes the number and properties of
all the elementary particles. The fundamental theory of the strong interactions,
based on the theory of quarks and gluons known as Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD),
has a very complex dynamics which gives rise to the rich properties of hadrons
(baryons, including protons and neutrons, and mesons and their excitations) and
also to the complexity observed in nuclear interactions and structure. The
challenges are therefore many and very complex. Those challenges require a
variety of experimental efforts, as well as theoretical efforts. In this
context, this project will further develop the connection between the
fundamental theory of QCD and hadronic/nuclear physics. It is expected that
tools and methods developed in that context may have a broader domain of
applications. The PI is a joint appointee in the Theory Group at Jefferson Lab,
providing him with the opportunity to focus on Jefferson Lab related physics. An
important mission of the project is the education and training at Hampton
University of graduate and undergraduate students. An additional broader impact
of the project will be the PI's interaction with scientists involved in
Jefferson Lab experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on low and
intermediate energy strong interactions in single hadron and few nucleon
problems, as well as some fundamental aspects of QCD. The methods used are based
in rigorous descriptions of the strong interactions known as effective theories,
which are consistent with QCD, and make use of experimental as well as lattice
QCD calculations results. The aim is to advance the theoretical knowledge of QCD
and the develop theoretical methods. More specifically, in single hadrons, two
main lines of research will be pursued: 1) Development and applications of an
improved chiral effective theory in baryons, where the combination of the low
energy and the 1/Nc expansions (Nc is the number of color degrees of freedom in
QCD) is implemented; applications to baryon observables, and in particular to
results obtained in Lattice QCD for those observables will be pursued, where in
particular the quark mass dependencies accessible through Lattice QCD will be
utilized for analyzing issues of convergence of the effective theory. Particular
emphasis will be on the applications to baryons involving strangeness, where
there are still unresolved issues with the implementation of effective theories
due to the relatively large mass of the strange quark. In particular, these
studies have impact in for improving the accuracy of the extraction of weak
interaction parameters from hyperon decays. 2) Study of excited baryons in the
framework of the 1/Nc expansion, which has as main aim the use of that
fundamental expansion of QCD to organize the description of baryon resonances;
this work has an impact in the analysis of current experimental results on
baryon resonances from various facilities, in particular Jefferson Lab, and it
can also be applied to the current Lattice QCD calculations of the excited
baryon spectrum. In few body physics, the research is focused on applying the
combined chiral effective theory and 1/Nc expansion to study the nucleon-nucleon
interaction. Among the fundamental aspects of QCD, the project will focus on
pure glue-dynamics, studying its fundamental non-perturbative quantities, namely
gluon condensate and topological susceptibility using methods of holographic
QCD.