* 1613771
* EAPSI: The Diversity and Distributions of Microbial Eukaryotes in Geothermal Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Angela Oliverio, Oliverio                Angela         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Geothermal hotspring systems represent useful natural systems to assess
microbial diversity and examine how environmental factors shape this diversity.
Geothermal springs vary dramatically in their environmental characteristics and
these gradients (e.g. temperature, pH) make hotsprings 'model' systems for
understanding the ecological distributions of micro-eukaryotic communities. This
project will investigate microbes in New Zealand hotspring ecosystems to
characterize microbial eukaryotic communities. New Zealand is ideally suited for
this work as it is home to thousands of unique hotspring ecosystems. This
scientific bioinventory will be useful for scientists and policy makers to
assess ecosystem uniqueness, biotechnology potential, and ecosystem health. This
is particularly relevant given strong current interest in harnessing geothermal
hotsprings for energy. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Craig Cary at the University of Waikato and Dr. Matthew Stott at GNS Science,
experts in microbial ecology and hot spring ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotic microbes (e.g. protists) are abundant and
critical to ecosystem functioning, yet remain poorly characterized in
hotsprings. This study will use archived samples from fifty geothermal hot
springs collected from the Taupo&amp;#772; Volcanic Zone (TVZ) in New Zealand
that represent extreme gradients in temperature (13- 100.6Â°C), pH (0- 9.7) to
search for novel eukaryotic diversity and test hypotheses on how environmental
parameters shape microbial eukaryotic communities in geothermal environments.
High-throughput DNA sequencing combined with microscopic analyses will be used
to yield one of the first assessments of the microbial eukaryotic communities in
geothermal environments. Although the bacteria and archaea found in hotsprings
and other geothermal environments have been studied for decades, there are no
comprehensive study of the microbial eukaryotic diversity found in these
environments despite increasing evidence that they can be abundant and active.
Thus, this project will contribute to our understanding of the biodiversity of
hotspring systems and whether there are endemic eukaryotic microbial taxa found
in these ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Royal Society of New Zealand.