* 1613482
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Water as a Selective Pressure in the Evolution of Primate Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Charles Nunn, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2019
* USD 31,682.00

Humans can survive for weeks without food, but only days without water, and
modern human populations have found creative and culturally-transmitted
solutions for living in dry areas of the world. However, little is known about
the evolutionary origins of water-seeking and selection behaviors. This doctoral
dissertation project aims to understand adaptations to water scarcity in
primates that experience highly seasonal conditions, including how they locate
and navigate to water sources, why they select certain water sources over
others, and what impact these decisions have on their health and survival. The
results of this project will contribute to understanding factors that influenced
human and primate evolution in water-scarce habitats, and could inform future
interventions for humans and primates living in drought areas. The project will
also support graduate student training and international collaborations, and the
student co-PI will share data on water quality with communities around the study
site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypotheses that water
distribution and water quality influence ranging patterns and water preference,
and that these behaviors have downstream effects on parasite infection. The
project will study a population of habituated, wild red-fronted lemurs (Eulemur
rufifrons) at Kirindy Forest in western Madagascar that is remarkable for
surviving an annual 9-month dry season in which no rain typically falls. These
lemurs subsist on standing waterholes that vary in color, clarity, and distance
from lemur groups' home ranges. This combined observational and experimental
project will employ high-resolution GPS collars, experimentally manipulated
water availability and quality. Gastrointestinal parasite infection dynamics
will also be analyzed. Through this research, the PIs will contribute to a new
theoretical framework focused on water and water-borne disease as a selective
pressure on primate behavior, and on the trade-offs that primates face when
living in or expanding into dry habitats.