* 1613598
* EAPSI: Connecting Distributed Impacts in Urban Watersheds to In-stream Hydrology and Water Quality Observations through Refined Landscape Metrics for Optimal Stormwater Handling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Thomas Epps, Epps                    Thomas         H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Stormwater moves through urban watersheds via a complex network over pervious
surfaces that infiltrate runoff and impervious surfaces that quickly move runoff
towards streams. Impervious areas and the degree to which they are connected by
drainage pipes have been shown to play the greatest role in shifting streamflow
dynamics and water quality in urban streams leading to degraded conditions
worldwide. This has spurred the adoption of more natural stormwater handling
with green infrastructure practices distributed throughout an urban watershed to
handle runoff issues at the source. Because urban land costs are high, guidance
is needed to better site these installations in order to maximize their
effectiveness to meet local drainage needs and contribute to improvements in
stream conditions. This project will explore novel methods of urban drainage
assessment that account for natural and piped runoff pathways and identify areas
that contribute more to stream degradation based on measures of impervious
surface connectivity. Methodology will be explored with the guidance of Dr. Tim
Fletcher at University of Melbourne and Dr. David McCarthy at Monash University
using established spatial datasets that include impervious areas and their
connectivity for comparison and validation. Different flowpath weighting schemes
will be explored using runoff and water quality datasets and a temporal analysis
will focus on the Little Stringybark experimental watershed to assess how
changes in impervious connectivity over time associated with green
infrastructure installations relate to observed changes in streamflow and water
quality.

The connectivity of impervious surfaces in urban watersheds has often been
represented as binary while it has been acknowledged that connectivity actually
exists on a continuum subject to storm-specific characteristics, antecedent
moisture conditions, and variable flowpath disconnection. This project will
utilize high-resolution spatial data representing elevation, impervious cover,
and stormwater drainage networks to establish a relative connectivity index that
provides both a landscape-scale weighted metric of imperviousness and spatially
explicit information that identifies critical source areas within the urban
watershed more closely tied to in-stream measures. Python scripting will employ
a grid-based representation of watershed surface cover and runoff flowpaths that
will measure connectivity by investigating weighting schema for different
portions of the flowpath that runoff takes across the watershed (overland,
impervious, piped, in-stream). These weighting schema will be calibrated to
optimize the fit of linear models relating the associated landscape metric to
in-stream observations, and differences in parameterization between watersheds
will be investigated to assess how effectively they represent physical watershed
characteristics and runoff transport mechanisms. This will help validate the
methodology and provide guidance to establish a tool that can be used on
ungauged watersheds to identify areas within any urban watershed that will be
best served by green infrastructure installation to decrease impervious
connectivity and impart positive changes in-stream through distributed means.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.