* 1613393
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Affiliative Social Relationships and Immune Function in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Cheryl Knott, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2019
* USD 25,145.00

Most primates are social species, and sociality comes with both benefits and
costs. This doctoral dissertation project will assess underlying mechanisms by
which social bonds shape well-being in primates. The investigator will study the
interaction of behavior, hormones, immune function, and pathogens, to see
whether stronger social bonds are associated with better immune function and
lower physiological stress. The findings from this study will provide a
comparative model for understanding sociality in our own species. The project
will also further science education outreach and student training, primate
conservation efforts, and development of international collaborations.

This project will investigate social buffering in wild chimpanzees at Ngogo,
Kibale National Park, Uganda - the largest wild chimpanzee community ever
studied. To assess the physiological and immunological correlates of social
bonds, the investigators will measure dyadic bond strength, glucocorticoids
(which reflect physiological reactions to stress and, when chronically elevated,
impair immune function), oxytocin (a nonapeptide correlated with social bonding
that may also attenuate glucocorticoid secretion), markers of immune activation
(i.e., urinary neopterin and body temperature), and the presence of pathogenic
infection. The investigators will noninvasively collect behavioral observations,
urine, and feces from 50 adult and adolescent chimpanzees. Hormones and immune
biomarkers will then be analyzed and infectious agents will be sequenced.