* 1613134
* Solar Wind Control of Alfven Wave Power in the Polar Region
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Andreas Keiling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 382,882.00

This project will quantify the global distribution of Alfven waves in the polar
region and its variations with solar wind conditions, geomagnetic storm
conditions, and auroral substorm phase. Alfven waves are an essential component
of the dynamics and associated energy transport within the Earth's
magnetosphere. This has become more and more apparent with each satellite
mission into the magnetosphere. Significant Alfven wave activity has been
observed by satellites traveling through the plasma sheet, the plasmasphere, the
tail lobes, the auroral zone, and the reconnection regions in the magnetotail.
Alfven waves are oscillations traveling along magnetic field lines. Much like
waves moving outward from a stone tossed into the water, the Alfven waves carry
information to other locations along magnetic field lines about changes in the
magnetic field or currents at the site of their generation. At these other
locations, the waves can be dissipated supplying their energy to power different
processes remote from the original energy source. For example, in the polar
ionosphere, the dissipation of Alfven waves supplies energy to accelerate the
electrons responsible for creating breathtaking auroras. These Alfven waves are
thought to originate in strong plasma jets within the stretched magnetotail far
from the polar ionosphere. The project will support a graduate student for the
summer thus contributing to the training of the next generation scientific
workforce. The advances in knowledge of an energy transport process important to
the dynamics of the magnetosphere will in the long term improve models of space
weather forecasting, of value to a technological society.

The project proposed here will develop statistical maps of Alfven wave power
observed by the NASA Polar spacecraft and quantify how these maps vary depending
on solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field parameters and storm and
substorm conditions. Results from MHD modeling will be compared to the
statistical maps to validate the MHD simulations. The study will use tools
similar to and the methodology of earlier work by the PI, but will include 10
years of data instead of the one-year interval used previously. This will allow
the statistical examination of Alfven wave power for a wide-range of different
conditions and geomagnetic activity levels. New insights about energy transport
and dynamics of the Geospace system are expected.