* 1613837
* EAPSI: Does Leaf Function Evolve in the Invaded Range? A study of East Asian Forest Invaders in Japan and North America
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Kelsey Martinez, Martinez                Kelsey         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Invasive plant species from East Asia are becoming increasingly abundant in
North American forests, and often have negative impacts on forest function and
biodiversity. Differences in how East Asian and North American plants acquire
energy may explain the invasiveness of East Asian species. This project will
examine differences in leaf traits driving energy capture in invasive species in
their native (East Asia) and invasive ranges (North America). Seedlings of East
Asian maple, cherry, and honeysuckle species growing in Aobayama Botanical
Garden in Sendai, Japan will be used as focal individuals. A replicate study
will be completed in Syracuse, NY using individuals sourced from North American
populations. This project is a collaboration with Dr. Kouki Hikosaka, an
accomplished ecophysiologist at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. The results
of this study will allow land managers to more efficiently minimize negative
impacts of invasive species, an endeavor in which large amounts of resources and
labor are invested annually.

Plant invaders native to East Asia are increasingly abundant in Eastern North
American (ENA) forests. The goal of this project is to understand leaf-level
physiological strategies used by shade tolerant, invasive woody species
(representatives from maple, cherry, and honeysuckle species to maximize carbon
assimilation at different light levels. Physiological comparisons will involve
invasive and non-invasive species, as well as population-level variation in non-
native species across their native and invasive ranges. This project will also
quantify potential costs of being able to adjust leaf physiology to changes in
light environments (i.e. from deep shade to high light after gap formation).
Understanding the costs and benefits of physiological strategies at both the
species and population levels will broaden our understanding of the mechanisms
invaders use to outcompete native species. This project is a collaborative
effort with Dr. Kouki Hikosaka at Tohoku University, a prominent leaf function
expert.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.