* 1613258
* Scaling Summaries in Multiscale Domains with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Brani Vidakovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,034.00

In many scientific experiments, the observations often present themselves as
noise, making traditional data analytic techniques inadequate. The main
objective of the proposed research is to develop and explore statistical models
that produce informative scaling summaries for such noise-driven data with the
goal of inference, classification, and prediction. This is achieved with the
help of wavelets, one of the most efficient multiscale tools. Multiscale
methodologies have evolved in the last two decades in disciplines ranging from
theoretical statistics to geosciences. Understanding the scaling in data will
lead to significant insights when analyzing massive, multidimensional, noisy,
and seemingly chaotic data sets. The proposed research will impact various
scientific fields that produce and utilize high-frequency data and images: most
notably the areas of health diagnostics and atmospheric monitoring and
prediction. In particular, the proposed methods will be applied to (1) breast
cancer and lung cancer diagnostics by screening for the scaling features of
digital mammograms and chest x-ray images, and (2) geoscientific analysis of
turbulent atmospheric flows such as wind velocities, temperatures, and pollutant
concentrations with the goal of modeling and prediction. The project will also
contribute to the education and training of students through their deep
engagement in the applications of novel techniques to problems from various
scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed framework for an
alternative assessment of scaling present in data utilizes statistical modeling
in the domain of real and complex scale-mixing wavelet transforms. The novel
scale-mixing hierarchies of wavelet subspaces succinctly describe "fluxes-in-
energy" among the multivariate components in data. Such descriptors will provide
added insights and informative summaries in the form of monofractal and
multifractal wavelet spectra and co-spectra, defined in a robust manner. The
three scientific aims of the project include: (i) analyzing the properties of
scale-mixing multidimensional wavelet coefficients for different decompositions
(orthogonal, non-decimated, and wavelet packets), and investigating their
relevance to scaling assessment, (ii) establishing theoretical properties of
robust measures for regular and irregular scaling in non-standard multiscale
domains, and (iii) translating theoretical advances of the proposed research to
applications in geosciences, bioinformatics, and medical diagnostics.