* 1613873
* EAPSI: The Effects of Environment on the Evolution of Human Skeletal Variation in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Tyler Dunn, Dunn                    Tyler          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project aims to contextualize postcranial variation in skeletal specimens
from China within the broader global understanding of the interaction between
human evolution, climate change, and skeletal robusticity. Human postcrania are
understudied in East Asia, and specifically in China. European and African
fossil specimens indicate that during times of climatic change the skeleton
becomes more robust due to necessary changes in subsistence and landscape use.
The few studied specimens from Asia do not consistently demonstrate this
increase in robusticity. However, most of these analyses lack specimens from
China. The examination of specimens from China will improve the current
understanding of the interaction between morphology and environment. Studying
the postcranial skeleton in specimens from China will promote understanding of
the interaction between climate change and skeletal robusticity on a broader
scale by testing assumptions made from the rest of the paleoanthropological
record in Asia. This research will be in collaboration with Professor Quanchao
Zhang from the Research Center for Frontier Archaeology at Jilin University in
Changchun, China. This collaboration provides access to an understudied skeletal
collection that spans China.

This project assesses metrics used to measure skeletal robusticity.
3-Dimensional shape analysis will be performed on specimens from different
archaeological assemblages across China, all of which originate temporally from
early Holocene. This research will test the hypothesis that postcranial skeletal
variation in Northern China will follow a trajectory that tends toward more
marked robusticity as global climate became colder and drier. This project will
use postcranial skeletal robusticity as a proxy to understand the interaction
between anatomy, climate change, and environment in several skeletal
collections. The findings of this project have the ability to inform global
patterns of human evolution relative to climate, activity, and subsistence.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.