* 1613219
* Estimation and Inference for Massive Multivariate Spatial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Joseph Guinness, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 11/30/2018
* USD 159,999.00

Satellite observations of the Earth's atmosphere and oceans have the potential
to improve forecasting of hurricanes and other extreme weather events. Massive
efforts to sample the chemical constituents present in well water can reduce
uncertainty in mapping of hazardous materials in groundwater. Observations of
chemical reactions at the sub-micron scale may lead to new insights about the
behavior of toxic trace elements in soils. However, the value of these expensive
efforts to collect massive amounts of data will not be fully realized if the
statistical techniques for analyzing them do not keep pace. The current
techniques available are inadequate to flexibly model and extract information
from massive datasets consisting of many variables collected across a region.
This research project aims to develop computationally efficient methods for
addressing the central challenges for analyzing massive multivariate spatial
data: (1) drawing justifiable conclusions about the relationships among the
multiple variables, and (2) making full and appropriate use of all variables
when mapping the data. Addressing the first challenge is essential to
translating observational and experimental data into scientific knowledge.
Addressing the second is crucially important for providing predictions of
potentially harmful outcomes, and the key to solving both challenges is
integrating the multivariate and spatial data analysis into a unified
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inherent correlation in time series and
spatial data is the feature that makes interpolation and forecasting possible,
but it also complicates estimation of multivariate relationships. As a result,
analyses of time series data often start with a transformation of the data into
the spectral domain, in which the transformed data are approximately
uncorrelated. Although the spectral domain has played a central role in
developing theory for models for spatial data, several issues have hindered the
implementation of practical spectral domain methods for spatial data. This
project aims to develop methodological innovations to overcome those barriers
and provide practitioners with a flexible set of tools to extract information
from dozens of spatial variables simultaneously, and predict variables at
unsampled locations using all of the available data. The methods employ
computationally efficient periodic data augmentations to simplify analyses,
dramatically improve the ability to characterize uncertainty, and are supported
by novel theoretical results.