* 1613577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Investigating patterns of genetic relatedness and social inequality using ancient DNA
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Dennis Van Gerven, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 25,187.00

Socioeconomic inequality is a topic of great concern in modern society, and
studies of past populations can shed light on the origins and development of
inequality. This doctoral dissertation project will analyze ancient DNA (aDNA)
from skeletons at the Nubian site of Kulubnarti (550-800 AD) to better
understand how genetic relatedness, physical appearance, health, and
socioeconomic inequality intersected in the past. This project will provide a
DNA-based framework that demonstrates the power of molecular analyses for
exploring the roots of social stratification. The student co-PI will also
conduct science education outreach to elementary school-aged children and their
parents, with a focus on biocultural approaches for understanding human
biological diversity. Ancient DNA methods used in this project will inform
future investigations of genetic relatedness in situations where DNA is
degraded.

This project is an investigation of whether biogeographic ancestry and genetic
relationships align with archaeologically-observed social stratification between
a mainland community of landowning farmers and an island community of
"underclass" laborers living side-by-side at the Sudanese Nubian site of
Kulubnarti (550-800 AD). To determine if social hierarchy at Kulubnarti
correlates with genetically distinct subpopulations, this project tests the
hypothesis that the "underclass" position of the islanders was a reflection of
migrant status while the landowning farmers composed a more genetically stable
local population. The investigators will 1) quantify genetic distance between
cemetery communities; 2) examine endogamy within each cemetery community; and 3)
estimate biogeographic ancestry and phenotypic variation of individuals from
each cemetery. After screening 146 DNA libraries, 30 libraries that demonstrate
the highest DNA preservation will be enriched and captured using an array of
~1.2 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The results will reveal the
genetic relationships within and between Kulubnarti communities, will produce
the first aDNA data from Nubia, and will integrate genetic and archaeological
data to examine the biocultural dynamics of social organization in the past.