* 1613988
* EAPSI: Development of Natural Drug Molecules with Improved Tracking and Targeting Capability
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Austin Schwartz, Schwartz                Austin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Drugs often have unique side effects due to non-selective interactions and poor
targeting of the drug molecule. This research involves the synthesis of a drug
molecule that can easily be bound to small, traceable nanoparticles.
Nanoparticles can have a variety of characteristics and for these experiments
fluorescent and magnetic nanoparticles will be used. These nanoparticles are
unique in that they can be tracked in-vivo following delivery and better guided
toward their target. The drug of interest is a peptide derived from scorpion
venom that can alter electrical signaling within the brain in a way believed to
contribute to regulating metabolism. Research to synthesize this drug, the
peptide Margatoxin (MgTx), will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Glenn
King, an expert in venom-derived molecules, at the University of Queensland in
Brisbane, Australia. The traceable drug molecules will be studies for in-vivo
effects on a potential therapeutic target for disorders such as obesity and
diabetes.

Venom-derived drug molecules are inherently difficult to produce due to highly
conserved disulfide bonds frequently found within their structure. With the
expertise of Dr. King, the researcher will produce venom-derived peptide using a
yeast expression system. This peptide can alter electrical signaling in the
brain through modulation of action potential firing frequency. Interestingly,
the primary metabolic molecules insulin and glucose can modulate electrical
signaling in the brain in a similar manner. To better track and deliver this
peptide-inhibitor to the brain, the peptide will be synthesized with a tag such
that it can easily be bound to fluorescent and magnetic nanoparticles. Peptide-
inhibitor bound nanoparticles will allow for improved targeting and tracking
following delivery, and in turn, will provide a means to elucidate the
relationship between this peptide?s target, obesity and other associated
disorders.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.