* 1613864
* EAPSI: Long-term Carbon Storage in Old vs. New Wetland Sediments along Major River Deltas Influenced by Constructed Diversions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jill Arriola, Arriola                 Jill
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

River deltas sequester large amounts of organic carbon (C) that originates from
either upstream, as terrestrial mineral sedimentation, or through local marine
vegetation that decays and is buried. Diminished sediment supply to river deltas
can enhance the erosion and release of this sequestered C within deltaic
wetlands, thereby potentially releasing CO2 back to the atmosphere through
decomposition of organic matter (OM). The Yellow River (Huanghe) in China is the
2nd largest river in terms of sediment load and 6th in terms of drainage length
in the world. The rate and location of sediment deposition in the Yellow River
Delta (YRD) have been greatly altered by human actions in recent decades. This
award supports research that will examine C burial within two different river
courses of the YRD, identify the sources of the buried C, and compare these
results to other major river deltas, such as the Mississippi River, to
understand C storage variations between global rivers with constructed
diversions. Under the supervision of Dr. Xuchen Wang, an expert in C dynamics
within coastal wetlands in China and the United States, research will be
performed at the Ocean University of China in Qingdao. The results of this study
will contribute to the formulation of global management strategies focused on
finding a balance between optimizing ecosystem services, such as wildlife
habitat, and economic viability, such as commercial fisheries, within major
river deltas.

Sediment cores will be retrieved from wetlands along current and abandoned river
courses within the YRD and analyzed for total organic C, total C, and total
nitrogen using a CHN analyzer to quantify buried OM. Sediment and local YRD
above and below-ground biomass, such as from Phragmites australis and Suaeda
salsa, will be analyzed for Ã¤13C isotopes, using an Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometer, and n-alkanes, through Gas Chromatography, to determine the
sources of the buried OM. Changes in odd-over-even predominance of n-alkanes
will be utilized as sediment horizons and used to estimate rates of C burial.
This NSF award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.