* 1613883
* EAPSI: How Personal and Contextual Factors Impact the Effects of Teacher Training on Student Math and Science Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Yanling Ma, Ma                      Yanling
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This study investigates the challenging issue of adolescents? math and science
achievement, which impacts retention, graduation, and future academic and career
orientation and success. Specifically, the project will examine the effect of
teacher training on student math and science performance and identify the
factors that may impact training effects using a sample of 1,400 Chinese middle
school students. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Yuantao Sun, an expert on educational practice, at Zhejiang University in China.
It is expected that the project will contribute to improved understanding of the
characteristics of effective teacher math and science training practices for
different contexts. It will also foster mutual understanding of teaching and
learning principles between U.S. and Chinese education researchers.

Mathematics and Science, as central elements of middle school curriculum, are
influenced by multiple personal and contextual factors directly and
interactively. Despite the significance of teacher training, surprisingly the
effects of training are not always shown to be beneficial for student outcomes.
One possible reason may be the pervasiveness of single-shot, one-day, low-
intensity training which lacks continuity and accountability. Different from
U.S. teachers who seldom receive intensive, content-focused professional
trainings in math/science courses, the teachers in China are required to attend
mandated, sustained workshops frequently. The results of this project could help
researchers, practitioners, and policy makers better understand the efficacy of
more intensive, sustained, content-focused teacher training on adolescent math
and science performance. In addition, the findings also identify both individual
(e.g., initial condition, gender, and age) and contextual (e.g., class climate
and peer influence) moderators when testing training effects among a large
Chinese adolescent sample. This award is expected to facilitate international
collaborations among researchers examining factors that moderate the impact of
teacher training on adolescent math and science performance in two different
countries.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.