* 1613391
* EAPSI: Risk Assessment of Coastal Bridges and Potential Surge Retrofit Measures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Alysson Mondoro, Mondoro                 Alysson        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Surge events, like those experienced in Japan after the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake
and in the Gulf Coast region of the United States after Hurricane Katrina in
2005, have the potential to inflict significant damage to existing structures
and infrastructure systems. Low-clearance coastal bridges have the potential to
be forced off their supports by extreme surge events. This detrimental
consequence can often be the result of neglecting hydraulic loads in the initial
design, an inadequate design, or corrosion damage to the structure. This project
aims to assess the potential for failure of existing coastal bridges subjected
to surge loads, in addition to identifying and assessing potential surge
retrofit measures that may be applied to existing coastal bridges to mitigate
future damage. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Prof.
Mitsuyoshi Akiyama, an expert on the effects of earthquakes and tsunamis on
bridges, at Waseda University in Tokyo, Japan.

The vulnerability of civil infrastructure to extreme coastal hazards has been
highlighted over the past two decades as major tsunamis and hurricanes have
struck densely populated, highly developed regions. Overall, this project will
investigate the strengths and weaknesses of earthquake retrofit measures as they
relate to resisting surge events and, ultimately, assess their effectiveness in
mitigating risk considering future extreme events. This work will be done in
collaboration with Prof. Mitsuyoshi Akiyama and Prof. Dan M. Frangopol, the
fellow's dissertation advisor. Furthermore, the uncertainties associated with
the loads and structural response corresponding to coastal infrastructure, as
well as the social, environmental, and economic consequences of failures will be
investigated. Ultimately, key retrofit measures with the potential to mitigate
the risk associated with coastal bridges subjected to surge events will be
identified and researched extensively.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is funded jointly by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.