* 1613375
* Steady stratified water waves and asymptotic models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ming Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 193,736.00

Chen&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1613375&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The theory of water waves is a
fascinating topic. The first comprehensive mathematical understanding of a fluid
goes back to Euler in the 1750s, and the equations named after him continue to
be the basic model used by mathematicians and engineers today. Precise and
rigorous mathematical analysis of these equations makes it possible to
understand the qualitative structures and behaviors of the physical systems they
represent. In this project, the investigator studies: oceanic internal solitary
waves, which are recognized to be highly significant components of the dynamics
of the coastal sea; the detailed dynamics of wave current interactions, which
can help in design of offshore engineering structures as well as in submarine
navigation; and the theory of approximate models that shed light on aspects of
tsunami waves. The mathematical results generated from this project are expected
to advance the fundamental understanding of ocean waves and currents. Graduate
students are included in the work of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this
project, (1) existence of large-amplitude stratified solitary waves is
established; (2) continuous dependence of surface and internal solitary waves on
the streamline densities in a stratified fluid is examined; (3) the stability of
solitary waves in some long-wave water wave models as well as a plasma model is
studied; (4) the breakdown mechanism of smooth solutions for asymptotic model
equations of full water waves is studied; (5) the well-posedness (including
existence, uniqueness, and continuous dependence on initial data) of global weak
solutions to a class of quasilinear dispersive equations is investigated. The
techniques developed in carrying out this project are expected to be useful for
other nonlinear water wave equations. Graduate students are included in the work
of the project.