* 1613462
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Integrating ROS, redox and cell metabolism across plant and animal cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ron Mittler, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 07/31/2019
* USD 845,389.00

Ever since the introduction of oxygen into the atmosphere by photosynthetic
organisms, about 2.7 billion years ago, activated forms of oxygen (called
reactive oxygen) have been the unwelcome companions of aerobic life. Although
currently used by plant and animal cells as important signaling molecules, these
activated forms of oxygen could be highly toxic to cells and tissues and cause
oxidative injury (oxidative stress). The long-term goal of this project, led by
Ron Mittler and Rajeev Azad of the University of North Texas and Rachel
Nechushtai of Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Israel, is to determine how cells
monitor their intracellular levels of reactive oxygen and prevent its toxicity.
In particular, the project will highlight an unknown aspect of the regulation of
reactive oxygen in plant and animal cells, namely the use of iron-sulfur
clusters by a newly discovered group of proteins to monitor reactive oxygen
levels and regulate cellular metabolism and other vital processes. Results
obtained from this study could lead to the development of new and novel
approaches to enhance the tolerance of crops to important stresses such as
drought and heat or delay senescence. In addition, the proposed study could
identify novel plant-based compounds and proteins that mitigate oxidative
stress, aging and different diseases such as cancer and diabetes. The PIs will
train a number of graduate and undergraduate students and partner with a local
education center and museum to provide outreach to K-12 students.

The PIs will investigate the role of a novel class of Fe-S proteins, NEET
proteins, in maintaining ROS homeostasis in plant and animal cells. In light of
their unique cluster features, it is hypothesized that NEET proteins use their
redox-active labile clusters to sense ROS levels in cells and regulate different
pathways that alter cellular metabolism. The Specific Aims of the project are:
1. Perform a comparative signaling and regulatory network analysis of plant and
animal cells with altered level and/or function of NEET proteins. 2. Identify
the NEET interactome network of plant and animal cells. 3. Determine the
dynamics of NEET protein localization/ function in cells and conduct genetic
complementation studies of NEET proteins between mammalian and plant cells.
Using a combination of functional genetics, proteomics, advanced imaging, RNA-
Seq and network analysis approaches, a mechanistic understanding of ROS/redox
sensing/regulation in cells will be pursued. The mechanisms identified through
this proposed NSF-BSF collaboration will be further compared between different
kingdoms: plant - studied through the NSF part, and animal - studied through the
BSF part of this project, to obtain an evolutionary perspective of ROS/redox
sensing/regulation in cells.

This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.