* 1613744
* The Importance of Merging and Changes Over Time in Luminous Quasars Selected by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jenny Greene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 325,820.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supermassive black holes (BHs) are common in the
centers of nearby massive galaxies, and energy from accreting BHs likely plays
an important role in changes of galaxy properties over time. Nevertheless, basic
questions remain about the fueling and feedback mechanisms in Active Galactic
Nuclei (AGN). For one, we still do not know whether major mergers of galaxies
are required to fuel the most luminous AGN, despite decades of research. For
another, we have not yet fully mapped the clustering strengths of AGN as a
function of luminosity, obscuration, or selection method. The PIs will use
nearby AGN to study their properties and the properties of the galaxies within
which they reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to combine the all-sky Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer Observatory
(WISE) survey with XMM-Newton data to select ~10,000 of the most luminous active
galactic nuclei (AGN) with z&lt;1 over 200 square degrees of sky. Thanks to the
deep and high-resolution imaging available from the HyperSuprime Camera Survey
(HSC), the PIs will extract unprecedented constraints on the clustering
properties, bulge fractions, and merger fractions, to understand the role that
AGN play in changes of galaxy properties with time. The PIs also propose to
strengthen their HyperSuprime Camera summer school, to prepare the next
generation of researchers for the era of large surveys.