* 1613159
* Large Investor Analysis and Equilibrium Problems for Mortgage Backed Securities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Scott Robertson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 363,754.00

The investigator and his colleagues study large investors in complex financial
instruments. Additionally, he considers the market for mortgage-backed
securities, focusing on both how fair mortgage rates are determined, and how to
improve the traditional mortgage contract by taking into account the negative
effects of house price decline. For the large investor analysis, the
investigator seeks to answer the basic question of why a financial institution
would take a large position in a derivative contract when the contract itself
carries inherent risks. What about the investor and underlying market would
induce such behavior? Could the investor find a willing counter-party to
transact with and why? What are the feedback effects which arise from taking a
large position? For the mortgage-backed security analysis, the investigator
shows that current mathematical models can determine fair mortgage origination
rates. As these rates are typically computed using ad-hoc methods, the analysis
provides both a deeper understanding of the sensitivities of such rates on
broader economic factors, and a valuable tool for predicting future rates.
Lastly, the investigator studies recent proposals for adjusting the traditional
mortgage contract to mitigate the "underwater" effect of buyers selectively
defaulting on their loans in the event of house price decline. Such defaults
impose significant costs on the lending institutions as well as the broader
economy. Though various mechanisms have been suggested, rigorous proofs showing
the viability, or superiority, of a given method are lacking. Such proofs will
help identify which proposal should be introduced into the marketplace. Graduate
students are involved in the work of the project.

The investigator uses modern tools from stochastic analysis to understand large
investors in derivatives markets. In particular, the theory of large deviations
is appropriate, as large investors have acute sensitivities to rare events when
hedging strategies fail, and large investors are seen to arise endogenously in
the asymptotically complete setting where hedging errors vanish. Developing new
large deviations results, as well as using theories of optimal investment and
equilibrium in incomplete markets, he shows how large positions arise and
describes the resultant equilibrium. Lastly, since large positions may induce
feedback effects such as price impact, the investigator studies whether these
effects are so severe as to preclude the existence of large investors in the
first place. For the mortgage-backed security analysis, the investigator uses
modern functional analysis to prove existence of fair mortgage rates for agency-
backed pools of residential mortgages, taking both prepayment and default into
account. Additionally, he uses the theories of continuous time optimal stopping
and partial differential equations to investigate proposed changes to the
traditional mortgage contract. The goal is to show that these changes either do
or do not effectively reduce the homeowner's incentive to selectively default on
her loan in the event her house price has declined.