* 1613426
* Collaborative Research: The Carnegie Supernova Project - Pushing the Precision of Type Ia Supernovae as Cosmological Standard Candles
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Anthony Piro, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 419,694.00

This award funds research on an extensive dataset that will provide firm tests
of the types of stars that end their life as Type Ia supernovae. The researchers
will recalibrate data to higher precision and gain a better understanding of
systematic errors and uncertainties. Results from this work will help provide
tests of general relativity and improve our understanding of dark energy.
Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained and mentored in
research. Public outreach programs incorporating research results will be
carried out at the home institutions of the PIs. The final reduced data will be
made available to the astronomical community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be accomplished by completing data reduction of optical and near-infrared
wavelength images to produce final light curves of supernova explosions. They
will also complete data reduction of near-infrared spectra of supernova
explosions with an emphasis on improved removal of telluric absorption. They
will produce new spectral templates for the community, analyze host galaxy
properties, and produce Hubble diagrams. Finally, they will compare theory with
observation and look for evidence of interaction with non-degenerate companions
or circumstellar material. They will also probe the explosion physics as a
function of luminosity and light curve decline rate. The dataset will also be
used to improve the precision of using supernova Type Ia data as distance
indicators for constraining the nature of dark energy.