* 1613340
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Intergenerational impacts of diet and lifestyle change among Alaska Native women and their children
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Ruby Fried, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2018
* USD 17,753.00

Recent studies in human developmental biology suggest that there may be
evolutionarily adaptive patterns of fetal growth that are related to the
maternal nutritional environment. In modern populations, this linkage between
fetal growth and maternal nutrition may be maladaptive in cases where maternal
obesity may negatively affect infant and child outcomes. This doctoral
dissertation project will explore the intergenerational effects of traditional
(versus store-bought) food consumption among Alaska Native women and their
children residing in Anchorage, Alaska. This population has seen dramatic
increases in obesity and related problems in the last 20 to 30 years, and prior
research has focused on the direct impacts of store-bought foods and decreased
physical activity. Studying the potential intergenerational effects of diet will
expand our understanding of how nutrition shapes human physiology. The project
will support community partnerships with Alaska Native organizations and
communities, involve local students in the research, and inform public health
efforts to address the globally-relevant obesity
epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on the long-term basic biology, and the
resulting health impacts, of the intrauterine nutritional environment has led to
the hypothesis that the fetus adjusts metabolic set points to match prevailing
nutritional conditions in the world it will soon enter. Rising rates of maternal
obesity and elevated blood glucose due to culturally-based shifts in diet and
lifestyle may be creating an evolutionarily novel gestational milieu that
promotes altered fetal growth, obesity, and metabolic dysregulation in
offspring. By assessing how dietary composition (traditional and store-bought
foods) impacts maternal metabolism during pregnancy among Alaska Native women, a
population who is experiencing ongoing shifts in diet, this study will examine
the impacts of maternal pregnancy metabolism on fetal and infant growth. The
proposed research will be conducted with the goal of establishing a long-term
productive collaboration with the Alaska Native community, and will contribute
to a better understanding of emerging health disparities observed in this
population.