* 1613063
* Bayesian Global-Local Shrinkage in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Polson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

High-dimensional data are ubiquitous in many modern applications such as
genomics, finance, and image analysis. Developing approaches that are
computationally scalable to the size of these data sets while retaining strong
theoretical justifications remains a challenge. The goal of the project is to
develop new methodology to enable tractable analysis of modern high-dimensional
data sets. Software developed from this research will be made publicly
available.

Bayesian methodology for high-dimensional data traditionally relies on point
mass mixture priors that have attractive theoretical properties but often scale
poorly due to the computational difficulties associated with searching a high-
dimensional discrete space. The goal of the project is to explore the use of
global-local alternatives to high-dimensional problems. Many recent
investigations using global-local priors, while showing signs of promise, have
been restricted to studying the simple normal means model. The PIs will employ
the techniques of global-local shrinkage to problems of fundamental interest in
statistics, such as regression, nonlinear function estimation and covariance
estimation. More specifically, the PIs aim to show in regression problems that
using global-local shrinkage instead of purely global shrinkage methods such as
ridge regression or principal components regression can result in improved
prediction. They aim to show global-local shrinkage priors are good candidates
for non-informative analysis of low-dimensional functions of high-dimensional
parameters. The PIs also propose to use global-local shrinkage in covariance
estimation and joint mean-covariance estimation problems and apply the developed
methodology in suitable applications arising from genomics or finance.