* 1613885
* EAPSI: Assessing Effects of Urban Proximity on Plant Communities in an Island Ecosystem
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Desiree Andersen, Andersen                Desiree        K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Islands are fragile ecosystems and endemic species are particularly susceptible
to extinction from environmental change and habitat exclusion from exotic
species. Understanding human impacts on plant communities on island ecosystems
is important because islands are often hotspots of biodiversity. This project
seeks to determine the effects of urban proximity on plant species composition
and diversity. The research will be conducted primarily on Ulleung Island, a
small, isolated volcanic island in South Korea and will focus on understory
vegetation. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Seung-Chul
Kim of Sungkyunkwan University in Suwon, South Korea. Dr. Kim studies genetic
relationships among plant groups, and has extensive experience conducting
phylogentic and population studies on Ulleung Island.

Ulleung Island, Gyeongsanbukdo, South Korea, also known as Ulleungdo, is
approximately 72.9 sq km in area and hosts 685 plant taxa, including 41 taxa of
rare plants and 30 taxa of endemic plants. The high biodiversity of the island
makes it an excellent candidate for ecological study. In particular, studying
human proximity impacts on biodiversity on Ulleungdo can illuminate the
influence of anthropogenic activity from the local population and tourists on
ecologically diverse temperate island ecosystems. The project involves sampling
understory vegetation in deciduous, mixed, and coniferous canopy forests of
varying distances from urban influence. The collected data will serve as the
baseline for future study of change over time due to direct human influence
(e.g. habitat disruption and exotic species introduction) and indirect human
influence (e.g. altered environmental factors due to climate change). In working
with Doctor Seung-Chul Kim, this project will link vegetative community research
with ongoing phylogenetic research to create a more complete picture of
Ulleungdo's unique flora and ecology.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
the summer research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded jointly by the
National Science Foundation and the National Research Foundation of Korea.