* 1613202
* Adaptive Thresholding for Hierarchical Clustering of Variables, with Connections to Scan Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Max G'Sell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

In modern data analysis with large data sets, a common goal is to detect groups
of variables that exhibit similar behavior. This task is usually referred to as
clustering. In genetics and proteomics, for instance, clustering can reveal
structures of scientific interest, such as potential biological pathways. On top
of detecting scientifically relevant structure in the data, clustering can also
be used to simplify data representations and analysis. One of the most widely
used approaches to clustering is called hierarchical clustering. In hierarchical
clustering, a measure of similarity, like correlation, is computed between each
pair of variables, and then similar groups of variables are repeatedly merged.
This leads to a fundamental question: how much grouping should be done? The
proposed research consists of several projects aimed at developing broadly
applicable methods for determining the appropriate amount of clustering, based
on the degree of similarity present in the data. The resulting procedures will
also provide statistical guarantees on the meaning of the resulting
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop practical procedures
for adaptive thresholding of hierarchical clustering dendrograms, when applied
to pairwise similarities of variables. These procedures will be connected to
inferential guarantees about the false cluster error rate of the resulting
clustering. The results will target a range of common linkages and variable
similarity measures. The PI will also demonstrate these procedures in a modern
genetics application.To support these procedures, new theory will be developed
describing the large order statistics of variable similarity measures, including
new asymptotic bounds on their joint distributions and new finite-sample bounds
on their maxima. The techniques proposed here will also have application to
other threshold-based procedures in statistics; in particular, connections may
be made between the proposed work and adaptive thresholding procedures for scan
statistics.