* 1613922
* Forward genetic analysis of lysosome-related organelle formation in Tetrahymena thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Aaron Turkewitz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 326,367.00

The overall project objective is to develop a deeper understanding of the
cellular mechanisms that have evolved to allow cells to interact, in
sophisticated ways, with their surroundings. In particular, the project will
investigate a feature of eukaryotic cells called lysosome-related organelles
(LROs), by using genetic approaches in a single celled organism called
Tetrahymena thermophila. The project will significantly enhance the tools that
are available to perform advanced genetics using Tetrahymena, and will allow
students at several different levels to be trained in using those tools. While
the project is focused on using these genetic tools to understand one aspect of
cellular organization in Tetrahymena, the findings will be highly relevant to
broad questions about how cells in general have become specialized to perform
their many functions. In addition, the tools that are being developed can be
applied in the future to probing a wide array of cellular features. Findings
from this project may lead to patenting and commercialization of genetic
modifications to Tetrahymena, to make this organism a more efficient tool for
commercial production of proteins and lipids. The project will involve students
from a wide variety of backgrounds, including students from groups that are
currently under-represented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will
hone a forward genetic approach to dissecting the biosynthesis of LROs. LROs are
ubiquitous and heterogeneous eukaryotic organelles that provide a very wide
range of functions in cellular physiology and intercellular communication, and
whose evolution appears to have been a major driver of diversification in the
secretory pathway. The project will enhance the understanding of mechanisms
involved in LRO formation, by identifying genes required for this pathway in
Tetrahymena. The approach takes advantage of a high-throughput screen to isolate
Mendelian mutants, following chemical mutagenesis, that are defective in LRO
formation. Those mutants will be characterized using cell biological and
classical genetic approaches. Following that analysis, the mutant genomes will
be sequenced, after employing an outcross and backcross strategy to generate
pools of F2 meiotic segregants from each initial mutant. By taking this
strategy, one can greatly simplify the problem of identifying the causative
mutation in each mutant, and thereby identifying the gene required for LRO
formation in that strain. It is anticipated that approximately 10 mutants will
be analyzed in this fashion, to the level of identifying the causative genetic
lesions.