* 1613881
* EAPSI:Analyzing the Interaction of Written-Language Complexity and Speech Duration to Understand the Effects of Literacy on Spoken Language
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Shannon Grippando, Grippando               Shannon        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Previous research has found a link in English between how a sound is spelled and
the duration of that sound. For tic, click, and clique, the final /k/ sound is
longer in click versus tic, and longer still in clique. It has yet to be
determined if children acquire these patterns naturally from adults' speech or
if this develops through the process of becoming literate. This question is
difficult to test in English: words that sound similar but vary only in the
spelling of specific sounds are not widely known to preliterate children.
However, this effect may be influenced by written-language complexity relative
to a language's writing system rather than just by alphabetic letters. Thus,
this effect could be present in languages without alphabets. Japanese has a
character-based writing system. It also has a larger number of words that have
similar pronunciations known to preliterate children but are written differently
with varying levels of complexity. Working with Dr. Montserrat Sanz of Kobe City
University of Foreign Studies in Japan, the PI will collect speech data from
Japanese speakers to determine if durational differences linked to written-
language complexity are also present in languages other than English. If this is
the case, speech patterns from preliterate Japanese children and literate adults
can be compared to determine if this effect is influenced by literacy. This
research can lead to the development of low-cost, non-invasive technologies that
use speech data to detect reading or developmental disorders in children.

Research has found a correlation between orthography and speech duration in
English: the duration of a word-final consonant is a function of the number of
letters used in its orthographic representation. This effect has not been
studied outside of English but may be influenced by orthographic complexity
relative to a language's orthography rather than just phonologically-salient
letters. If this is the case, a similar effect should be present in languages
with orthographies other than alphabets. The PI will collect speech data from
Japanese speakers and analyze speech duration as a function of orthographic
complexity of kanji. If Japanese exhibits similar durational patterns, speech
data from Japanese children of various stages of literacy (including
preliterate) and literate adults will be compared to determine whether these
durational effects are acquired naturally or develop through literacy. This
research can lead to techniques to test for reading and developmental disorders
in children through analyses of their speech

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.