* 1613525
* EAPSI: A Unified Approach to the Euler-Mahonian Identity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* McCabe Olsen, Olsen                   McCabe         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

A permutation of a finite set is a reordering of the elements of the set.
Permutation statistics, such as descent number and major index, describe the
behavior of a particular permutation. The Euler-Mahonian identity is a
mathematical identity related to these permutation statistics which arises in
many distinct areas of mathematics. This project will investigate the underlying
connections between the different mathematical areas by identifying connections
between the various proofs of the identity. The identification of such
connections will allow for a more standard approach when studying other, often
more difficult, mathematical identities of this type. Research will be conducted
with Professor Takayuki Hibi, an expert in combinatorial mathematics, at Osaka
University.

More explicitly, the Euler-Mahonian identity is a multivariate generating
function identity involving the joint distribution of the descent number and
major index over symmetric group Sn. The researcher plans to investigate
connects between three proofs of the identity, namely (1) a method involving
counting integer points in convex/discrete geometry, (2) a method involving
commutative algebraic and representation theoretic techniques in the context of
the coinvariant algebra for the symmetric group Sn, and (3) a method involving
finding ordinary generating functions arising from lecture hall partitions. The
identification of such connections will allow for extending to similar, but more
complicated combinatorial identities of this type, such as those involving
statistics of the hyperoctohedral group or colored permutation groups. Professor
Hibi, along with his research group at Osaka University, are leaders in
algebraic combinatorics and combinatorial commutative algebra. Subsequently,
Professor Hibi?s insight and expertise will be an invaluable aid in developing a
unified approach to generating functions of this type.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.