* 1613939
* Forward Meson Production and Spin Asymmetries at RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven Heppelmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 555,000.00

It is a well-established fact that protons and neutrons are made up of smaller
constituents called quarks and gluons. Protons are collections of quarks bound
by the strong nuclear force much as atoms are collections of electrons bound to
the nucleus by the electric force. By studying the proton collisions at high
energy we learn how these quarks are bound inside the proton. The proton also
has an intrinsic property called spin, which can be visualized by thinking of
the proton as a sphere spinning on its axis, much like the Earth rotates on its
axis. In particular, when high energy beams of spin-aligned protons collide at
Brookhaven National Laboratory's Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) the
resulting particles can reveal how much of the proton's spin is carried by its
gluons or by different types of quarks. The goal of this project is search for
the gluon contribution to the spin of the proton, which is identified as an
important question by the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee. These collisions
are observed as photons and electrons in the STAR detector and its component
part, called the FMS, which will be maintained as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the Penn State group to
prepare, calibrate and operate the FMS for upcoming RHIC runs and to analyze
data recently collected. The FMS is an electromagnetic calorimeter covering the
pseudo-rapidity region from 2.6 to 4. It detects collision fragments from
neutral pions, eta mesons, jets, single photons and electrons. The upcoming
polarized RHIC run will be emphasizing the transverse proton spin dependence for
production of electron-positron Drell-Yan pairs. This will allow measurement of
the transverse single spin asymmetry, defined as the difference in cross section
for proton spin up or down divided by the sum of those cross sections. The
measured asymmetry is sensitive to the strong nuclear forces in a regime where
current models of Perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics are evolving.