* 1613367
* EAPSI: Developing a Survey on Public Perceptions of Energy Tradeoffs in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Brian Sergi, Sergi                   Brian          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will focus on developing a survey to investigate public perceptions
of energy in China. The survey will allow respondents to choose between energy
scenarios with different sources of electricity (e.g. coal, nuclear, natural
gas, and renewable power). In addition, each scenario will have different levels
of climate change related emissions, human health related air pollution, and
cost to the customer from electricity bills. Respondents will make several of
these comparisons, and their choices will be used to infer their preference for
different characteristics of the energy system. In addition, we will randomize
which individuals receive information on emissions in order to explore how this
information affects preferences. The project will be conducted under the
mentorship of Professor Jianhua Xu of Peking University Department of
Environmental Management. This survey will serve as a complement to a similar
study of one thousand individuals across the United States, and the insight from
this research will help inform future policy making to encourage the adoption of
more sustainable energy systems both in the U.S. and in China. Time spent in
China under the EAPSI program will focus on translating the survey into Chinese
and pre-testing it in the local context.

The design of the survey is based on a discrete choice conjoint experiment in
which the attributes are electricity portfolio, the level of carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions, the level of sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, and the
individual?s monthly electricity bill. The emissions and bill components are
presented to respondents in terms of changes relative to current baseline
levels. Respondents face sixteen comparisons of energy scenarios with different
attribute levels, and their responses will be analyzed using a mixed logit,
random utility statistical model. The estimated coefficients of this model can
be used to interpret the relative strength of preference for each attribute, and
can be used to calculate conditional probability of support for different
scenarios as well as willingness to pay for different tradeoffs. In addition,
using a mixed logit model allows for an exploration of any heterogeneity in
preferences based on individual demographics and geographic-specific traits.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.