* 1613549
* EAPSI: Determining Conditions Necessary for Desired Chemical Processes by Simulation of Controlled Molecular Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Daniel Kidd, Kidd                    Daniel         W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

As laser technology continues to improve, the need for computational tools that
can interpret and guide experimental investigations similarly grows. It is now
common, due to modern computational capabilities, to design programs that
simulate the dynamics of small-scale molecules and materials in order to expose
and understand the underlying mechanics of chemical processes. In this project,
one such program will be designed, written, and tested with the goal of
controlling the motion of specified molecules to reveal the conditions necessary
for the resulting dynamics. The program will be capable of prescribing laser
parameters that yield desired reactions in such molecular systems. The
development and efficient assessment of the program will benefit from the
expertise and guidance of Dr. Kazuyuki Watanabe at the Tokyo University of
Science.

Density Functional Theory (DFT) has developed since the 1960's into the premier
computational tool for understanding small-scale electronic properties in
molecules and materials. It has proven to be an invaluable asset in assisting
the interpretation of increasingly sophisticated experimental results. In recent
research, it has been shown that by forcing the three-dimensional (3D) electron
density to be in a given distribution within DFT calculations, one is able to
numerically generate the real-space external potential which would yield such as
its ground state. This motivates the creation of a modified DFT molecular
dynamics program that constrains the 3D electron density at each time step in
order to generate associated real-space real-time external potentials. In this
project, conducted under the supervision and expertise of Dr. Kazuyuki Watanabe
at the Tokyo University of Science, such a program will be designed, written,
and tested in order to generate the necessary conditions for desired adiabatic
molecular dynamics.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.