* 1613260
* Investigating the Correlation Between Lightning and High-Energy Particles in the Earth's Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* William Rison, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 471,167.00

This project supports for the operation and analysis of data from a Lightning
Mapping Array (LMA), collocated with the Telescope Array (TA), the largest
astroparticle physics&lt;br/&gt;observatory in the Northern Hemisphere. The
merger of these arrays allows (1) study of the known phenomenon of gamma ray
emission by lightning with a wide aperture detector capable of reconstructing
gamma showers generated by lightning strikes, and (2) a search for the long-
speculated "seeding" of lightning strikes by cosmic ray air showers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;It has been known for over a
decade that x-ray and gamma radiation (~100 keV to 10 MeV) is emitted by
lightning strikes. This phenomenon has been observed by ground-based detectors
in association with both natural and induced lightning, and by space-based
detectors. Recently, physicists studying data collected by the 700 square
kilometer TA Surface Detector (SD) in Western Utah, U.S.A. have observed
energetic elementary particles in coincidence with lightning strikes. In a
subset of these events, "showers" have been reconstructed which point back to
the particles' origin in the Earth's atmosphere. This has not been seen before,
and it implies that the energetic radiation may be traced to particular times
and features within the lightning strike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LMA is the
ideal instrument to couple with the TA SD in order to perform these studies. A
version of this instrument used for site testing purposes has been temporarily
located at the TA site. The LMA consists of nine VHF detectors, spread over
hundreds of square kilometers, which detect impulsive radiation from lightning.
These impulses may be reconstructed with 10 microsecond timing accuracy and
better than 100 meter position accuracy, and used to create a 3-dimensional GPS-
timed reconstruction of a lightning strike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merger of
TA/LMA is also the ideal instrument to search for evidence of a more speculative
- but more profound - connection between particle astrophysics and climate: The
seeding of lightning strikes by cosmic ray air showers. Since the electric
fields present in thunderstorms are typically an order-of-magnitude less than
the 30 kV/cm needed for dielectric breakdown of air, it is evident that
something else must be assisting the process. The TA/LMA synergy will have the
unique ability to search for cosmic ray coincidences with lightning, adding a
tantalizing piece of speculative research to its
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The synergy will
create a rare opportunity for particle astrophysics research to have such a
direct impact on the national priority of meteorological research. Electrical
storms in the atmosphere have had a profound impact on the development of life
on Earth, and continue to shape individual human lives and society. Yet
mysteries remain as to the causes and nature of lightning. A large cosmic ray
observatory is the ideal pairing with a lightning detector to probe two of these
mysteries: (1) From where within a lightning strike do high-energy particles
arise? (2) Can cosmic ray air showers provide the "seed" of atmospheric
dielectric breakdown? For the relatively modest cost of maintaining a lightning
mapping array, the TA/LMA observatory will become an important showpiece
illustrating the benefits of NSF Particle Astrophysics to society as a whole.