* 1613626
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding enamel hypoplasia in great apes of known life history
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 13,691.00

Much like tree rings provide a record of growth patterns related to past
environmental conditions, teeth can preserve a record of physiological stress
experienced during dental development. This doctoral dissertation project will
use novel imaging and analytical methods to study stress-related dental defects
in Virunga mountain gorillas for whom long-term behavioral, health, and climate
data are available. The ability to link specific dental defects to specific life
events will improve our understanding of the complex interplay among ecological,
social, and physiological stressors in both extant great apes and fossil
hominins. The project will support student mentoring and training in STEM fields
as well as collaborations and conservation efforts at the research site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teeth are important to studies of health and development
because they provide a permanent and detailed record of their absolute
chronological growth. Enamel hypoplasias manifest as grooves on the tooth
surface when growth is disrupted by stressors such as undernutrition and
disease. Hypoplastic defects are usually scored by low-power enamel surface
observation, and the boundary between normal and abnormal morphology has never
been quantitatively defined in great apes. This project employs quantitative
criteria to diagnose defects, and establishes a minimum threshold for
determining what is a defect versus what is within the bounds of normal
variation. Aims include: (1) determining defect presence quantitatively, and
testing for differences in defect prevalence and morphology among mountain
gorillas and other great apes; (2) analyzing microanatomical parameters of crown
growth to determine which factors influence variation in defect morphology among
great apes; and (3) testing correspondence between defect timing and stressful
events (e.g. injury, disease, intergroup interactions) in the recorded history
of individual mountain gorillas to produce the first data on enamel hypoplasia
etiology in wild gorillas. By assessing the relationships between defect
morphology, microanatomical parameters of enamel growth, and documented
stressors in associated life history records, the proposed research will deepen
our understanding of factors that underlie differences in defect expression
among great apes, and thus improve our ability to more confidently interpret
enamel defects in paleoanthropological contexts.