* 1613811
* Earth Partnership: Indigenous Arts and Sciences -- Connecting STEM to Native Science
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Cheryl Bauer-Armstrong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 11/30/2020
* USD 1,328,713.00

This project will advance efforts of the innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a path to further research
on best practices for Native American youth education. It will enhance the
existing Indigenous Arts and Sciences (IAS) project by addressing cultural
perspectives of Native students and educators. The approach describes the need
to include ecological relevance in STEM learning for Native American youth, with
an integration of Western science with Native knowledge, process, and core
values, which will give a positive impact on Native American youth's interest in
and learning of science. The project will deliver a culturally relevant
stewardship-based education model applying science to indigenous knowledge and
community culture connections in collaboration with four tribal communities in
Wisconsin. Informal science education will come through the Earth Partnership
(EP) and will involve participants in habitat restoration and stewardship as a
context for intergenerational science learning across age, discipline, culture
and place. EP Indigenous Arts and Sciences (IAS) integrates Western science with
Native knowledge, process, and core values including relationship, reciprocity,
respect and responsibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will convene the
expertise of elders and community members from Red Cliff, Bad River, Lac du
Flambeau, and Ho-Chunk Nations with university social, physical, and life
scientists to expand informal science learning incorporating ecological
protection and restoration, citizen science, and cultural diversity. STEM
learning and career pathways for underrepresented groups will occur in an
informal and culturally relevant contexts becoming important for enhancing
ecological and STEM literacy, efficacy and civic engagement. IAS will engage
students, educators, elders, informal educators, natural resource professionals,
and parents in community dialogues and relationship building, informal-formal
professional development collaborations, and indigenized STEM learning
experiences and mentoring for students in grades 8-12. The science content will
be explored through technology-enhanced, project-based learning in real-life
contexts integrating culture in classroom and informal settings. This project is
based on a growing body of research on Indigenous wisdom that reconnects Native
youth and the broader community with the environment. The project occurs broadly
at the intersection of science learning, environmental justice, ecological
restoration, tribal history, and culture at a crucial time of global climate and
social change. IAS will use this project-based learning model to advance the
knowledge of how and why indigenizing informal science learning through a
collaborative effort including elders, families, youth, formal and informal
educators will revitalize culture, community and education.