* 1613022
* Acclimation Responses that Optimize the Photosynthetic Apparatus in Cyanobacteria: from Ecophysiology to Biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,900,000.00

Title: Acclimation responses that optimize the photosynthetic apparatus in
cyanobacteria: from ecophysiology to biophysics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model
cyanobacteria have been extensively studied to learn many details of
photosynthesis. However, these organisms exhibit more limited physiological
responses to light and nutrients than many more complex cyanobacteria, which are
often considered to be more difficult to study. The concept behind this project
is "to let nature be the guide" to study photosynthesis in stressful settings in
situ and to understand those photosynthetic processes identified mechanistically
by using laboratory model organisms, genetics, biochemistry and biophysics. By
learning more about adaptation and acclimation in cyanobacteria, it should be
possible to develop strategies to improve photosynthetic efficiency in crop
plants. The recently discovered capacity of some cyanobacteria to use far-red
light for oxygenic photosynthesis raises questions about how those cyanobacteria
are able to expand their usage of the solar spectrum reaching Earth's surface.
This project will use genetic systems that have been developed for non-model
cyanobacteria that exhibit diverse adaptive and acclimation responses. Genetic
methods, together with physiological, biochemical and biophysical approaches
will be used to study the photosynthetic apparatus in these organisms. This
proposal offers a unique opportunity to expand knowledge of 'real-world'
photosynthesis and is likely to provide new insights for engineering
photosynthetic organisms intelligently for human needs, including expanding the
light-use capabilities of crop plants. This project will provide training for
underrepresented minorities in STEM research and education. The developed
photobioreactor concept for the classroom will be used to involve K-12 level
students in STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The defining
premise of this project is that terrestrial cyanobacteria have evolved novel
adaptive and acclimation responses to optimize light harvesting and energy
trapping in environments with strongly filtered (e.g., far-red) light, variable
redox states, and the intensive energetic demands of nitrogen fixation. Many
cyanobacteria have a cluster of 17 genes encoding core subunits of Photosystem I
(PSI), PSII, and phycobilisomes. Combined with the synthesis of chlorophylls
(Chls) f and d, the products of these genes confer an acclimation response that
permits growth in far-red light (700 to 800 nm), a process known as FaRLiP. This
project will use the genetic system developed in Chlorogloeopsis fritschii PCC
9212 to dissect FaRLiP and other postulated acclimation and adaptive responses
by determining role of different genes and their variants in acclimation
responses of PSI and their roles under anoxic, nitrogen-fixing conditions. This
project will also characterize the energy transfer and trapping kinetics in PSI
and PSII complexes and study long-wavelength-absorbing phycobiliproteins from
cells undergoing FaRLiP and other adaptation/acclimation responses by performing
genetic analyses and manipulations, biochemical analyses, mass
spectrometry/proteomics, site-specific mutagenesis, biophysical methods (EPR
spectroscopy, time-resolved optical spectroscopy). This project is supported by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.