* 1613100
* I-Corps: Development of Active Driving Assistance (ADA) Systems for Safety Enhancement and Real Time Traffic Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Weidong Xiang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

As more and more driverless vehicles are prepared to be introduced into the
marketplace, companies such as Qualcomm, Cisco, and numerous OEMs including BMW,
Daimler, Ford, Honda and Toyota are developing systems to identify in real time
the traffic environment and conditions encountered by these vehicles while
driving. Their attempt to provide rapid and accurate information can be limited
by the complexity of the communication systems used, weather conditions and
signal interference. This team believes that its proposed technology, using a
smartphone based system that gathers, processes and delivers information, via
real-time message exchange between host and neighboring vehicles, can help to
overcome these limitations, providing useful information more quickly compared
to existing technology and products, and thus reduces the chance for crashes and
other negative events. The proposed technology can also be used by today's
driver-controlled vehicles to determine driving directions that are based on our
ability to better sense real-time traffic&lt;br/&gt;conditions. This provides
the most efficient route to a destination, which is critical for users such as
first responders and logistics carriers who need to get to a destination quickly
and cost-effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system is a smart-phone
based API integrating short-range communication system (DSRC), global
positioning system (GPS) satellite data and video streams of real time traffic
and road conditions the vehicle is encountering. Moreover, a digital beam
forming antenna array is adopted to further improves signal strength and limits
interference from other directions. The images captured are processed in real
time to recognize drivable regions, and to locate and track vehicles through
effective signal processing algorithms. This provides drivers or self-driving
systems with real time information about surrounding transportation environments
quickly and&lt;br/&gt;thus enhance driving efficacy.