* 1613325
* Can improving predictions of soil oxygen dynamics increase understanding of greenhouse gas hotspots and hot moments?
* BIO,DEB
* 10/22/2015,05/31/2019
* Terrance Loecke, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 699,254.00

The amount of oxygen in a soil affects many ecosystem processes, including the
release of greenhouse gases such as nitrous oxide, methane and carbon dioxide.
However, soil oxygen concentrations are rarely directly measured in research
projects because they are difficult and expensive to measure accurately. Better
understanding of the controls over soil oxygen could help guide land restoration
projects that result in a greater removal of greenhouse gases from the
atmosphere. The new technologies and approaches proposed in this project could
lower the cost and enable easier measurements of soil oxygen, which could help
reduce the financial burden of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the future.
This project will add to the national scientific capacity through support of
four early career scientists and the interdisciplinary training of a
postdoctoral student. The scientists will also enhance undergraduate research
experiences. An important broader impact will be a partnership among land
managers and the scientists involved to develop a continuing education program
aimed at providing opportunities for citizens to engage in climate-friendly
projects for the restoration of local ecosystems.

Soil oxygen concentrations are usually estimated using computer models based on
soil properties that are easier to measure, particularly soil water contents.
But measurements made in prior research indicate that directly measured soil
oxygen levels differ considerably from modeled soil oxygen levels. In fact,
current computer models cannot predict the rapid changes in soil oxygen that are
observed in wetlands, where the production of greenhouse gases is particularly
high compared to other types of ecosystems. Mismatches between models and
measurements may occur because in actual ecosystems the emission of greenhouse
gases may not be constant across space and time, but likely occur under specific
environmental circumstances that are particularly difficult to identify and keep
track of (called hot spots or hot moments). This project will measure emissions
in relation to hot spots and moments along transects running from abandoned
agricultural lands into adjacent creeks at an established research site near
Dayton, Ohio. Success requires high-resolution measurements of soil oxygen
concentrations in space and time. This is a major challenge, but if successful,
the project will critically contribute to the assessment of greenhouse gas
fluxes from local ecosystems, as well as their incorporation into large-scale
climate models.