* 1613643
* Integrating Environmental Variables in Plant Circadian and Photoperiodic Timing.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Brian Zoltowski, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2022
* USD 646,884.00

Plants evolved in response to advantageous and deleterious environmental
variables, such as light, temperature, moisture and the threat of pests. To
counteract daily stresses, and to maximize energy storage during the day, plants
developed complex regulatory circuits that can predict daily (circadian) and
seasonal (photoperiodic) rhythms, thus providing an evolutionary advantage and
improved organism fitness. As such, plant circadian rhythms control all facets
of plant growth and development, including flowering times, photosynthesis,
latitudinal species distribution, and resistance to drought, cold and pests. It
is estimated that greater than one third of all plant genes are under circadian
control and that proper day-length measurements are imperative to the
maintenance of plant growth, reproduction and crop yields. How these circadian
clocks measure and adapt to a wide array of environmental signals is poorly
understood. This is particularly the case for adaptation to daily and seasonal
variations in the quality and quantity of environmental light. The current
proposal aims to use a multidisciplinary approach to model how plants sense and
adapt to changes in the intensity of blue-light in a given environment. Aside
from gaining fundamental understanding of the chemical processes that govern
plant photobiology, the project is likely to provide new avenues to improve crop
yields and biomass production for renewable energy, and develop novel varieties
of plants that are more drought and pest resistant. The project will provide
unique training opportunities for undergraduate students and outreach to local
science teachers and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How Light-Oxygen-
Voltage proteins integrate environmental cues is poorly understood. The proposed
research leverages recent discoveries of new signaling mechanisms that delineate
adaptive responses to environmental stimuli. The concerted chemical, biophysical
and synthetic biology approach will provide quantitative understanding of
adaptive responses in complex signaling networks. The primary technical
objectives are three fold. 1) A combination of chemical kinetics and predictive
mathematical models will be developed to gain a systems level understanding of
Light-Oxygen-Voltage protein function in seasonal and daily clocks. A direct
result of these efforts will be a detailed understanding of how multiple
chemical inputs to Light-Oxygen-Voltage protein function dictate signal
transduction and optogenetic tool development. 2) The project will use the new
understanding of Light-Oxygen-Voltage protein signaling networks to design
synthetic gene circuits in mammalian cells, and thus enable the testing of the
understanding of the network in the absence of extraneous plant proteins that
may affect signal transduction. 3) The ultimate goal is to combine this
understanding to guide the construction of new Arabidopsis thaliana strains that
exhibit altered circadian function and plant flowering periods to demonstrate
how Light-Oxygen-Voltage protein chemistry is essential for triggering systems-
level adaptive changes in a plant system.