* 1613149
* EAPSI:Design of a Novel Balancing Mechanism to Improve Stable Flight of a Multirotor and Mounted Robotic Arm
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jameson Lee, Lee                     Jameson        Y
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Communication and the accurate collection of data is critical to the success of
first responders in their efforts to aid victims in the aftermath of both
natural and man-made disasters. Often Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) are used to
facilitate this information through aerial mapping of terrain, or by locating
victims and potential hazards not immediately known to first responders in the
field. Recently, multirotor UAS have been considered for use in manipulation and
grasping tasks in the field. The inclusion of a robotic arm in the design
greatly increases their utility in practice, and allows these machines to
interact with their environments mid-flight. These interactions may be as simple
as water sample collection or as complex as door opening, and while there are
many advantages to the deployment of a UAS to perform these tasks, there are
still many problems concerning stability in operation. The proposed work seeks
to improve the effectiveness of these manipulation UAS through the design and
analysis of a mechanism which would actively balance the platform while flying.
Work concerning the design and implementation of the mechanism will be conducted
at the Intelligent Robotics & Mechatronics System (IRMS) Laboratory of
Sungkyunkwan University in Suwon, South Korea under the supervision of Professor
Hyouk Ryeol Choi. The expertise of the IRMS Laboratory in manipulation platforms
is an invaluable resource for the completion of this award, and this
collaboration will lay the groundwork for future works between Sungkyunkwan
University and the University of Nevada Las Vegas.

Aerial manipulation using a multirotor UAS is challenging due to the limitations
imposed on the platform?s stability by multirotor actuation modes. Indeed, a
traditional multirotor is incapable of producing a couple to negate applied
external torque. To maintain hover conditions during manipulation maneuvers, the
design and implementation of a balancing mechanism will be explored to affect
active stabilization of the platform. While the effects of the environment on
the mounted manipulator?s end effector cannot be accounted for generally, the
eccentricities introduced to the system?s center of gravity by the mass and
moment of inertia of the manipulator can be reduced using the mechanism. It can
be shown that this improves robustness of both static and dynamic flight,
through analyses based on Lyapunov?s principles, simulation, and testing.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.