* 1613896
* EAPSI: Validation of a Numerical Method for the Simulation of Granular Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Reid Kawamoto, Kawamoto                Reid           Y
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will validate a numerical method, the level set discrete element
method (LS-DEM), that simulates the mechanical behavior of granular materials.
Granular materials abound in the world and are the second most manipulated
material in the world after water. A deeper understanding of their mechanics,
gained through the use of LS-DEM, can have far-reaching implications in the
fields of civil, mechanical, and aerospace engineering, as well as geophysics.
This research will be conducted at the University of Tsukuba under Professor
Takashi Matsushima, who researches granular materials and has a wealth of
experimental data against which LS-DEM will be
validated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LS-DEM is a variant of the discrete element
method (DEM), but uses level set functions as the geometric basis for particles
which gives it the ability to capture any particle shape as opposed to solely
spheres as in DEM. LS-DEM integrates seamlessly with level set-based imaging
techniques, allowing it to be able to replicate the exact shapes and initial
conditions of particles in granular experiments, something which even other
shape-based DEM variants cannot do. Furthermore, LS-DEM is computationally
inexpensive. However, for all of its benefits, LS-DEM still needs to be
validated against experimental data. To this end, the researcher will digitally
replicate experimental specimens of standard sands commonly used in granular
materials research and simulate them using LS-DEM in conditions identical to
those in experiments. By showing that simulations and experiments yield similar
mechanical responses, LS-DEM will be validated, thereby providing a greater
justification for it to be used for granular applications in fields such as
those previously mentioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia
and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.