* 1613905
* AF: Small: General Linear Multimethods for the Time Integration of Multiscale Multiphysics Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Adrian Sandu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Many fields in science and engineering rely on computer simulations of time-
dependent multiscale multiphysics systems. These fields include mechanical and
chemical engineering, aeronautics, astrophysics, plasma physics, meteorology and
oceanography, finance, environmental sciences, and urban
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiscale problems, by definition, have
interacting components that evolve at different temporal or spatial scales. For
example, the coupled Earth includes the atmosphere (evolving at time scales of
minutes) interacting with oceans (time scales of hours) and with polar ice caps
(time scales of days). Computer simulations track the evolution of systems at
discrete time steps -- the short time steps needed to track rapid atmospheric
changes are inefficient for modeling the slow-changing ice. Even within the
atmosphere models for local mixing chemical reactions (miliseconds) will be
coupled to models of long distance flow of pollutants (weeks). No single time
discretization algorithm can efficiently model all processes. Improvements in
simulation capabilities require the development of new flexible time integration
algorithms that preserve the accuracy and stability of the component
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a rigorous approach to
the construction and analysis of multirate multimethod discretizations for time-
dependent partial differential equations (PDEs)in the framework of General
Linear Methods (GLMs). GLMs extend traditional integration schemes such as
Runge-Kutta and Linear Multistep, and enjoy favorable mathematical properties
that make them very well-suited for the construction and study of multimethods.
The new time stepping algorithms will enjoy the following properties: (1)
different time steps can be used in different subdomains to achieve efficiency;
(2) different discretizations can be applied to operators modeling different
physical processes; (3) they will have high order of temporal accuracy, and
allow for efficient time step and error control; and (4) linear and nonlinear
stability constraints impose only local restrictions on the step size. The new
methods will be implemented in high quality software, and will be applied to
real-life simulations arising in the prediction of atmospheric
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this research will advance the
field of large, multiscale, multiphysics simulations, which will benefit several
major fields in science and engineering. The development of novel computational
high performance computing algorithms and their application to real problems
provide an excellent opportunity for training postdocs and graduate students.
The PI will broadly disseminate the algorithms and software developed during
this research.