* 1613596
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ontogeny of Complex Tool Use in Great Apes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Crickette Sanz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2018
* USD 25,155.00

One of the hallmarks of human evolution has been the creation and use of complex
tools, but the specific mechanisms by which this behavioral adaptation developed
are not fully understood. This doctoral dissertation project will investigate
the roles of teaching and imitation, as well as sex differences in foraging tool
use, in the development of tool skills in a wild chimpanzee population.
Chimpanzees are our closest living relatives, and the study of their tool
traditions provides unique insights into the evolutionary origins of human
culture and technology. This project will also provide student field research
and training opportunities and support great ape conservation efforts at the
research site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to
differentiate the social learning mechanisms involved in chimpanzees'
acquisition of complex tool skills, quantify the impact of variable social
learning opportunity, and evaluate competing hypotheses for sex differences in
tool skill acquisition. Chimpanzees of the Goualougo Triangle, Republic of
Congo, exhibit some of the most complex tool behavior among nonhumans, and this
will be the first study to investigate how they learn these skills. Direct
observations using focal and all-occurrence sampling will be conducted and
supplemented by remote video footage of chimpanzee tool use. Both cross-
sectional and longitudinal approaches will be employed to document the ontogeny
of tool skills. Insights from this study will refine models of the evolution of
material culture in the hominin lineage. Specifically, results will help to
resolve debates about how social learning influences intraspecific behavioral
diversity, illuminate how complex tool traditions are maintained among wild apes
over generations, and clarify the ontogenetic origins of sexual differentiation
in tool-assisted foraging among chimpanzees.