* 1613621
* 2016 NSF CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Guru Prasadh Venkataramani, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 85,313.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is the NSF's most
prestigious award bestowed on outstanding tenure-track faculty members to
support their exceptional research and educational activities. This proposal
proposes to organize the 2016 NSF CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop in
Arlington, VA on April 4, 2016. It is expected that 200 junior faculty will
attend this workshop, including a significant portion of attendees from HBCU/MEI
and under-represented groups. At the early stage of their academic careers, many
junior faculty have lacked grant-writing experience, which could lead to an
unsatisfactory presentation of their research and education activities. To
address this problem, this workshop will allow junior faculty to obtain first-
hand experiences through the combination of a number of interactive activities
with recent CISE CAREER awardees and NSF program
directors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-day workshop will consist of the
presentations on CISE CAREER solicitation, talks given by recent CAREER
awardees, mock panels, as well as program-specific discussions with NSF program
managers. The opportunities to interact with NSF program managers will be
valuable to junior faculty in developing competitive CAREER
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is open to all CAREER-eligible
principal investigators in NSF-supported disciplines at U.S. universities and
colleges. Preferences will be given to junior faculty in CISE-related
disciplines. About 200 junior faculty are expected to attend. A number of
fellowships will be given to junior faculty from HBCU/MEI and under-represented
groups, including women. This will provide necessary travel support for those
faculty to attend the workshop. The presentations by recent CISE CAREER awardees
will be podcasted online and the slides and videos will be available on the
workshop website for other faculty who might not be able to attend the workshop
in person. This will ensure the workshop to achieve a broader impact among
junior faculty within the CISE community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By attending the
workshop, junior faculty will have a better understanding of the NSF CAREER
program and obtain valuable insights from the CAREER awardees and NSF program
managers. The mock panel and program-specific breakout sessions will also
provide constructive feedback to junior faculty. This workshop will help prepare
junior faculty in CISE-related disciplines to develop outstanding research and
education activities at their universities and write competitive CAREER
proposals.