* 1613790
* Constructive Approximation and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Vladimir Temlyakov, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 02/28/2018
* USD 26,298.00

This award provides funding to defray expenses of US-based participants (both
young researchers and established scientists) in the intensive research program
"Constructive Approximation and Harmonic Analysis", which is to be held at the
Centre de Recerca Matematica (CRM) in Barcelona, Spain during the period of
March-July, 2016. This program will concentrate on the areas of harmonic
analysis and approximation theory, areas of mathematics that underlie the
representation and approximation of functions and data. The emphasis will be put
on constructive high-dimensional methods of approximation and representation.
Recently, driven by applications in engineering, biology, medicine, and other
areas of science, new challenging problems have appeared. A common feature of
many of these problems is that they involve data and multivariable functions in
extremely high dimensions, in which setting classical methods of approximation
do not work well. This is an important and rapidly developing area of
mathematics. A recent increase of activity at the interface of harmonic analysis
and approximation theory makes the timing perfect for a research program that
emphasizes this interplay and will help the cross fertilization of both fields.
CRM is a renowned mathematics research institute which provides excellent
facilities for such a program, and both harmonic analysis and approximation
theory have historically been strongly represented in the activities of CRM.

The program will include a workshop on "Function Spaces and High-Dimensional
Approximation" (May 2016), several advanced courses on "Methods of Constructive
Approximation and Harmonic Analysis" aimed at graduate students and postdocs
(May-June 2016), and a Conference on "Harmonic Analysis and Approximation
Theory" (HAAT 2016, June 2016). In addition there will be ample time for
collaborative research. The program will bring together different groups of
mathematicians working in several areas of analysis and numerical analysis to
try to make a breakthrough in high-dimensional problems, which are very
important in data compression and processing (critical to information technology
applications and medical imaging). Progress in this area will impact several
other mathematical sciences communities, including signal and image processing,
numerical mathematics, learning theory, and optimization theory. The schedule of
the events in the program has been carefully coordinated with other European and
US events in these fields, which will allow a large number of US-based
mathematicians to participate. The web site for the conference is
http://www.crm.cat/en/Activities/Curs_2015-2016/Pages/IRP-Approximation-and-
Harmonic-Analysis.aspx