* 1613534
* Evolved DNA contacts required for hexameric helicase unwinding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Sanford Leuba, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2021
* USD 786,000.00

Hexameric DNA replication helicases are structurally conserved and essential
enzymes present throughout all domains of life including most viruses. They
utilize a common topological strategy of encircling one strand of duplex DNA to
physically separate the duplex by coupled ATP hydrolysis, which results in
separated single-strand DNA templates for leading and lagging strand DNA
synthesis. Earlier research in the field has focused on DNA contacts within the
central channel of these helicases, while recently identified exterior contacts
with the excluded DNA strand have largely remained unexplored. This project will
assess the importance of external helicase contacts in controlling the speed of
DNA replication through direct or indirect interactions with the excluded
strand. Because a multitude of hexameric helicases across all domains of life
will be compared for the nature of the interactions and the consequences of
disrupting them, both in vitro and in vivo, the scientific scope and impact is
expected to be broad and influential. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained in techniques of single molecule fluorescence, advanced enzyme
kinetics and precise genetic manipulation. Scientific outreach programs will
encourage local elementary school students to explore the wonders of their own
genome through "DNA Days" and engage students in electromagnetism by building
their own working audio speakers.

The mechanism of DNA unwinding by hexameric helicases during genome replication
currently focuses solely on interactions with the encircled strand and overlooks
the implication of contacts with the excluded strand. Preliminary work suggests
that these external contacts could be more influential in controlling the speed
of replication, coupling enzymes at the replication fork and sensing DNA damage.
This project will interrogate and quantify precise chemical specificities of
excluded strand interactions, and monitor mutational consequences on replisome
speed, enzymatic coordination, and genomic stability, both in vitro and in vivo.
The resulting data, methods, and findings will be broadly distributed within the
scientific community and will provide further insights and comparisons into the
precise mechanisms of action of hexameric helicases in DNA replication across
all domains of life.

This project is funded jointly by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.