* 1613359
* The Calcium and Strontium (radiogenic and stable) isotope geochemistry of weathering in Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Andrew Jacobson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 09/30/2021
* USD 375,000.00

This project aims to elucidate the role of basalt weathering in Earth's long-
term carbon cycle. While basalt represents only ~5% of the crustal rocks exposed
at the Earth's surface, basalt weathering may have a disproportionately large
effect on long-term climate change because Calcium-bearing silicate minerals
composing basalt appear to dissolve easily, thereby consuming atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO2) at a relatively rapid rate. Several studies have examined basalt
weathering in Iceland. A major assumption is that all of the riverine Calcium
(Ca)and carbonate alkalinity originates from silicate weathering. However,
hydrothermal calcite occurs throughout Iceland, and even trace levels are
expected to impact river geochemistry owing to the mineral's high solubility and
fast dissolution rate. Understanding the role of hydrothermal calcite weathering
has several implications for quantifying the strength of the basalt weathering
feedback and the factors that appear to control it, such as runoff, temperature,
and mechanical erosion. The project will foster a new international partnership
with Icelandic researchers and students. The investigator will supervise
research by graduate and undergraduate students, and he will incorporate project
findings into his radiogenic isotope geochemistry course. The investigator and
his students will engage K12 underrepresented minorities in education and
outreach activities related to the project award. The project will benefit
society by providing new insight into the long-term carbon cycle and related
geochemical phenomena that explain why the Earth is a habitable
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test several hypotheses
surrounding controls on the Ca isotope composition of Icelandic rivers, which in
turn can provide insight into sources of riverine alkalinity and from there, the
impact of basalt weathering on long-term atmospheric CO2 levels. The research
will also include analyses of radiogenic and stable Strontium (Sr) isotope
ratios (87Sr/86Sr and &amp;#948;88/86Sr), which should provide additional
constraints on the sources and cycling of riverine Ca. Fieldwork conducted
during the spring, summer, and fall will mostly concentrate on the Skagafjördur
Valley in northern Iceland. Investigators will collect river water, spring water
(thermal and non-thermal), rocks, minerals, soils, and plants. They also plan to
collect rock and mineral specimens from the Berufjördur region in eastern
Iceland. Calcite and the zeolite mineral heulandite form during burial
metamorphism of basalt in the deep lava pile and often occur together in
metabasalts now exposed at the surface. Heulandite Ca isotope values are lower
than those for bulk basalt, while calcite Ca isotope values are higher. The Ca
isotope composition of heulandite likely reflects the preferential incorporation
of 40Ca during equilibrium isotope exchange at hydrothermal temperatures,
implying that the residual 44Ca-enriched waters determine the high Ca isotope
values of calcite. To test this hypothesis, the proposed study also includes
bench-scale experiments designed to quantify the heulandite Ca isotope
fractionation factor under a range of physicochemical conditions. The project is
potentially transformative because it will test a long-standing paradigm
surrounding the role of basalt weathering in long-term climate regulation.
Because zeolite facies metamorphism and hydrothermal fluid circulation are
ubiquitous characteristics of basaltic eruptions, findings for Iceland may apply
generally to other flood basalt provinces. The research will also advance novel
double-spike TIMS methods for measuring Ca isotopes and Sr isotope values
recently developed by this group.