* 1613856
* Collaborative Research: Impact of a novel retrotransposon expansion on centromere function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Lucia Carbone, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2020
* USD 436,208.00

Centromeres are DNA regions that ensure the correct separation of chromosomes
during a cell's reproduction. However, due to the highly repetitive nature of
DNA present in centromeres, further studies in identifying the make-up of this
portion of DNA have been limited. In response to the roadblocks caused by the
limited amount of research in this area, this project aims to advance our
knowledge of centromere biology and evolution. This research will support
outreach activities focused on the biology of gibbons, a critically endangered
group of primates that has a unique centromere structure that could inform
future studies. As the main threats for these species are from human activities,
a large part of the outreach effort for this work seeks to increase awareness of
the precarious state of this species. Current conservation efforts, encompassing
different venues, include informal seminars to the public and collaborations
with primate centers and museums. In addition, this project will promote
education through training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduate and local high school programs by providing experiential learning
and exposure to modern technologies and training workshops.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While expansions of DNA within centromeres are known for many
species, most centromeres are stable over evolutionary time and relatively
uniform across all centromeres in one genome. Decoupling equilibration events
across chromosomes from the initial seeding events specific to a subset of
chromosomes has not been possible in most model systems. This project
capitalizes on the recently discovered centromeric expansion of a selfish
element, the LAVA retroelement, in a subset of chromosomes in one gibbon genus
(Hoolock). This project will build upon foundational discoveries in gibbon
centromeres, the newly released gibbon genome sequence and novel genomics
approaches for studying complex, repeat-rich regions. This project will test the
hypothesis that both LAVA and neighboring satellite DNA bind inner kinetochore
proteins, implicating genetic conflict in the seeding and expansion at
centromeres. Second, based on observations that the Hoolock centromere structure
is similar to that found in marsupials and plants, this project will include
analyses of transcripts from centromeric repeats to determine whether
transcription from centromere retroelements is associated with young centromere
restructuring or with subsequent stabilization. Finally, this research will
incorporate emerging next-generation sequencing technologies to assemble Hoolock
centromeres from single chromosomes. Collectively, these aims will determine the
impact of the organization and function of repeats among newly seeded
centromeres and stabilized centromeres within one karyotype.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.