* 1613891
* EAPSI: Modeling Plant Species Distributions to Support Biological and Cultural  Diversity Under Climate Change
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Matthew Bond, Bond                    Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Climate change has altered the distributions of many species around the world,
although the extent of its future effects on organisms and human society remains
uncertain. This project will use computer modeling to calculate how climate
change is likely to affect two plant species. Kuta (Eleocharis sphacelata), a
native rush used for Mâori weaving, and kûmarahou (Pomaderris kumeraho), an
endemic shrub used in Mâori traditional medicine, are critical to Mâori culture
and the function of New Zealand ecosystems. The project will create maps of
where these species are currently located, simulate how the locations of these
species will be affected by climate change, and develop management
recommendations in collaboration with Mâori groups and conservation
organizations. Project outcomes will also advance understanding of similar
cultures and ecosystems across the Pacific, particularly in the researcher's
home institution, Hawai'i. The researcher will be collaborating with Dr.
Priscilla Wehi, an ecologist and conservation biologist at Landcare Research
Dunedin. Dr Wehi's expertise in Maori culture and New Zealand native species
will be integral to the success of this project.

This project will use species distribution modeling to contribute to
conservation of New Zealand's biocultural diversity under conditions of climate
change. The researcher will use Environmental Niche Models to estimate the
fundamental niche of kuta (Eleocharis sphacelata), a native rush used for Mâori
weaving, and kûmarahou (Pomaderris kumeraho), an endemic shrub used in Mâori
traditional medicine. These species niches will be used to project the
fundamental climatic envelope of these two species using future climate
scenarios for New Zealand. Culturally informed management recommendations will
then be developed in collaboration with Mâori groups and conservation
organizations. This project will advance biocultural conservation across the
Pacific where floras, colonization histories and climate threats experienced by
many indigenous peoples are strongly related. The similarities of New Zealand
and the researchers home institution, Hawai'i, are particularly strong,
providing significant opportunities for future collaboration. The host
researcher, Dr. Priscilla Wehi, is an ecologist and conservation biologist at
Landcare Research Dunedin. Dr Wehi's expertise in Maori culture and New Zealand
native species will be integral to the success of this project.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.