* 1613471
* The effect of eletric currents on superconductivity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Yaniv Almog, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 191,109.00

This grant supports the research program of the Principal Investigator on
mathematical models of superconductivity and the behavior of the solutions of
these models. Superconductors are metals that at a sufficiently low temperature
exhibit two important properties: they lose entirely their electrical
resistivity, and the magnetic field is excluded from the superconducting area.
Superconductors have great technological potential for applications ranging from
magnetic sensors, through generators of large magnetic fields, to high power
transmitters. Even for low temperatures, a sufficiently strong electric current
would revert the superconductor to the state of a normal metal. The Principal
Investigator will study the transition of superconducting materials from the
normal state to the superconducting one and vice versa, with either increasing
or decreasing current. Of particular interest is the disparity between
experimental measurements of the critical current and theoretical predictions of
the critical current in the absence of magnetic fields, and the maximal amount
of current that can flow through a sample before the superconducting state loses
its stability. The project will shed light on both the nucleation of
superconductivity for decreasing currents and on the loss of superconducting
properties when the electric current increases. The results are expected to have
an effect on other areas of Applied Mathematics, such as hydrodynamic stability,
magnetic resonance imaging, and more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
address the Ginzburg-Landau model of superconductivity in the presence of
electric currents. The Principal Investigator will study several fundamental
theoretical problems related to this model. Most of the project will involve
analytical work to be performed by the investigator and his collaborators. The
following problems will be studied: (1) the existence and stability of fully
superconducting solutions away from the boundary, which is adjacent in part to a
normal material from which the current enters and exits the superconducting
sample, and solutions will be studied both in the presence and in the absence of
a magnetic field, (2) analysis of the behavior of solutions with decreasing
current density below the critical current where the normal state loses its
stability, (3) generalization of some recent results on the local and global
stability of the normal state in the presence of strong electric currents, both
in the presence and the absence of magnetic fields.