* 1613987
* The Chemistry and Physics of Titan's Upper Atmosphere Revealed by the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martin Cordiner, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 211,546.00

The atmosphere of Saturn's moon Titan is composed of molecules such as nitrogen
and carbon and other elements that were present in the early atmospheres of the
rocky planets like Earth. We study Titan's atmosphere to learn more about the
early history of the Earth's atmosphere. Cassini spacecraft has mapped simple
carbon and nitrogen molecules, revealing many patterns of molecules that change
with the changing seasons of Titan. These are, however, only a small number of
the types of molecules in Titan's atmosphere, and we do not have coverage of the
atmosphere across all of Titan. This is Cassini's last year of operation. Using
the new Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) radio telescope
observatory at the same time as Cassini, the astronomers will observe Titan's
atmosphere completely using both the radio telescopes and the spacecraft. They
will make the first 3-dimensional maps of the types and amounts of molecules in
Titan's atmosphere. They will then model the results to learn about how the
molecules in the atmosphere are produced, transported, and changed with time.
Undergraduate physics and astronomy students from minority-serving schools in
the Washington DC area will conduct independent Solar System research with the
principal investigator's input and backing at NASA's Goddard Space Flight
Center.

Saturn's moon Titan has a thick nitrogen and carbon-rich atmosphere, abundant in
complex organic molecules. It is a potential analogue for primitive terrestrial
bodies (including the early Earth). Instruments onboard NASA's Cassini
spacecraft have provided maps of the smaller hydrocarbons and nitriles,
revealing many complex, seasonally-varying molecular abundance patterns. These
observations, however, trace only a small subset of Titan's molecular inventory,
and have incomplete spatial and temporal coverage. Understanding the formation
and evolution of Titan's atmospheric gases is a key step in determining the
molecular inventories present in other primitive planetary atmospheres. The
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) is a revolutionary tool for
the detection and instantaneous daylight-hemisphere mapping of Titan's gases.
ALMA will be used concurrently with Cassini during its final year of operation
to provide complete views of Titan's atmosphere. This research will produce the
first instantaneous, spatially-resolved 3-dimensional molecular abundance maps
for multiple molecular species on Titan, allowing new and rigorous tests for
understanding the basic physics and chemistry of planetary atmospheres.
Interpretation of these maps will help generate more detailed chemical models to
provide insight into the global production, transport and evolution of molecular
material, particularly in Titan's less well-studied middle and upper
atmospheres. Isotope abundance ratios will help constrain chemical pathways and
trace the origin and evolution of Titan's hydrogen and nitrogen. The principal
investigator will mentor undergraduate physics and astronomy students from
minority-serving institutions in the Washington DC area, who will conduct
independent Solar System research at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.