* 1613433
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The effect of lifetime investment in reproduction and physical activity on women's rates of senescence
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Catherine Panter-Brick, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 25,175.00

What drives variation in how fast women will age? This doctoral dissertation
project is a comparative study of rural and urban women to investigate whether
lifetime reproductive behaviors and physical activity patterns have long-lasting
impact on biological aging. The investigators will examine the physiological
mechanisms associated with reproductive and physical behaviors that
energetically tax women's bodies across their lives. Findings from the project
will contribute to our understanding of aging at the cellular level and in the
context of human life history. The project will promote international
collaboration, support the acquisition of new research skills for students
participating in fieldwork and lab activities, and produce data that may inform
clinical and policy research on women's health and aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines whether physiological tradeoffs impact
rates of senescence in contexts where women have to allocate limited resources
to competing energetic demands across the life course. It uses a comparative
design with two populations - rural and urban women - who vary in lifetime
reproductive investments and contrast in their physical activity levels. The
researchers predict that women's levels of lifetime reproductive investment will
be directly associated with their levels of oxidative stress, a marker of
cellular damage resulting from aerobic metabolism and a potential indicator of
physiological aging. They further predict that rural women, who assume vigorous
physical activity over their lifetime, will demonstrate greater rates of
physiological senescence relative to urban women - over and above the aging
effects of reproduction. This research will be among the first of its kind to
test the association between investments over the life course and variation in
rates of biological aging while evaluating a mechanistic explanation for
variation in rates of senescence over the lifespan.