* 1613867
* Uncovering the mechanisms of splice site choice
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Alan Zahler, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2020
* USD 565,000.00

This project is aimed at understanding how the genetic information stored in DNA
is accurately processed to code for protein assembly. In order for information
in DNA to be used in the cell, the DNA is first copied into an intermediate
sister molecule called RNA which is then decoded into protein sequence. However,
in order to be useful, internal parts of the RNA must first be removed and the
surrounding sequences precisely pasted together by a process called RNA
splicing. Splicing is a carried out by one of the largest and most complicated
machines in the cell, the spliceosome, which consists of over 100 proteins and 5
RNA molecules that assemble onto the RNA at the region to be spliced out.
Because of the complexity of assembling such a large machine onto the RNA, there
is still much to learn about the mechanisms by which the spliceosome accurately
chooses the sites in the RNA that will be spliced together. Genetic experiments
to search for mutations that affect splice site choice are an important and
cutting-edge component of this research, and these experiments will be carried
out by minority undergraduate participants in an established summer
undergraduate training program at the University of California-Santa Cruz
(UCSC). This training will be important in preparing these students for
positions in UCSC faculty research labs, and for future admission into PhD
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs the microscopic worm
Caenorhabditis elegans as a model to explore pre-mRNA splicing through
integrated genetic, genomic and biochemical approaches. Unique approaches have
been developed in the preliminary studies that uncovered new regulatory
phenomena for splice site selection at both ends of the region of RNA to be
removed, called the 5' and 3' splice sites. Genetic screens have been used to
uncover new roles for factors important for the regulation of 5' splice site
choice. Fundamental differences have been uncovered in alternative adjacent 3'
splice site selection between somatic and germ cells. The research will expand
on these observations by addressing the following two questions: how do protein
factors regulate the choice of 5' splice sites, and what are the mechanistic
differences in 3' splice site selection between soma and germ cells? The results
are expected to provide novel insights into how the splicing machinery
accurately chooses the 5' and 3' splice sites.