* 1613074
* A Workshop on Science Challenges in Low Temperature Plasma Science and Engineering: Enabling a Future Based on Electricity through Non-Equilibrium Plasma Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Mohan Sankaran, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2017
* USD 35,765.00

This grant is to provide partial travel support for 45 researchers to attend a
"Workshop on Science Challenges in Low Temperature Plasma Science and
Engineering: Enabling a Future Based on Electricity through Non-Equilibrium
Plasma Chemistry". Salary support for a technical editor and a graphic artist to
assist with the production of the final report of the workshop is also provided.
The workshop will be held at NSF in the spring or early summer of 2016 and aims
to create a roadmap defining research challenges and opportunities in the field
of Low Temperature Plasmas (LTPs) with the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;-
Summarize the current state of the art in plasma activated
processes.&lt;br/&gt;- Describe the role of LTPs in facilitating the vision of a
future based on renewable resources.&lt;br/&gt;- Delineate and prioritize the
major scientific issues in LTPs that must be addressed to achieve that
vision.&lt;br/&gt;- Describe a role for NSF in addressing these science
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop is motivated by the need to explore the efficient conversion of
electricity into chemical reactivity. Chemical reactivity enables the synthesis
of new materials, the production of chemicals, fertilizers, plastics,
pharmaceuticals and food. Two common ways in which electrical power is
transformed into chemical reactivity are electrochemistry and electro-catalysis.
Low Temperature Plasmas (LTPs) can be a very versatile alternative technology
for converting electrical energy into chemical reactivity. LTPs can interact
with gases, liquids and solids under non-equilibrium conditions that enable
production of unique chemical reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop will bring together the leading scientists and engineers in LTPs with
the objective of discussing and defining the major scientific challenges that
prevent translation of this technology into commercial practice. The context of
the workshop will be to define the role of LTPs in enabling a sustainable future
through efficient utilization of renewable electricity. The workshop will
provide a forum for open exchange of ideas among the participants and NSF staff
with the objective of defining the challenges and priorities for research in
this field, and their potential impact on society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of LTPs in converting
electrical energy to chemical reactivity is an important topic with potentially
significant societal impact related to energy sustainability. This workshop will
address the state of the art in the field and define the challenges that must be
overcome to enable commercial exploitation of LTPs in a broad range of
applications. The ultimate objective of the workshop will be to define a roadmap
for research that addresses these challenges that will be useful to NSF, other
federal agencies (DOE, DOD, NASA, and EPA), policy makers, and the scientific
community at large.