* 1613678
* RNA Dynamics by Solution and Solid State Deuterium NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Gary Drobny, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 690,415.00

Title: Functional dynamics in microRNA precursors by NMR

Ribonucleic acid (RNA) performs many essential functions in all living
organisms. MicroRNAs are an important class of RNAs that regulate the vast
majority of the human genome, however the molecular mechanism by which these
microRNAs are produced from precursor species is unclear. The dynamic structure
of the precursor species have implications on microRNA processing. The project
investigates how intrinsic motional properties of the RNA and RNA-binding
proteins regulate the biological pathways associated with RNA regulation of gene
expression, as a paradigm to understanding the molecular logic of regulation.
This research will be executed in a highly interdisciplinary manner, which will
allow training of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students to
interdisciplinary research at the interface of physics, chemistry and molecular
biology. The project will involve under-represented minority students who will
be included in the research activities. Material from the project will also be
used in teaching at the graduate level and in specialized advanced undergraduate
courses.

The overarching goal of this project is to study the relationship between RNA
motion and its biological function. The specific objective of the research is to
understand how microRNAs are produced in a manner that is regulated in different
cellular states. This project will investigate how RNA dynamics, intrinsic to
RNA, is altered upon substrate binding and its effects on the efficiency of
processing of microRNA precursors. Primarily solution and solid-state NMR will
be used and advanced spectroscopic techniques will be developed. Experimental
studies will be integrated into state-of-the-art computational modeling for
atomistic level interpretation. Biochemical and cell-based experiments will also
be performed to test the biological functional relevance of the project's
discoveries. Spectroscopic tools developed within this project to study
functional dynamics in RNA will be broadly applicable to other nucleic acid
systems.This project is supported by Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.