* 1613330
* Collaborative Proposal: Broadening Participation for STEM Women of Color
* EHR,HRD
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Orlando Taylor, Fielding Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2019
* USD 305,903.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program has
identified evidence-based leadership and professional development of faculty as
one of its priorities and is committed to funding innovative models and
approaches that will: broaden the full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM, improve STEM education and educator
development at any level, and increase the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. With support from the National Science Foundation,
Fielding Graduate University, in partnership with the Society of STEM Women of
Color, Inc., proposes to enhance and implement the STEM Women of Color Conclave
as a Broadening Participation Workshop series that will facilitate the
preparation of a cadre of its participants for academic leadership roles. GPRA
Strategic Management, Inc. (GPRASMi) will serve as the collaborative
organizational partner in implementing the proposed Conclave Workshops. This
effort will foster a strategic collaboration and provide access to formal
postgraduate training in leadership studies. The overall goal of this effort is
to increase the representation of STEM women of color in academic leadership
positions by enhancing the quality of the leadership development experience. The
proposed Conclave Workshops will heighten the profile of STEM women faculty of
color who, in turn, will constitute a powerful knowledge network for broadening
participation through effective academic leadership. As a long-term outcome, the
proposed leadership development experience for women of color is likely to yield
a cadre of academic leaders with the acumen needed to address the shifting
demands of higher education, and the cultural sensitivity to yield academic
success and better STEM career outcomes, particularly among underrepresented
minorities. As such, the proposed Workshops will extend beyond the leadership
capacity of its participants to the thousands of underrepresented minority
students with whom they will interact.

The proposed project will enhance the leadership development experience for
women of color who provide the kind of academic and psychosocial support for
underrepresented minority students that leads to better STEM learning outcomes
by: 1) convening broadening participation workshops focused on leadership
development for STEM women of color; and 2) providing access to opportunities to
earn continuing education credits as credentials necessary for acquiring
legitimacy in and contributing to STEM academic leadership. The specific
objectives are: 1) to convene a two-day Broadening Participation Workshop:
National Conclave for STEM Women of Color; and 2) to provide access to
continuing education (CE) credits for Conclave participants. This project will
contribute to redefining higher education leadership to meaningfully include an
awareness of, affinity for, and sensitivity to the academic and psychosocial
needs of underrepresented minority students, thereby broadening participation.
Collectively, these efforts are expected to impact a network of thousands of
STEM higher education reformers committed to diversifying STEM faculty, as well
as a wider pool of faculty and academic administrators, from all disciplines,
who are committed to recruiting and retaining STEM women faculty of color.