* 1613336
* Collaborative Proposal: Broadening Participation for STEM Women of Color
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Carmen Rivera, GPRA Strategic Management, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Clytrice Watson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 591,975.00

Fielding Graduate University, in partnership with the Society of STEM Women of
Color, Inc., proposes to enhance and implement the STEM Women of Color Conclave
as a Broadening Participation Workshop series that will facilitate the
preparation of a cadre of its participants for academic leadership roles. GPRA
Strategic Management, Inc. (GPRASMi) will serve as the collaborative
organizational partner in implementing the proposed Conclave Workshops. This
effort will foster a strategic collaboration and provide access to formal
postgraduate training in leadership studies. The overall goal of this effort is
to increase the representation of STEM women of color in academic leadership
positions by enhancing the quality of the leadership development experience. The
proposed Conclave Workshops will heighten the profile of STEM women faculty of
color who, in turn, will constitute a powerful knowledge network for broadening
participation through effective academic leadership. As a long-term outcome, the
proposed leadership development experience for women of color is likely to yield
a cadre of academic leaders with the acumen needed to address the shifting
demands of higher education, and the cultural sensitivity to yield academic
success and better STEM career outcomes, particularly among underrepresented
minorities. As such, the proposed Workshops will extend beyond the leadership
capacity of its participants to the thousands of underrepresented minority
students with whom they will interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will enhance the leadership development experience for women of color who
provide the kind of academic and psychosocial support for underrepresented
minority students that leads to better STEM learning outcomes by: 1) convening
broadening participation workshops focused on leadership development for STEM
women of color; and 2) providing access to opportunities to earn continuing
education credits as credentials necessary for acquiring legitimacy in and
contributing to STEM academic leadership. The specific objectives are: 1) to
convene a two-day Broadening Participation Workshop: National Conclave for STEM
Women of Color; and 2) to provide access to continuing education (CE) credits
for Conclave participants. This project will contribute to redefining higher
education leadership to meaningfully include an awareness of, affinity for, and
sensitivity to the academic and psychosocial needs of underrepresented minority
students, thereby broadening participation. Collectively, these efforts are
expected to impact a network of thousands of STEM higher education reformers
committed to diversifying STEM faculty, as well as a wider pool of faculty and
academic administrators, from all disciplines, who are committed to recruiting
and retaining STEM women faculty of color.