* 1613726
* EAPSI: Refining Techniques for Remote Sensing of Snow and Ice Impurities on Brewster Glacier, NZ
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Alia Khan, Khan                    Alia
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

High elevation snow packs play a major role in the global climate system due to
the reflectivity of the large land cover. Aerosol deposition of impurities such
as dust and black carbon on snow and ice can reduce the amount of solar
radiation reflected by the surface, as well as enhance the generation of melt-
water. This can result in both short and long-term impacts on community water
resources, as well as downstream impacts such as sea-level rise. Ground-based
observations in mountainous regions, such as the New Zealand Alps, are difficult
to collect due to the inaccessibility of the terrain. Recent development of
remote sensing tools by satellite to quantify surface albedo is enabling more
rapid quantification of changes of snow/ice. This aim of this study is to refine
remote sensing techniques to identify impurities on snow and ice. The project
will utilize Brewster Glacier in New Zealand as a case study to conduct ground
validation of the remote sensing estimates. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Pascal Sirguey and Dr. Nicolas Cullen in the Snow Remote
Sensing Group at the University of Otago in New
Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface albedos of highly reflective snow/ice
expanses, such as in the mountains of New Zealand (NZ), play a significant role
in the global energy balance. Ground-based observations in mountainous regions,
such as the NZ Alps, are difficult to collect due to the inaccessibility of the
terrain. Airborne residues from light absorbing impurities (LAIs) such as dust
and black carbon (BC) may travel thousands of kilometers before being deposited
on these highly reflective surfaces. The dark particles absorb more solar
radiation, thereby reducing the surface albedo of the corresponding snow/ice, as
well as enhancing melt. This study will utilize cutting edge remote sensing
tools to identify changes in surface albedo of Brewster Glacier, New Zealand,
provide ground validation of those techniques, as well as quantify the impact of
BC and LAIs on the surface albedo of the glacier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer
research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Royal
Society of New Zealand.