* 1613138
* EAPSI:Leaping Out of Water - Fabrication of a Bio-Inspired Robotic Jumping Copepod
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Brian Chang, Chang                   Brian          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Copepods are small crustaceans (~2 mm) with long antennae that inhabit nearly
all aquatic systems. A few copepod species are able to jump out of water to
escape predators. This jumping behavior is impressive because creatures at such
small scales normally have difficulty breaking the water surface. To understand
the jumping mechanism, a bio-inspired robot will be designed and built to mimic
the movement of the jumping copepods. This project will be conducted at Seoul
National University under the mentorship of Dr. Ho-Young Kim, an expert in the
field of bio-fluid mechanics and microfluidics.

The goal of this project is to create a bio-inspired jumping robot based on the
kinematics and fluid dynamics of a jumping copepod?s aerial escape mechanism. By
determining the forces generated by the robot and the calculating the resulting
flow field, a deeper understanding of the copepod will be gained. Particle image
velocimetry (PIV) and force measurement experiments will be performed on a
fabricated antenna rowing mechanism in order to visualize the velocity flow
field and understand the forces acting at different scales. Then, a self-
sustaining copepod robot will be fabricated to mimic the escape mechanism based
on a parameter space inspired by nature. These tests will give greater insight
on the necessary forces to overcome surface tension and the associated flow
fields around a jumping copepod.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.