* 1613917
* EAPSI: Understanding Biological Invasion of Asian Carps Involving Hybridization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Sarah Gaughan, Gaughan                 Sarah          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis) and silver carp (H. molitrix), both
native to China, are invasive species in the US. Natural hybridization occurs
extensively between these two species in the Mississippi River Basin; however
hybridization has long been considered rare in the Yangtze River (YR). The
effect of hybridization on fitness or invasion potential remains unknown. The
recent construction of Three Gorges reservoir has caused dramatic environmental
change in native regions, and may facilitate hybridization. The objectives of
this project are 1) to obtain a better understanding about ecological factors
that pertain to Asian carp hybridization and 2) to evaluate the fitness of F1
hybrids farmed in aquaculture ponds. Environmental and morphological data, along
with tissue samples (genetic assay), will be collected from fish caught in the
middle and upper reaches of the YR, in collaboration with scientists from
Shanghai Ocean University and the Institute of Hydroecology (Wuhan), Ministry of
Water Resources & Chinese Academy of Sciences. The results are expected to
improve our understanding of the hybridization mechanisms, which will benefit
the management and control of invasive Asian carps in the US.

This project employs a novel approach to integrate genomic, morphological and
ecological information into an important knowledge base to explore the
detrimental factors linked to Asian Carp invasions in the U.S. The results from
this proposed research are likely to provide an explanation of why F1 hybrids
are less prevalent in introduced habitats in the Mississippi River Basin (MRB).
The comparison between native and invasive Asian carps in morphology and
genomics will allow us to identify adaptive characters, which will provide a
better understanding of the invasiveness of the Asian carps. The investigation
of habitat uses by Asian carps in both native and invasive environments will
allow us to determine environmental conditions which promote hybridization and
invasion. Understanding the relative roles of biology and genomics of exotic
species, environmental attributes, and evolutionary events would transform the
knowledge of invasion biology.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.