* 1613957
* EAPSI: Anion Binding Directed Supramolecular Donor-Acceptor Assemblies for Photoinduced Charge Separa
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Whitney Webre, Webre                   Whitney        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Solar energy is an excellent renewable energy source because of the near
unlimited amount of solar radiation that reaches the Earth's surface. An avenue
towards improved solar generation is the development of solar cells that employ
copycat systems based on photosynthesis. The research will involve design,
syntheses, and characterization of electron donor-acceptor hybrids where light
energy can be stored in the form of radical ion-pairs. The work will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jonathan Hill at the National Institute of
Materials Science (NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan. The collaboration provides direct
access to unique techniques available at NIMS. Development of renewable energy
sources is a matter of major scientific and social importance, and this project
will have a positive impact on renewable solar energy harvesting.

Research on renewable energy is essential due to the limited fossil energy
resources and environmental problems they continue to generate. Converting solar
energy into electricity or fuel using donor-acceptor systems, Nature?s way of
harvesting light energy, has gained much interest in recent years. In this
project, the development of novel self-assembled via anion binding donor-
acceptor conjugates comprised of metalloporphyrin and oxoporphyrinogen as wide
band capturing light energy harvesting systems will by synthesized in Dr. Hill's
laboratory at NIMS. The syntheses, characterization, spectroscopic and
electrochemical studies will be performed at NIMS and photoinduced electron
transfer leading to charge separation in the newly developed conjugates will be
investigated using time-resolved emission and transient absorption techniques at
the University of North Texas under Dr. Francis D'Souza after the program is
completed.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.