* 1613943
* EAPSI: Modeling an Environmentally Friendly Catalytic Mechanism to Convert Wax-Covered Poultry Waste into Digestible Protein Meal
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Matthew Barcus, Barcus                  Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Natural waxes in animals provide their hosts with a form of energy storage or
waterproof protection from elements. Waxy lipids present on the surface of
chicken feathers, a large waste product from the poultry industry, is thought to
hinder biological rendering of the feathers into digestible protein meal for use
in animal agriculture. Wax ester hydrolases are a potential catalyst to assist
in breaking down the waxes in an environmentally sound way. A biocatalyst with
demonstrated ability to hydrolyze wax esters has been sourced from a feather-
degrading microorganism found in soil. In collaboration with Dr. Shinya
Fushinobu, an expert protein crystallographer at the University of Tokyo in
Japan, the project will determine the three-dimensional structure of the
biocatalyst as a means to understand its molecular mechanism. This information
will advance understanding of biocatalyst function, which can then be used to
design a biocatalyst with improved properties to better aid in feather rendering
and adaptations for use in other industries such as health care, cosmetics,
nutrition, and energy.

A wax-ester hydrolase gene was cloned from a gram-positive Streptomycete
isolated from the soil and capable of hydrolyzing chicken feathers. The gene
will be heterologously expressed in E. coli, then purified and concentrated for
the structure research in the lab of Dr. Fushinobu. Favorable parameters to grow
crystals of the enzyme will be determined and optimized using a hanging drop
crystallization test. Crystals will then be cryoprotected and used to collect
diffraction data using beamlines with a charged couple device camera at the High
Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan. After
processing the data using the HKL2000 software package, a combination of
computational tools will be used to refine and analyze the structural models of
the biocatalyst. Based on the determined structure of the wax-ester hydrolase,
the enzyme will be rationally designed for improving its stability and catalytic
efficiency.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.