* 1613002
* Canonical Linear Methods and Hierarchical Non-Linear Methods in High-Dimensional Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Statistics is at the heart of extracting meaningful information from big data.
Its primary tasks include estimation and uncertainty assessment. The latter is
crucial in big data analysis for sound decision making. For the former, the
methods employed in deep learning machines, such as those behind Google's Brain
and AlphaGo and Microsoft's Cortana, beg understanding. This research project is
intended to bridge practice and theory of statistics in these areas. It aims to
provide accessible uncertainty measures for linear modeling of big data and to
derive insights into how deep learning works, based on mathematical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops and analyzes linear and
non-linear high-dimensional statistical inferential methods that are easily
accessible by practitioners in data science. In the linear case, it develops and
analyzes inferential methods based on well-established bootstrap, lasso, partial
ridge, and random projection methods. In the non-linear case, it takes the first
steps to explain in a principled manner the impressive success of deep learning
in practical problems such as image classification and speech recognition. In
particular, statistical properties of these methods will be studied under linear
and Neyman-Rubin high dimensional models, and via analytical and simulation
means. A generative model of a two-layer neural network (or hierarchical non-
linear model) will be explored to understand and compare deep learning with
other methods, analytically and through simulation studies. Improvements over
deep learning as a general supervised learning method are sought by enforcing
biologically meaningful constraints from brain connectivity research.