* 1613920
* RUI (MCB - Genetic Mechanisms): Molecular analysis of two interacting components of the conjugation machinery of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Melanie Berkmen, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2022
* USD 361,199.00

Bacteria have the remarkable ability to acquire new genes in a process known as
conjugation, which plays a profound role in bacterial evolution and adaptation
to different environments. During conjugation, DNA is transferred from one cell
to another through a specialized translocation channel. Many of the molecular
mechanisms behind the conjugation process remain a mystery. This project will
characterize two critical interacting protein components of the conjugation
machinery of the bacterium Bacillus subtilis, providing insight into how they
function, interact, and localize. The research will be designed and conducted by
12 highly qualified and diverse undergraduate students. By attaining this
independent, inquiry-driven research experience, students are more likely to
remain in science and gain employment or entrance to top-tier graduate programs
after graduation. This project will also improve science education by enabling a
professor from a diverse community college to do research and learn new
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this study is a specialized DNA
translocation channel known as a Type IV secretion system (T4SS). While the
T4SSs found in several Gram-negative bacteria have been well-studied, much less
is known about those of Gram-positive bacteria. This project aims to examine the
conjugation machinery of Gram-positive bacteria using the integrative and
conjugative element ICEBs1 of B. subtilis as a model system. Prior results
indicate that the ICEBs1 T4SS is composed of ConE and ConB, among other
proteins. ConE is a peripheral membrane ATPase that likely energizes DNA
transfer and/or channel assembly. The bitopic membrane protein ConB interacts
with ConE and is required for its association with the membrane. ConB and ConE
will be characterized by a variety of methods including mutagenesis, conjugation
assays, fluorescence microscopy, and biochemistry. This research will define the
conserved sequence motifs and domains of ConB and ConE that are required for
conjugation, interaction, enzymatic function, and oligomerization. As these
proteins are conserved, the findings will apply to the conjugation machinery of
numerous Gram-positive bacteria and provide a deeper understanding of a major
mechanism mediating horizontal gene transfer.