* 1613996
* Nonsmooth Optimization: Structure, Geometry, and Conditioning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Adrian Lewis, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,444.00

This research project concerns optimization theory, a classical mathematical
subject of wide applicability that is evolving in response to the demands of
current computational developments and challenges. Practitioners across the
applied sciences and engineering often now resemble mountaineers more than hill-
walkers, exploring optimization goals in sharp rather than smooth strategic
landscapes. Solving such problems in control engineering, contemporary
statistics, or big data applications has had transformative impact. Often lost
in the computational fog, however, has been the fundamental geometry underlying
this success: mathematical specialists often compute little, and conversely,
practitioners across vital science and engineering applications are typically
unaware of the fundamentals. This project aims to bridge that divide, developing
an innovative mix of geometry and computation. Ph.D. students will be involved
in all aspects of the research.

The project envisages a unifying mathematical strategy based on two dual but
equivalent viewpoints: the geometric idea of partial smoothness and the
algorithmic idea of identification. Using the power of modern variational
analysis, the project aims to illuminate how partly smooth geometry encourages
solutions with desirable structure (like sparsity or low rank), how popular
contemporary algorithms are hence drawn to (or "identify") such solutions, how
fast the methods therefore converge, and how we might accelerate them. In the
project's spotlight are two motivating algorithms, both very promising in
computational practice. The first, a prox-linear method, solves large-scale
structured problems whose explicit partly smooth geometry it could potentially
exploit. The second, a smooth quasi-Newton method with robust but baffling
success for nonsmooth optimization, is blind to any explicit geometry, but is
strongly influenced by it. Crucial to the project's success will be interplay
with other areas of classical mathematics; matrix analysis is rich in potential
applications -- the project aims in particular at the "Crouzeix conjecture."
From a foundational perspective, commonly-occurring polynomial inequalities can
induce partial smoothness through stratification into smooth surfaces, immersing
this project in the fundamentals of semi-algebraic geometry.