* 1613056
* 2016 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2018
* USD 5,000.00

2016 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; May 31-June 4 2016;
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, State College, PA

Penn State's very popular astrostatistics summer school has trained over 700
total participants since its inauguration in 2005. At this rate, they train
about 10% of the nation's young astronomers. They give critical skills to the US
scientific workforce. Highly skilled instructors provide an intense immersion in
statistical methods. The courses are oriented towards graduate students and
young researchers. The curriculum covers the underlying principles of modern
statistics. It covers advanced methods useful in astronomy, and hands-on
training in statistical software. Attendees gain much better expertise in
statistics and its application to their science. They have a better
understanding of how to teach this material to others. The value and meaning of
statistics in science become clear. The instructors devote considerable effort
to adapting the course material to their audience. In 2012, the course leaders
published a formal textbook based on this curriculum, which continues to evolve.

A vast range of statistical problems arises in modern astronomical and space
sciences research, particularly due to the flood of data produced by ground-
based and space-based surveys at many wavelengths. There has been a resurgence
of interest in statistical and computational methods as researchers seek insight
into the physical phenomena underlying such complex data. Common approaches
either inadequately utilize known methods or require the invention of new
methods. Regrettably, the statistical needs of physical scientists have been
neglected in recent decades, even while modern statistical procedures
implemented with computationally efficient algorithms became increasingly
essential. Unfortunately, due to the structure of undergraduate and graduate
curricula, U.S. astronomers are generally not well trained in statistical
techniques. Statistics is an available technology that must be tapped to advance
the needs of astronomy and astrophysics.

The 2016 Summer School in statistical inference for young astronomers will
present concepts and methodologies at an intermediate level, using experienced
instructors and an innovative curriculum. Lectures are accompanied by hands-on
software R tutorials, and training in high performance cluster computing with
applications to astronomical datasets. The Penn State Research Computing &
Cyberinfrastructure Group, and its Institute for CyberScience, are providing
technical manpower and partially supporting the high-performance computing.