* 1613777
* EAPSI: A Method Connecting Radiation Diffusion and Radiation Transfer Along Resonant Lines
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kenneth Czuprynski, Czuprynski              Kenneth        D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The radiative transfer equation can be used to describe the transport of light
through optically thick or optically thin regimes. As a result, there is great
interest in the solution of the radiative transfer equation from numerous
scientific fields. The goal of this research is to develop a method connecting
solutions of the radiative diffusion equation with solutions of the radiative
transfer equation where optically thick and thin regimes coexist. The radiative
transfer equation is notoriously difficult to solve in many real-world
applications. As a result, the diffusion approximation is often used, as the
resulting equation is easier to solve. In optically thick regimes, the diffusion
approximation is appropriate; however, in optically thin regimes, the solution
of the radiative transfer equation is needed. In collaboration with Professor
Masayuki Umemura of the Center for Computational Sciences at the University of
Tsukuba, Japan, a method connecting solutions of the radiative diffusion
equation in optically thick regimes with solutions of the radiative transfer
equation in optically thin regimes will be developed. This approach will result
in a more efficient means of solving radiative transfer problems in regions
where optically thick and thin regimes coexist.

More specifically, the radiative transfer equation is an integro-differential
equation which mathematically describes the propagation of radiation within a
medium that participates. Analytical solutions for the equation are known only
for a small subset of situations, which necessitates its numerical solution. Yet
numerically, due to the high dimension and integro-differential form of the
equation, the computational demands are significant. The diffusion approximation
is an extremely important approximation in radiative transfer. In comparison,
the radiative diffusion equation is much easier to solve and is an accurate
approximation in optically thick regimes. In order to develop a more efficient
method for solving radiative transfer problems where optically thick and thin
regimes coexist, we aim to develop a method capable of coupling solutions of the
radiative diffusion equation with solutions of the radiative transfer equation.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.