* 1613265
* I-Corps:  Development of Imaging System with Large-Size Germanium Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Dongming Mei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal will establish an I-Corp team for seeking an experiential learning
opportunity to help in determining the commercial readiness of the developed
technology for the state-of-the-art germanium detectors, which will improve the
detection of radiation from objects including human diseases (cancer), personal
travel items and cargos at the gate of airports and harbors for the applications
of diagnosis in nuclear medicine, materials screening, monitoring of
decommissioning of nuclear power plants, and homeland security. An imaging
camera has two detection planes, which will be made of high purity germanium
crystals with excellent energy resolution. The imaging camera has a bright
future as a screening detector or medical imaging device considering its
portability, compactness, low patient dose, multiple-radioisotope tracing
capability, inherent three dimensional (3D) imaging capability at a fixed
position. Currently, however, the image resolution of the Compton camera is not
sufficient for medical imaging. In this project, the I-Corps team intends to
improve imaging system using germanium detectors with high sensitive energy
resolution and position resolution. The developed technology can be especially
helpful for detecting abnormal growth in body tissue or the growth of lymph
nodes, which use gamma-ray sources as diagnostic radiation tools. Similar, tumor
growth or cancer, such as breast cancer, in the human body can be detected by
this technology because gamma-ray sources are often used for cancer treatment as
well as diagnostic purposes. Recently, cancer has become one of the most
devastating diseases worldwide. One of the techniques used for treating cancers
is nuclear medicine with radiation tracers, which can emit gamma rays. Philips,
GE and Siemens are some of the leading companies in the domain with scanning
technology for cancer treatment. The proposed detector technology is based on a
dynamic read-out that provides both excellent energy resolution and position
resolution as a camera can be commercialized through either through licensing,
establishing a joint venture or establishing a standalone
company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop and
commercialize an imaging camera using germanium detectors that will improve the
detection of radiation from objects including human diseases (cancer), personal
travel items, and cargos at the gate of airports and harbors. The scope is to
develop the technology in two phases within three years. The Phase I project is
to develop a large germanium detector with 23 Ã— 23 dynamic read-out system for
proof-of-concept in a year. A dynamic read-out system will be accomplished by
measuring the charge induced on electrodes with multiple channels that are
positioned close but not electronically connected to the detector materials. The
multiple electrodes will be fabricated on a circuit board that is positioned 0.5
mm from the detector surface onto which charge is collected. A dynamic read-out
system with multiple channels will adopt the proximity read-out technique
developed at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory by utilizing its advantages
of simplified detector fabrication, expanded electrode geometry options, and
greatly improved position resolution through simple signal interpolation. In
Phase II, the team will fabricate a germanium orthogonal dynamic read-out
detector (GODD) for testing new detector technology innovations as an imaging
system in two years. The GODD will then be tested on passengers' travel items
and cargos, mimicking airport and harbor nuclear and non- nuclear imaging tests.
The simulated airport and harbor tests will be performed at The University of
South Dakota (USD) under a subcontract and compare the relative merits of the
GODD in airport or harbor situations with modern imaging systems. GODD response
to realistic test objectives will be established. With a dynamic read-out system
that greatly improves position resolution of a germanium detector, which can
detect small, low contrast objects, including position of the source of
radiation and even tumors in human body. New fabrication methods for contacts,
improved electronics and experience with long term stability of germanium
detectors, make them important for national security tasks.