* 1613741
* Collaborative Research: Identifying and modeling the advantages of regulating protein abundance in Caulobacter crescentus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,650.00

The cell cycle is a series of cellular events leading to DNA duplication and
cell division, and ultimately to the production of two daughter cells. This
project will address broadly relevant questions about cell cycle regulation.
Namely, what is the function of the regulated degradation of crucial cell cycle
proteins and how does this regulatory mechanism integrate with other levels of
regulation to control the cell cycle? By addressing these questions, this work
has the potential to have a significant impact on our basic understanding of how
the cell cycle is regulated. This project will expose students to
interdisciplinary research and allow undergraduate students in summer laboratory
courses to be active participants in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timed
synthesis and degradation of specific proteins is a ubiquitous mechanism of cell
regulation. However, some proteins can be regulated by covalent modification or
binding to an allosteric effector. If a protein's activity can be controlled
without the energetic cost of degradation and resynthesis, what circumstances
would favor regulation by proteolysis? To address this question, the
investigators are studying CtrA, a transcriptional regulator that promotes cell
division in Caulobacter, yet also blocks chromosome replication. To reconcile
these opposing functions, CtrA activity is temporarily eliminated from the cell
just prior to chromosome replication by both dephosphorylation and proteolysis.
Caulobacter strains expressing a non-degradable version of CtrA can still
initiate chromosome replication, indicating that CtrA activity can be
significantly reduced by dephosphorylation alone. However, cells with non-
degradable CtrA have subtle defects that may compromise their competitive
fitness. During each division cycle, ~9000 CtrA molecules are degraded and
resynthesized. To understand the selective advantages conferred by this
apparently wasteful strategy, experimental and modeling approaches will be used
to predict and test the consequences of regulating CtrA only by phosphorylation.
In particular, this study will investigate whether the periodic degradation and
resynthesis of a neutral passenger protein confers a competitive disadvantage in
Caulobacter, as in other bacteria. Caulobacter strains expressing steady levels
of a non-degradable CtrA protein will be used to identify phenotypes that differ
from cells with oscillating CtrA levels. Competitive fitness assays and
quantitative microscopy approaches will test explicitly the predictions of
existing mathematical models, e.g., that cells with non-degradable CtrA
experience a delay in chromosome replication and a longer cell division cycle.
Existing deterministic and stochastic models of the Caulobacter cell cycle will
be revised, taking into account recent published findings. Stochastic
spatiotemporal modeling will benefit from single-cell data on times of division,
chromosome replication, and protein localization.