* 1613169
* Measurements of Hydroxyl (OH), Hydroperoxy (HO2), and Other Photo-Oxidants and Products During 2016 PROPHET (Program on Oxidants Photochemistry Emissions and Transport)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Roy Mauldin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 487,044.00

This project is part of a summer field study to gain a better understanding of
reactive chemistry in the atmosphere of a forested environment. In this project,
key radical species will be measured that are relevant to the production of
small secondary particles in the atmosphere. Improving the understanding of
reactive chemistry in forest environments will improve projections of how
changes in forest succession and climate might affect the future composition of
the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field study will take place at the
University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) Program for Research on
Oxidants: PHotochemistry, Emissions, and Transport (PROPHET) in the summer of
2016. The overarching objectives of the field study are to investigate the
inability of current atmospheric chemistry models to reproduce observed radical
concentrations in forest environments in order to accurately predict the impact
of biogenic volatile organic carbon emissions on the production of ozone,
secondary organic aerosols and the cycling of nitrogen between the atmosphere
and the biosphere. Species to be measured related to understanding atmospheric
oxidation include hydroxyl (OH), hydroperoxy (HO2), and organic peroxy (RO2)
radicals; sulfuric acid (H2SO4); organic acids; and low-volatility and extremely
low volatility organic compounds (LVOC and ELVOC). There will also be several
weeks of laboratory measurements conducted at the University of Indiana to
intercompare the instrumentation of those participating in the PROPHET 2016
campaign.