* 1613536
* A Focused Test of Whether Neutron-Capture Elements Are Another Expression of the Multiple Populations Phenomenon in Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ian Roederer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2019
* USD 144,914.00

Globular clusters are groups of hundreds of thousands of stars. There are more
than 100 globular clusters orbiting our Milky Way galaxy. The atomic elements
found in stars in globular clusters retain the chemical fingerprints of the
earliest generations of stars. These elements offer a glimpse into the ways that
nature formed stars in the early Universe and produced the heavy elements (iron,
uranium, etc.) like those found on Earth today. This investigator will collect
and interpret new observational data on trace elements found in five globular
clusters. These clusters were formed prior to the assembly of our galaxy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abundance variations among the heavy elements may signal
another expression of the multiple populations phenomenon in globular clusters.
These variations are not predicted by current models of globular cluster
formation and evolution. New optical spectroscopy data collected using the M2FS
spectrograph at the Magellan Telescopes will settle the issue. The investigator
will perform observations that will conclusively confirm or refute previous
ideas based on lower-quality spectroscopic data. If confirmed, the community
will gain a new tool to guide models of globular cluster formation and
evolution. If refuted, the community may refocus its efforts to develop models
that fully explain the chemical and dynamical properties of globular clusters in
the Milky Way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also result in the
development of a new introductory course that explores the connections between
heavy elements forged in ancient stars and the nuclear weapons that have shaped
global politics over the last few generations. This course would reach a broad
audience of undergraduates at the University of Michigan, including many
students who are not majoring in one of the STEM disciplines. The course will
introduce students to the role of science in the public arena, articulated
specifically through the compelling story of how stardust from ancient
supernovae became the key ingredient in the nuclear arms race. This will
increase scientific literacy, enhance public engagement with science and
technology, and improve the preparedness of future leaders.