* 1613884
* EAPSI: Identifying Fungi Associated with the Ancient Conifer Agathis Australis and Testing their Potential as Biological Control Agents against Harmful Pathogen
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Lauren Jackson, Jackson                 Lauren         W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Kauri (Agathis australis) are economically and culturally important trees that
are native to New Zealand and are currently threatened by a devastating soil
pathogen that causes a disease known as kauri dieback. In collaboration with Dr.
Maj Padamsee of Landcare Research in Auckland, New Zealand, who has expertise
working with kauri dieback and fungi that associate with kauri, this work aims
to (1) identify beneficial fungi that associate with the roots of kauri; and (2)
evaluate their potential to inhibit infection or slow the progression of the
pathogen. The network formed to complete this work will be beneficial for
professional development and future international collaborations. Findings from
this research have the potential to improve control methods for kauri dieback
and diseases caused by similar pathogens such as sudden oak death, soybean root
rot and cocoa black pod disease that threaten economically and culturally
important trees in other regions around the globe.

Agathis australis (Araucariaceae), commonly referred to as kauri, is an ancient,
long-lived, economically important and culturally significant conifer that is
endemic to New Zealand. Kauri have been reduced from 1.6 million hectares to
only ca. 7500 hectares since European arrival and the remaining trees are
currently threatened by Phytophthora agathicida, an oomycete pathogen that
causes a devastating collar rot known as kauri dieback. Padamsee and colleagues
characterized mycorrhizal associations with kauri roots and found evidence of
dark septate endophytes (DSEs) also being present in association with the roots
via microscopic analyses. The scope of the present work is to (1) identify
kauri-associated DSE fungi at the species level by sequencing their internal
transcribed spacer (ITS) regions; and (2) evaluate the potential of DSE fungi to
inhibit vegetative growth and spore germination rates of P. agathicida via two
in vitro inhibition assays. Results from this investigation may serve as the
basis for biocontrol methods that can be applied to kauri dieback and other
important diseases that are caused by Phytophthora spp.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.