* 1613048
* Laminar Neural Field Models for the Visual Cortex of the Brain
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Paul Bressloff, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project is focused on developing improved insights into the functioning of
the primary visual cortex of the brain. This is the first region of the cerebral
cortex (the convoluted part of the brain responsible for higher cognitive
function in primates) to receive and process visual information from the eyes.
It can be viewed as a two-dimensional sheet of millions of brain cells (neurons)
communicating with each other via electrical signals. The electrical activity
patterns of these neurons encode information about a visual image, which is then
processed by other regions of the brain, resulting in the visual perception of a
dynamically changing three-dimensional world. Visual information is often
represented by spatially structured or coherent activity patterns. Understanding
the mechanisms that underpin the origin and maintenance of these dynamical
patterns is not only important for understanding the normal functioning of the
visual brain, but also the occurrence of pathological states during epileptic
seizures and migraines. One of the major challenges in neuroscience is
determining how the wiring of the visual brain contributes to the generation of
cortical activity patterns. The investigator has developed mathematical models
of the primary visual cortex based on models that describe the generation and
spread of electrical activity across the two-dimensional cortical sheet. Recent
experimental studies indicate, however, that the laminar or layered structure of
the primary visual cortex plays a crucial role in the production of these
activity patterns. This research project, which is part of a larger
collaborative program with the Moran Eye Center at the University of Utah, aims
to extend previous mathematical models in order to take into account the laminar
structure and determine how it affects a range of spontaneous visual phenomena.
The main focus of the collaboration is to use a combination of neurophysiology,
anatomy, and computational modeling to understand the functional architecture of
the primary visual cortex and its role in visual processing. The Moran group is
currently developing the use of light to control genetically modified cells and
virus labeling techniques in order to understand the fine-structure of the
visual cortex, which will be used to refine the mathematical models. The
underlying idea linking the two projects is that the neural circuits used in the
mathematical models to understand spontaneous activity are the same as those
used to explain observations of the normal response of the cortex to visual
stimulations. This project promotes scientific progress in the interdisciplinary
field of mathematical neuroscience and vision and contributes to the
interdisciplinary training of graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of the primary visual cortex
involves the construction and analysis of continuum neural field models, in
which the large-scale dynamics of spatially structured networks of neurons is
described in terms of nonlinear, integro-differential equations. A major
advantage of working with neural fields is that powerful methods from the
mathematical theory of nonlinear partial differential equations can be adapted
to analyze such models. Almost all previous studies of neural fields have
ignored the fact that the cerebral cortex has a laminar structure, with neurons
in distinct layers often having distinct stimulus response properties and
participating in distinct circuits. There is also extensive coupling between
layers via so-called vertical connections. In this project the laminar neural
field models will be used study two important examples of spontaneous visual
phenomena, namely, binocular rivalry waves and visual hallucinations. One
possible mechanism for the latter is based on the idea that some chemical or
physical disturbance can destabilize the visual part of the brain, inducing a
spontaneous pattern of cortical activity. The geometry of the resulting
hallucination thus reflects the intrinsic architecture and symmetry of the
visual cortex. Analyzing such patterns can provide further insight in how the
brain processes images in normal vision. Binocular rivalry is the phenomenon
where perception switches back and forth between different images presented to
the two eyes. The resulting fluctuations in perceptual dominance and suppression
provide a basis for non-invasive studies of the human visual system and the
identification of possible neural mechanisms underlying conscious visual
awareness.