* 1614290
* EAPSI: Comparing Food Webs on Natural and Man-Made Shorelines in Sydney Harbor
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Eliza Heery, Heery                   Eliza
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Shorelines in coastal cities are heavily modified by introduced, man-made
structures. These structures support novel assemblages of marine organisms, but
their impact on marine food webs is unknown. This project will use modern
chemistry techniques to characterize marine food webs on natural and man-made
shorelines in Sydney Harbor. The study will be conducted under the guidance of
Dr. Emma Johnston, a pioneer in studies of urban marine ecosystems, who has
advanced the field through an extensive publication record and a strong
commitment to communicating science to the public. Findings from the study will
provide insight into the effects of urban shoreline development on food web
complexity and the ecological goods and services that marine ecosystems provide.

We will use stable isotope analysis to compare trophic linkages within two types
of urban marine habitats: hard-bottom substrates (man-made seawalls versus
natural rocky shorelines) and soft sediments (where artificial structures have
been added versus where they are absent). Research on these habitats in Sydney
Harbor is unparalleled compared with other coastal cities; this will allow the
researcher to develop conceptual food webs and identify key species for stable
isotope analysis based on past literature prior to collecting tissue samples.
Selected organisms will be collected from random quadrats and sediment cores at
three sites in Sydney Harbor and their tissue will be analyzed for carbon and
nitrogen ratios using a new elemental analyzer at the University of New South
Wales. The researcher will use mixing models to determine the relative trophic
position of each organism sampled and derive trophic webs and isotopic niche
calculations. Resulting quantified food webs will then be compared between
habitat types to evaluate the effect of man-made shorelines on food web
relationships and ecosystem complexity.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.