* 1614375
* EAPSI: Investigating the role of a Putative Lipid-Binding Protein in Hormonal Signaling and Control of Lifespan in the Worm C. Elegans
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Dena Block, Block                   Dena
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The fundamental question of why we grow old has puzzled humans for thousands of
years. Widely-accepted evolutionary theories of aging have postulated that aging
results from organisms? universal need to reconcile survival and reproduction
under changing environmental conditions. However, how animals modify their
physiology according to environmental inputs remains unclear. The roundworm C.
elegans is an excellent model organism in which to address this question, as it
is short-lived and has a genome that can be relatively easily manipulated. The
project will investigate a member of the transthyretin-like protein family,
TTR-1, which has an unknown function, but is known to affect lifespan in C.
elegans. This work will be conducted at Nagoya University in Japan, in the lab
of Kunihiro Matsumoto, an expert in cellular signaling in C. elegans. The
project will provide new insights into the functions of a virtually
uncharacterized gene family and advance knowledge of reproductive control of
stress responses and aging.

Trade-offs between reproduction and maintenance of the soma are a general
feature of organismal physiology reflecting choices in energy allocation and
affecting stress resistance and lifespan. How organisms coordinate the complex
interplay between environmental inputs, metabolism, stress response, and
reproduction remains unclear. Members of the transthyretin-like (ttr) gene
family of the nematode C. elegans have been shown to respond to stress and
affect lifespan, but the actual roles of these proteins in worm physiology
remain elusive. While little is known about ttrs in C. elegans, the single
vertebrate transthyretin is a carrier of lipophilic vitamins and hormones. The
project will investigate the function of one ttr, TTR-1, by evaluating which
types of lipids TTR-1 can bind in vitro. The project will shed light on a gene
family of unknown function and its potential role in integration of stress
response and lifespan by hormonal signaling.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.