* 1614640
* Saturation Physics: NLO Precision and Quasi Collectivity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Alexander Kovner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 309,858.00

The study of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory describing the fundamental
interactions between quarks and gluons, the most fundamental constituents of
nuclei, represents an area of intense inquiry in nuclear physics. In particular,
QCD is called upon to describe the behavior of matter under extreme conditions
of temperature, pressure, and density, and precision calculations are needed to
compare quantitatively experiments and theory. In this context, the PI and his
collaborators will develop accurate calculational methods that will allow
searches of exotic forms of matter predicted to occur in highly energetic
proton-proton and lead-proton collisions currently studied at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Switzerland. This project includes also educational and outreach activities: the
PI will organize a workshop for graduate students from universities in the North
East. Mini-courses on aspects of high energy/heavy ion physics will be organized
for faculty involved in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At very high
energies the structure of strongly interacting particles (hadrons) is believed
to undergo a qualitative transition. Instead of dilute objects containing
several quarks and gluons, they should rather resemble a drop of saturated
liquid densely filled with gluons. This must lead to very different
characteristics of final states in high energy collisions. The theory that
qualitatively describes this behavior is the perturbative saturation or Color
Glass Condensate (CGC). At current LHC energies one expects this new phase to
have been already attained. Indeed many observations point to some sort of
collective, or quasi collective behavior in the final state of the proton-proton
and proton-lead collisions, especially when the number of produced particles is
larger than average. In this context, the PI and his collaborators will
contribute the development of a program for systematic improvement of current
calculational paradigms of saturation effects. This involves first, systematic
resummation program in the high-energy evolution equation, the so-called JIMWLK
equation in order to stabilize it at next-to-leading order (NLO). The resummed
evolution then will be applied to a variety of hadronic observables consistently
calculated at NLO. In addition, the PI will study in depth to what extent the
structure of initial CGC state can lead to quasi collectivity in the state
produced in p-p and p-A collisions.