* 1614562
* AF: Small: Extending algorithms for topological notions of similarity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Erin Chambers, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 301,821.00

How would you measure the closeness of two signatures or two clay figurines?
This project explores the mathematics and computation of measuring similarity
between curves or 3-dimensional objects -- whether to compare GPS tracking data
to road maps, or medical scans of internal organs to reference models of healthy
organs. While some well understood comparison methods simply look at how close
the objects are, this project aims to design more sophisticated measures that
take into account the underlying structure (or topology) of the curves and
surfaces. The PI plans to collaborate with applications areas that use these
measurement algorithms to develop measures that best fit the areas, in addition
to continuing her work in a larger network of shape analysis and computational
topology communities, including organizing workshops focused at mentoring junior
women in these areas.

This project generalizes notions of similarity from curves to graphs, meshes,
or 3-manifolds. The primary problems and techniques come from the emerging field
of computational topology, which combines algorithms and computational geometry
with mathematical foundations and tools from the area of topology. In
particular, the PI proposes to examine fundamental topological notions of
similarity between curves and surfaces in some ambient space, based on computing
optimal homotopies, homologies, or isotopies. Each possibility offers a
different notion of what it means for two things to be equivalent in the ambient
space, and each can be optimized based on the notions of area, "height," or
"width." While several initial algorithmic results on these measures have been
published, there are many open questions that remain. In addition, recent
mathematical developments indicate many potentially tractable and feasible areas
that are yet to be explored from the algorithmic perspective. Some of these
measures are likely to be hard to compute, which is of interest to the
theoretical community, and approximation or fixed parameter tractable algorithms
may prove practical in applications areas. The project will also include
collaborations in applications areas for these measures, in order to better
evaluate their utility.