* 1614279
* EAPSI: Developing a Semantic Attributes Learner through Machine Learning Approaches
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Diana Kim, Kim                     Diana          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project aims to prove that machine learning approaches in computer vision
can discover two key components of fine art classification: first, how humans
recognize and classify different visual styles for a target object, and second,
what semantic visual attributes they use to finalize their classification
decision. Working with a large data set of fine art paintings, the project will
investigate a computational procedure to identify a list of word descriptions of
different visual styles that is interpretable to humans and is further valid to
encode all styles of painting. It can be difficult to provide objective grounds
that necessarily determine a visual style: even for the art expert, it is not
easy to explain why Claude Monet?s Poppies is classified as impressionist based
on its attributes. If the computational algorithm automatically finds semantic
attributes determining visual styles that are recognizable to human observers,
the result will provide scientific analysis of the human visual perceptual
process which is known to be complex to specify. After stabilization, the
algorithm will generate annotations describing visual styles for a massive image
data set without expensive human work. This data set will be useful data set for
future computer vision research. This project will be conducted in collaboration
with Professor Seung Wan Hwang in the Data Intelligence Lab at Yonsei University
in Korea. Professor Hwang has devised qualitative and quantitative methods to
find semantic attributes through data pattern analysis.

This award supports a research study to design an attributes learner algorithm
from datasets that will enable classification of fine art painting styles, and
produce extended datasets containing valuable features of the art work that can
be annotated automatically via learned attributes generators. Rather than an
expensive training set of annotations to learn the attributes of interest, the
PI will design a learner which automatically harvests attributes without human
supervision. This approach eliminates the need for a predefined (and potentially
subjective) vocabulary of semantic attributes which require expert annotation.
The project will use numeric high dimensional data gotten through a Deep
Artificial Neural Net (ANN) model. The ANN model is trained through a big image
data targeting art style inference. With the unsupervised deep architecture that
correlates images and textural data through a shared hidden layer, it is
expected that the hidden layer?s positive or negative variables will be
interpreted as informative attributes. The data set will include some amount of
redundant and hard-to-decipher information, so it requires compression and
translation to human-interpretable concepts. Since available ground truth
information of the data set is limited to authors, year, and art style,
cooperative work with the hosting researcher will focus on the extraction of
pattern information between the ground truth information and numeric data. There
has been similar research work related to feature extraction in academia, but
regarding the new subject of Fine Art style and unsupervised attributes
learning, this research will be innovative.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.