* 1614218
* Water, Drought and Snowpack Monitoring in the United States Using the EarthScope Plate Boundary Observatory GPS Network
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Adrian Borsa, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2019
* USD 520,000.00

Changes in water storage in aquifers, soils, lakes and glaciers cause the Earth
to deform elastically in ways that can be detected using the Global Positioning
System (GPS). We propose to study this water- related deformation at GPS
stations in EarthScope?s Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) and use these
observations to estimate the variation of water loads over the continental
United States. Given the longstanding importance of water and drought in the
West, and the threat of climate change to water security across the entire USA,
improvements in direct monitoring of the water cycle are of great social and
economic relevance. By providing new data on water storage and the water cycle,
this work has the potential to make a significant and positive impact on water
management in the United States, in addition to improving the underlying
science.

The goal of this work is to combine GPS load estimates with mass change
estimates from NASA's GRACE satellite mission and independent information about
hydrological systems and their boundaries to develop improved models for water
redistribution. This study puts special emphasis on the all- important snowpack
estimates for the Sierra Nevada and Rocky Mountains, and drought impacts on
groundwater changes in California?s Central Valley and other principal aquifers
in the USA. Specifically, over the next three years, we will: 1) reprocess all
daily GPS position data to generate reliable series of seasonal and nonseasonal
displacements; 2) correct all time series for offsets, transient displacements,
and known atmospheric/oceanic loads; 3) invert for the spatiotemporal water
loading across the continental USA; 4) constrain GPS mass changes with lower-
resolution data from the GRACE mission to develop better estimates of water
fluxes; 5) investigate mass changes of vulnerable mountain snowpack and
groundwater aquifer systems in response to the current western USA drought; and
5) publish the results of this work as a set of data products and accompanying
methodology for use by scientists and for possible operational use by water
managers.