* 1614294
* EAPSI: Evolution and Biogeography of an East Asian-North American Distribution in Sedges, a Hyper-Diverse Group of Flowering Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jenna Dorey, Dorey                   Jenna
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Sedges (genus: Carex) are one of the five largest genera of flowering plants,
and the most diverse plant genus in the temperate zone. Sedges, with an
estimated 2100 species, are an ideal group for examining questions about broader
patterns of biodiversity and evolution due to 1) high species diversity in the
genus, 2) speciation driven by microhabitat specialization, and 3) restricted
ability for physical dispersal. Within this genus, a clade of about 60 species
in sections Laxiflorae, Paniceae, Limosae, and Bicolores are distributed widely
across North America and Eurasia, with two centers of biodiversity in the
eastern United States and Japan. The project will utilize a combination of
molecular systematics and biogeographic methods to reconstruct the evolutionary
relationships of these sedges and model their geographic range shifts through
time. The award will allow the researcher to travel to Japan to sample East
Asian sedges, including narrowly distributed Japanese endemics. Laboratory work
will produce DNA sequences that integrate with data previously generated by the
principal investigator for North American sedges. This is a collaborative
research project with Dr. Takuji Hoshino, a plant systematist and sedge expert
at the Okayama University of Science.

During the research in Japan, DNA will be extracted from the collected silica-
dried leaf samples. Six DNA sequence regions will be targeted and amplified by
PCR. The generated DNA sequences will be edited with Sequencher, then aligned
manually and with the program MUSCLE. BEAST, a Bayesian program for phylogenetic
analyses, will be used to reconstruct a combined character phylogeny and perform
divergence dating by calibrating node ages with fossil data. The research will
test the hypothesis that the clade was once widespread throughout a continuous
forest in the Northern Hemisphere, and that the present-day patterns of
diversity are due to recent species radiations in both eastern North America and
Japan. This work will investigate role that Beringia played in shaping patterns
of diversity in the present-day flora, and examine long-term range shifts in
dispersal-limited flora due to changes in climate and environment.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.