* 1614475
* RUI: Probing Subatomic Physics Via Lepton Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kevin Giovanetti, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

This award will support the Particle and Nuclear Physics group at James Madison
University as a key contributor to state-of-the-art research in intermediate
energy nuclear physics while providing an outstanding educational experience for
undergraduate students. The group's research is focused on exploring the
structure of the basic building blocks of matter, protons and neutrons. It is
known that protons and neutrons are composed of three interacting quarks but the
mechanisms that produce and govern the evolution of multi-quark systems are not
fully understood. The group will address this by scattering photons from protons
and neutrons to detect and analyze the resulting particles. The group is also
involved in measuring fundamental properties of the muon, which can be thought
of as a heavy electron. The Particle and Nuclear Physics group at James Madison
University group has an established track record of strong undergraduate student
involvement in research. This award will provide enhanced educational
opportunities for students as well as significant outreach activities, promoting
science and educating beyond the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The members
of the group are spokespersons on two experiments approved to run at Jefferson
Lab. One of these experiments was identified is currently scheduled to run in
March 2017. The group is also an important contributor to the BONuS12
experiment, which was identified as a high priority Jefferson Lab experiment,
and is currently scheduled as the second physics experiment to run using the
CLAS12 detector in Hall B. The main activities for the duration of this proposal
include commissioning detectors built by the group for Jefferson Lab,
participating in data taking and analysis for various Jefferson Lab experiments,
as well as installation and commissioning of the g-2 detector at Fermilab. The
members of the JMU-PNP group will continue their R&amp;D detector work for
future nuclear physics experiments. This work, carried out in the group's labs
at James Madison University, will augment the group's capabilities and expertise
in scintillator-based detectors and associated readout electronics.