* 1614045
* EAPSI: Analyzing Sediment-Associated Zinc Nanoparticles in Aquatic Food Webs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Brittanie Dabney, Dabney                  Brittanie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Nanoparticles are used in personal care products and industry. They also form
naturally from mining. The release of nanoparticles into aquatic ecosystems is
rapidly increasing and receiving attention due to the potential environmental
and human health risks. However, little is known on the risks that influence
toxicity of nanoparticles. In collaboration with Dr. Shosaku Kashiwada, an
expert in the field of environmental nanoscience, at the Research Center for
Life and Environmental Sciences at Toyo University, this project will determine
the fate of nanoparticles through an aquatic food chain from insect to fish. The
uptake of metal nanoparticles from sediments and its potential impacts on the
aquatic food web is not fully understood. This missing information is crucial as
many fish species feed on sediment dwelling insects. Importantly, understanding
the transfer of metals to fish will provide a resource for the public and policy
makers to determine the risk of consuming fish from metal contaminated
environments and the economic implications.

Zinc-nanoparticles are the focus of this research because of the high
concentrations of zinc at metal-contaminated sites in the U.S. and in Japan.
Zinc is also a significant contaminant of concern to regulatory agencies in both
countries. Applications in applied ecotoxicology, gene expression and bio-
imaging will be used to measure the trophic transfer of zinc nanoparticles in
sediments in the laboratory. The proposed research is a novel approach for the
growing practice of using gene expression to answer ecological questions. A
field colonization experiment will also be conducted at a site impacted by metal
contamination to identify the insects tolerant to metals and to quantify metal
transfer up the food chain. The field study will fill in knowledge gaps needed
to model the fate of metal nanoparticles in the aquatic food chain while
addressing broad ecological questions about the usefulness of species traits in
predicting effects of environmental stressors.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.