* 1614298
* EAPSI: Controlling Gas Evolution and Natural Convection to Optimize the Current Distribution and Energy Efficiency of Electrochemical Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Brian Chmielowiec, Chmielowiec             Brian
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Electrochemistry provides a clean and efficient way of producing structural
metals at industrial scales. Electricity can be used to produce metal and oxygen
or sulfur gas from raw ore whilst avoiding the emissions associated with
traditional carbon coke-based production methods. This project seeks to
understand how bubble evolution (whether oxygen or sulfur gas) affects the
distribution of current across the anode (oxidizing electrode) in an
electrochemical cell. Electrochemical engineering principles will be applied so
that the results will be applicable to a wide variety of chemical systems and
geometries. This research will be performed in collaboration with Professor
Takayuki Homma at Waseda University and Professor Toshiyuki Nohira at Kyoto
University, both of whom have great expertise with interfacial characterization.
The findings will be critical designing more energy efficient electrolysis
reactors.

This project will utilize the high speed camera capabilities at Waseda
University to observe directly the production of electrolytic bubbles and
correlate the effect on the current density distribution. Magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) convection will serve as a tool to enhance mass transfer at the anode
surface. Confocal laser scanning microscopy at Kyoto University will be used
additionally to characterize the interfacial phenomena. Experimental results
corresponding to different values of the mass Rayleigh number (Ram) relevant for
metal sulfide electrolysis will be analyzed with previously developed
computational methods within the Japanese labs. By developing a correlation
between mass transfer and current density distribution, this project will aid in
the design of more efficient electrolysis reactors with the industrial scale in
mind.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.