* 1614964
* On the Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems in Applied Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Konstantina Trivisa, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 295,001.00

The analysis of multiphase flow models, such as models governing fluid-particle
interaction and evolution of cells, is relevant to several practical
applications in engineering and in physical and biomedical sciences. This
project focuses on issues of stability, uniqueness and regularity, and numerical
approximations for nonlinear models. In particular, the projects include
analyzing systems involving moving domains or free boundaries and systems with
stochastic forcing. The project includes undergraduates, graduate students, and
post-doctoral associates in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project focuses on the modeling and mathematical analysis of nonlinear systems
arising in physical and biological science and addresses themes in two
interconnected directions: (a) hydrodynamic models within moving domains and
free boundary problems, and (b) random perturbations of models of compressible
fluids and multiphase flows. The mathematical analysis of these nonlinear models
requires innovative ideas for the construction of suitable schemes for the
approximation of their governing systems, as well as the development of new
analytical techniques for the proof of well-posedness and convergence results in
light of special features of the models that arise in applications. The goal of
the project is the development of a variational framework able to treat a large
class of multi-phase flows both analytically and computationally. The nonlinear
systems under investigation include models of compressible fluids governed by
the Navier-Stokes and Euler systems, Euler-kinetic fluid models, mixed-type
hyperbolic-elliptic systems within fixed or moving domains, and free-boundary
models.