* 1614942
* Does Proximity of Hydraulic Fracturing and Wastewater Disposal to Basement Increase the Likelihood of Induced Seismicity in the Central and Eastern US?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Brudzinski, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2020
* USD 358,584.00

Does Proximity of Hydraulic Fracturing and Wastewater Disposal to Geologic
Basement Rocks Increase the Likelihood of Seismicity in the Central and Eastern
US?

Over the past decade, the increased use of enhanced oil and gas recovery
operations is thought to be largely responsible for a dramatic rise in
earthquakes in the in the Central and Eastern US. However, some areas that have
experienced such an increase, such as in Pennsylvania and North Dakota, appear
to have little if any earthquakes related to these operations. This study seeks
to better understand these geographic differences by examining whether the
subsurface proximity of oil and gas operations to geologic basement rocks
promotes earthquakes. Located a few miles below the surface, the basement is
comprised of igneous and metamorphic rocks that can contain numerous ancient
faults. Both hydraulic fracturing and wastewater disposal operations result in
deep fluid injection occurring close to the basement may have the potential to
reactivate these basement faults, producing earthquakes. This study seeks to
test this idea by improving earthquake detection, refining knowledge of how deep
the basement is, and comparing these to the geographic location, depth, and
timing of oil and gas operations. In particular, the researchers will apply new
processing of seismic data to better detect small earthquakes, compile detailed
records of well operations from state databases, and produce regional basement-
depth maps across the Central and Eastern US. To accomplish these goals, this
project will leverage new approaches to developing large-scale undergraduate
research involvement. This project will also increase knowledge transfer with
geologic surveys, state regulators, and the oil and gas industry. The
researchers will continue to build on a track record of public outreach
including proactive dissemination and discussion with the news media considering
the national debate over hydraulic fracturing.

To improve the detection of induced seismicity, this research will first employ
a template matching approach that has successfully discerned induced from
natural earthquakes. This research will also utilize an emerging technology for
detecting the repetitive microseismic swarms commonly associated with induced
events, without requiring a previously cataloged earthquake as a template. These
approaches will be employed on seismic stations throughout the Central and
Eastern US and will provide a more uniform detection of induced seismicity. To
improve basement depth characterization, this research will integrate recently
constructed basement maps, particularly those by state geological surveys and
regional compilations. Deep wells will also help characterize geology between
injection/hydraulic fracturing target intervals and basement to determine if the
mechanical properties of these subsurface rocks may influence the occurrence of
induced earthquakes. This project will actively engage state geologic surveys in
the Central and Eastern US to accomplish the project goals. In some cases our
research will benefit from existing basement, geologic, or seismicity
characterizations performed by state geological surveys and other agencies. In
other cases we expect to generate and contribute this information to these
institutions. Geologic surveys are also key communicators to the general public,
so this research will capitalize on the opportunities to integrate new results
from this project with existing educational resources that these state surveys
already provide. This project will also utilize new undergraduate curricular
structures to introduce foundational research concepts early in a student?s
college career to engage a larger number of students in research project such as
this one. Mentoring will be formalized to establish thematic research teams
focused on the project goals. The results will be disseminate with and beyond
the academic community, continuing to engage industry and regulators as well as
the general public.