* 1614573
* Genetic variation in transcriptional, proteomic and metabolic responses of S. cerevisiae to herbicides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Gallagher, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2019
* USD 257,855.00

This proposal is to study the evolutionary changes that have been occurring in
wild yeasts in the last several decades. Yeast are one of the oldest
domesticated organisms, but it was only recently that wild yeasts resistant to
herbicide Roundup became known. The highest levels of resistance are observed in
the strains collected from agricultural soils that have been treated with
Roundup in the last 40 years. In depth genetic analysis of six strains
definitively showed that resistance is achieved in a different way from what is
observed in Roundup-resistant plants. State-of-the-art genome sequencing
technologies will be applied to study the genetic changes that have caused these
adaptations to a chemical that is not observed in nature. The project will be
done with the help of 6-12th grade students from rural West Virginia schools,
science outreach programs at WVU Arboretum and Upward Bound (a TRiO program), in
which citizen scientists will find and study yeasts from their own
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to identify
genes that vary in S. cerevisiae strains with different resistance to
herbicides. The working hypothesis is that Roundup resistance is linked to
polymorphic regions of the genome that have been selected for by exposure to
Roundup. The approach to addressing this question is to map Quantitative Trait
Loci (QTL) responsible for herbicide resistance by using recombinant haploid
collections between sensitive and resistant strains. With the high-throughput
sequencing approaches, responsible gene products will be identified, most likely
in chorismate metabolism, small molecule transport and possibly other pathways.
The collection of isolates and their preliminary characterization will be done
through several outreach and citizen-science initiatives.