* 1614133
* EAPSI:Rapid, Smartphone-based Paper Assay Fabrication for Sensitive and Specific Detection of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Soohee Cho, Cho                     Soohee
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In summer 2015, the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
outbreak compromised South Korea, spreading rapidly due to high-density
population and humid environment. Patients are quarantined while monitored by
lab-based methods, which are laborious, expensive, and requires days for cross-
validated results. A rapid diagnostic tool that detects MERS-CoV with high
sensitivity and specificity is crucial for preventing further outbreaks. This
project aims to fabricate rapid assays that can detect MERS-CoV Spike protein.
Spike protein has gained recognition as a high research priority target and
serves as a positive mimic for the virus. Smartphone-based analysis enables
point-of-care (POC) diagnostics without requiring laboratory expertise and
resources. This collaborative project will be performed with Dr. Seungjoo Haam
at Yonsei University, South Korea. Dr. Haam has conducted extensive research on
fabricating light-sensitive nanostructures that are target-specific, which is
critical for efficient detection of MERS-CoV.

This project includes fabrication of a rapid, POC microfluidic paper analytical
device (µPAD) for sensitive and specific detection of Spike protein. µPADs have
gained momentum as an advantageous lab-on-a-chip that makes disease diagnostics
cost-effective, are operable by non-experts, and with rapid assay time within 30
s. The PI has expertise in µPAD fabrication and antibody-conjugation on
submicron particles for pathogen detection from bio-complex matrices by
measuring optical signal change from smartphone-based analysis. However, the
optical signal change can be greatly enhanced by the use of Spike protein
antibody conjugated to gold nanorods (GNRs), which are light-sensitive and
respectively exhibits near-infrared absorbance for a long period upon
irradiation. The synergistic product of PI?s µPADs and the collaborator?s GNRs
may result in a highly effective lab-on-a-chip system, that enables rapid, POC
detection of Spike protein with improved sensitivity and specificity that is
unbound to clinical or poor-resource settings. Future work may include detection
of other respiratory diseases, such as H1N1 influenza.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.