* 1614769
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Caching and Coding for Media Delivery in Next Generation Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jaime Llorca, Nokia of America Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Providing services such as voice, web, cloud computing, social networking, video
on demand, live streaming and augmented reality requires the ability to globally
handle massive amounts of data, which must be efficiently processed, stored, and
delivered to end users. The medium of delivery is shifting from wireline to
wireless; it is predicted that mobile traffic will account for nearly two-thirds
of the total data traffic by 2018 and nearly three fourths of the mobile data
traffic will be video by 2019. This puts a tremendous pressure on the limited
wireless bandwidth and necessitates revolutionary approaches that exploit
alternative resources available in the network. Motivated by the decreasing cost
and abundance of storage capacity, this project considers joint design of
storage and transmission schemes for the efficient delivery of video-based
services over next generation heterogeneous wireless networks, by specifically
taking into account the unique nature of video content and the wireless
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish this ambitious task, the
work is organized into the three research thrusts that develop next generation
of wireless caching networks for video delivery:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Thrust 1:
Fundamental limits and practical schemes for cache-aided video
delivery:&lt;br/&gt;This thrust takes into account properties of video
applications and their associated requirements for efficient and robust caching
and delivery techniques particularly suited for such demands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Thrust 2: Video delivery over future cache-aided
heterogeneous wireless networks:&lt;br/&gt;This thrust builds upon the
foundations developed in Thrust 1 and expands the cache-aided video delivery
schemes to consider and take advantage of heterogeneous wireless channel
conditions and network topologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Thrust 3: Technology
validation and experimentation: This thrust includes proof-of-concept
prototyping efforts to validate the designs developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the activity in
this project will include significant enhancement of video delivery mechanisms
over wireless channels beyond the current state of the art. This of key
importance since the total global mobile traffic was about 885 petabytes per
month at the end of 2012, and is expected to keep increasing. As the storage
capacity becomes cheaper, the techniques developed in this project will be able
to alleviate the spectrum crunch by trading off memory for bandwidth. Industry
outreach and dissemination will be done through Bell Labs Nokia and other
industrial partners at NYU. The PIs are committed to and have an excellent track
record in increasing participation of as well as mentoring women and
underrepresented minorities in the STEM fields. This grant will help to support
these efforts.