* 1614065
* EAPSI: Real-time 3D Reconstruction for Autonomous Underwater Manipulation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Katherine Skinner, Skinner                 Katherine      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The focus of this project is to develop and test algorithms to enable an
underwater robotic system with a manipulator to sense, recognize, and retrieve
an object from the seafloor, in real-time, with no user input. This work will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Stefan Williams of the Australian Center for
Field Robotics (ACFR) at the University of Sydney, Australia. Dr. Williams is an
expert in the field of perception and navigation for underwater robotics, and
ACFR has vehicles and facilities ideal for carrying out this work. Several
applications of this work include deep-sea scientific sampling and exploration,
and construction and maintenance of offshore equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop novel methods for real-time underwater
perception to enable autonomous intervention in aqueous environments. Methods
will be developed for real-time underwater 3D reconstruction using input stereo-
vision imagery for the application of autonomous grasping underwater. These
novel methods will be validated through testing on a remotely operated vehicle
(ROV) equipped with stereo-vision cameras and a single function manipulator. The
main goals will be to visually reconstruct an object on the seafloor in real-
time and then pick up that object. Results of the 3D reconstruction will be
compared to laser-acquired ground truth and through observing the interaction
task with an external set of cameras to determine effectiveness in grasping.
Ultimately, the results will demonstrate closed loop grasping underwater, a
fundamental task for autonomous intervention, which is necessary for
applications such as deep-sea scientific sampling and maintenance of offshore
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.