* 1614093
* EAPSI: Reducing Uncertainty in the Simulation of the T2K Neutrino Particle Beam
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Andrew Cudd, Cudd                    Andrew         B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Neutrino physics are poorly understood currently. This project seeks to enhance
our understanding of these fundamental particles using the T2K (Tokai to
Kamioka) experiment to make precise measurements of neutrino properties.
Neutrinos are produced by accelerating a beam of protons to high energies and
then colliding them with a target. The T2K measurements depend on the properties
of this proton beam and how it interacts with a target. The properties of the
beam are studied with physical measurements and computer simulation. These
simulations are important for predicting and assessing the observed behavior of
the proton beam. This project will improve neutrino beam simulations for the T2K
experiment by incorporating new advancements in simulation technology to improve
accuracy, and by incorporating new physics data collected by other experiments
to improve precision. These improvements will enhance the accuracy of the
measurements made by the T2K experiment. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Tetsuro Sekiguchi, the leader of the T2K beam group, of
the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) in Japan.

The T2K neutrino beam simulation currently is built using a custom framework
utilizing the FLUKA and GEANT Monte Carlo simulation packages. Part of this
project will involve migrating the beam simulation to an updated version of
GEANT and then testing and validating its performance. The performance of the
neutrino beam simulation is tuned and checked against experimental data, which
needs to be updated when new and more precise data sets are available. Recent
data sets from the NA61/SHINE experiment are available and will be used for this
purpose. Finally, this project will involve the calculation of new correlated
systematic uncertainties between the two T2K near detectors to allow for both
new and more precise measurements of neutrinos to be made by T2K.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.