* 1614403
* EAPSI: Computation of Wishart Eigenvalue Distributions for Multi-Channel Passive Radar Detection
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Scott Jones, Jones                   Scott
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Passive radars seek to perform the same detection and characterization of
targets as an active radar, with the key difference that passive systems do not
transmit a signal. Instead, passive radars rely on electromagnetic radiation
already present in the environment to illuminate targets, typically from sources
such as radio, cellular, and television transmitters. In order for the system to
decide if there is a target traveling at a particular velocity at a given angle
and range, sophisticated models of the target and noise signals are employed to
construct an optimal test statistic. This research seeks to use analytic and
geometric methods to enable computation of noise models in multiple receiver
passive radar systems in collaboration with Professor Vaughan Clarkson at the
University of Queensland, who has significant experience in the areas of
detection and estimation theory. The University of Queensland also offers the
unique opportunity to test these models with data drawn from a single frequency
network, in which area Professor Clarkson's group has particular expertise.

In a multiple channel passive radar system, data vectors are measured at each
receiver. When no signal is present, it is assumed that the data is identically
distributed zero mean complex white Gaussian noise; this noise is considered
additively in the case of a present signal. It has been shown that the optimal
test statistic for presence of a rank one signal in such a system is the largest
eigenvalue of the Grammian matrix constructed from the measured data. This
Grammian matrix has a complex Wishart distribution, and closed form expressions
exist for the largest eigenvalue distribution. However, expressions for the CDF
involve taking the determinant of matrices with terms taking the form of ratios
of gamma functions with large integer arguments, which overwhelm floating point
representations for cases of practical interest. This project will utilize
results expansions in terms of partial inner products with orthogonal
polynomials to produce a factorization of this matrix to make computation
tractable. Following completion of the theoretical portions of the work, single
frequency network data gathered by the University of Queensland will be used for
experimental tests.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.