* 1614531
* Collaborative Research: Quantum cascade laser sources of high-power, coherent frequency combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Alexey Belyanin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2019
* USD 174,951.00

Abstract title: Compact, high-power semiconductor laser sources of coherent
frequency combs for fast and efficient molecular detection

Abstract: Non-technical: The objective of the project is the development of
compact, practical, high-power semiconductor laser sources of coherent frequency
combs in the mid-infrared spectral range. The combs work as rulers in frequency
space, providing fast and accurate readings of frequencies of molecular
vibrations. These frequencies can serve as unique identifiers of different
molecules. Therefore, the proposed laser sources will enable ultra-broadband and
fast molecular spectroscopy, which has a wide range of applications in trace gas
environmental monitoring, pharmaceutical quality control and remote detection of
biochemical agents. The project will explore a new mechanism of frequency comb
generation, which is based on coherent pulsations in quantum cascade lasers. The
project will be pursued as a collaborative effort between the team members at
Harvard and Texas A&M University and in collaboration with world-leading
spectroscopy experts from Europe. This will create unique inter-disciplinary and
multi-cultural education, research, and outreach opportunities for all involved
students and researchers.

Technical: The objective of this collaborative research is to develop high-power
semiconductor laser sources of coherent frequency combs in the mid-infrared
based on continuously pumped quantum cascade lasers. The field of quantum
cascade laser mode locking and frequency combs has seen rapid expansion over the
last three years, due to contributions of the proposing team and several other
groups. However, so far broadband phase-coherent combs have been demonstrated in
lasers of special design in a narrow interval of currents near threshold.
Ultrafast gain relaxation presents a fundamental obstacle to most mode locking
techniques. The proposing team will focus on a new route to frequency combs
through coherent Rabi oscillations, which result in parametric generation of a
phase-coherent "supercomb" of modes separated by terahertz frequency intervals.
The resulting harmonic mode locking is equivalent in time domain to amplitude
modulation at terahertz frequencies comparable to the gain relaxation rate. This
new mechanism of frequency comb generation is entirely phase-coherent and
intrinsically operates high enough above threshold, yielding high power per
mode. The project will pursue several strategies of utilizing the Rabi mechanism
for generation of stable, high-power, and broadband combs using standard high-
performance laser chips.