* 1614266
* EAPSI: Developing a Fast, Nano-Scale Wideband Spectrum Analyzer for GHz Frequency Analysis and Novel Computer Logic Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Steven Louis, Louis                   Steven
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will take important steps towards developing a new instrument that
can perform spectrum analysis considerably faster, with lower power, and with a
physically smaller size than any current technology. This science and
engineering research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhongming Zeng,
a noted expert in experimental magnetization dynamics research at the Suzhou
Institute for Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics (SINANO) in central China. This
collaboration will accelerate progress in this research program by providing
access to cutting-edge experimental nanotechnology facilities and leaders in
experimental nanotechnology techniques.

The goal of this project will be to develop a prototype ultra-fast broadband
spectrum analyzer using a nano-sized spin valve or magnetic tunnel junction as a
Spin Torque Nano-Oscillator (STNO). The project will leverage two important
properties of STNOs: firstly, that they can serve as extremely sensitive,
frequency selective microwave detectors, and secondly that their selective
frequency can be tuned by varying the STNO bias current. The PI will develop
theoretical and numerical models to describe the dynamic properties of STNO
microwave detectors when influenced by a linearly modulated bias current. As Dr.
Zeng is a world leading specialist in experimental spin torque microwave
detection and SINANO has extensive experimental resources, collaboration between
the host and the EAPSI fellow is well justified. This project has the potential
to advance understanding of dynamic magnetization in magnetic nanostructures
through investigating the phase locking properties of an STNO in the presence of
a modulated bias current. Currently, understanding of phase locking in non-
isochronous systems presents a challenge to scientist in many fields, including
biology, chemistry, medicine, geology, astronomy, etc. As this STNO study
represents a unique opportunity to discretely study synchronization in non-
stationary systems, the analytical and experimental results will likely provide
new universal insights into physical synchronization mechanisms.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.