* 1614189
* EAPSI: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Correlation Studies for Identification of Water and Polymer Populat
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Sarah Mailhiot, Mailhiot                Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The mobility of fluid and the structure of viscoelastic substances such as gels
is important to human health and many key industries. One example of a gel is
articular cartilage, the tissue that lines joints and allows for efficient
motion such as walking. This study conducts nuclear magnetic resonance
correlation studies to characterize the fluid mobility and pore structure of a
model cartilage, aiming to identify water and polymer populations in a complex
biopolymer system. The information will improve understanding about the
relationship between polymer systems and water in a viscoelastic substance.
Although these studies focus on cartilage models, many mammalian tissues and
many commercial applications are dependent on water and polymer diffusion and
how they interact, suggesting potential broad impact to the work. The project is
a collaboration with Dr. Petrik Galvosas at the McDiarmid Institute for Advanced
Materials and Nanotechnology at Wellington University in New Zealand and enables
a U.S. graduate student to learn new techniques to expand her skillset as an
experimentalist.

Articular cartilage is a mammalian tissue that is not connected to the blood
stream and is therefore dependent on molecular mobility of water for nutrient
flow and survival. It is also a complex heterogeneous, anisotropic, polymer
composite composed of fluid, collagen, and proteoglycans. This study will used
Pulsed Field Gradient (PFG) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to characterize the
internal structure of a model cartilage, collagen hydrogels, as a function of
collagen content. This information is critical to understanding the structure-
function relationship of articular cartilage, and in general, gels. The findings
will be applicable to fields such as drug development, animal range sciences,
and plant physiology.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.