* 1614673
* ArcticDEM Production
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Michael Willis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2020
* USD 28,494.00

The project will use the sustained, petascale computing capabilities of Blue
Waters to construct the first high-resolution (2m), high-quality (&lt;5m
uncertainty), and openly distributed digital elevation model (DEM) set of all
Arctic land masses above 60 degree N, including all of Greenland, Alaska, and
Kamchatka. Such a DEM set is needed for measuring and understanding rapid,
ongoing changes to the Arctic landscape resulting from climate change and human
use, as well as mitigation and adaptation planning for Arctic communities.
Resources for obtaining and maintaining the imagery, tools for post-processing
the results, software development time, and methods for distributing the DEM
have been secured. The compute time used on Blue Waters is needed to provide DEM
coverage of the entire Arctic. DEMs will be provided at no cost to the science
community and public at large, and will fulfill the United States' commitment to
its Arctic partners as part of its tenure as chair of the Arctic Council.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of a comprehensive, fine-scale Arctic DEM
will transform the Arctic research community and Arctic society. The DEMs will
provide time-stamped observations of ice extent and ice surface height and can
be examined within the context of changing environmental forcings. The detail of
the DEMs will allow the evolution of supraglacial hydrology to be examined down
to the level of individual lakes and streams. As published recently in Nature,
surface subsidence caused by subglacial hydrological changes will also be
available for study (I. M. Howat et al. 2015; Palmer, McMillan, and Morlighem
2015; Willis et al. 2015). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the extent of
Arctic DEM almost exactly matches the extent of permafrost in the northern
hemisphere, so the DEM set will make it possible to examine major thermokarst
changes and periglacial hill slope evolution. Examination of the static,
dynamic, macro- and micro-surface topography of permafrost regions is a major
recommendation of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to
enable&lt;br/&gt;further understanding of how permafrost regions and their
trapped carbon are responding to a warming climate (National Research Council
2014). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the DEMs will enable detailed
examination of coastal evolution, highlighting shoreline erosion at constant
rates and in response to extreme events such as a shoreline ice-shove, or ivu.
Changing distribution of lake size and location (and possibly depth) and river
and delta morphology will be apparent in the data set, with ramifications for
wetlands, ecosystems, and wildlife management and sustainability. Ice/volcano
interactions, process geomorphology, tectonic geomorphology, plate boundary
interactions, fault expressions, fault evolution, glacial geomorphology, and
solid earth geodynamics derived from bending lake shorelines will all be
provided from the new data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, atmospheric science
pursuits such as the study of microclimates, valley-scale atmospheric dynamics
and foehn winds will use the new fine-scale topographies for downscaled or
micro-region atmospheric models. Communities are also likely to use the DEMs to
anticipate and address permafrost impacts, rising sea level, floodplain
delimitation and disaster management.