* 1614216
* Socio-Environmental Science Investigations Using the Geospatial Curriculum Approach with Web Geospatial Information Systems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Anastasio, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,199,794.00

This project will advance efforts of the innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM-cognate intensive workforce of the
future. This project will develop, implement, and evaluate a series of
innovative socio-environmental science investigations (SESI) using a geospatial
curriculum approach with STEM-related mentoring that will provide economically
disadvantaged students in the 9th grade of the Building 21 school in Allentown,
PA with technology-rich geospatial learning experiences to develop STEM-related
skills. The project will focus on social issues related to environmental
science. This project uses a design partnership among Lehigh University natural
science professors, social science professors, education professors, the STEM
Valley Mentoring Coalition, Building 21 science and social studies school
teachers, the Allentown city government, and PPL Corporation to develop
geospatial investigations with Web GIS (Geospatial Information Systems) that
will prepare students with skills, and career awareness, to motivate them to
pursue appropriate education pathways for STEM-related occupations.

Despite the accelerating growth in geospatial industries and congruence across
STEM, few school-based programs integrate geospatial technology within their
curriculum, and even fewer incorporate STEM-related mentoring to promote
interests and aspirations in related occupations. The project will contribute to
educational research infrastructure by producing a series of instruments to
measure the development of STEM-related skills in the context of SESI
investigations, students' perceptions of mentoring experience, STEM career
motivation, and STEM interest for use with high school students who are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM-related disciplines and careers. The
project also promotes a unique community-based partnership with university
scientists, social scientists, educators, a science center, and STEM mentors
that involve high school students in the research and decision-making process
about local environmental problems. The learning activities will provide
opportunities for students to collaborate, seek evidence, problem-solve, master
technology, develop geospatial thinking and reasoning skills, and practice
communication skills that are essential for the STEM workplace. The project will
enable researchers to (1) examine how SESI and mentoring increases students'
interest in STEM and their motivation to pursue STEM-related careers, and (2)
analyze how the geospatial curriculum approach when combined with STEM-related
mentoring can improve STEM-related skills with students under-represented in
STEM.