* 1614394
* EAPSI: Characterizing Regenerative Cells during Central Nervous System Regeneration in Marine Acorn Worms
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Shawn Luttrell, Luttrell                Shawn          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Central nervous system (CNS) regeneration remains on the forefront of scientific
research after decades of study. Progress and advances have been made, however,
many of the cellular mechanisms controlling CNS regeneration continue to be
elusive. Millions of people suffer from debilitating neurological defects, like
Alzheimer?s and Parkinson?s disease, spina bifida, epilepsy, and spinal cord
injuries, to name a few. Furthermore, aging and age related diseases eventually
affect everyone. Regeneration may slow the aging process and stem cells, which
have the potential to become any type of cell in the body, including nerve
cells, present one feasible way to combat neural diseases and injuries. The goal
of this project is to determine whether bona fide stem cells are elaborating
missing tissue during regeneration in marine acorn worms. Some species of acorn
worms, like Ptychodera flava, completely regenerate their entire CNS after
amputation. Understanding the mechanisms for regeneration in acorn worms may
yield clues to unlocking regeneration in other animals with limited CNS
regeneration, including humans. I will be working with Dr. Yi-Hsien Su at the
Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology at Academia Sinica in Taiwan on
this project. She routinely collects and uses this animal for biological
studies. Her lab specializes in gene networks regulating animal body plan
evolution, development, and patterning using molecular techniques that target
specific genes and cell types. This project may be a springboard that could give
insights for new stem cell therapies and nerve regeneration in humans.

Acorn worms, also known as hemichordates, are marine, invertebrate deuterostomes
and sister group to the echinoderms. Acorn worms have a tripartite body plan
with an anterior proboscis, a middle collar region, and a long posterior trunk.
As deuterostomes, hemichordates share several morphological and developmental
features with the chordates. The solitary hemichordate, Ptychodera flava, has a
hollow, dorsal neural tube that develops in a very similar fashion to the
chordate neural tube. Upon amputation, P. flava reliably regrows their entire
neural tube and anterior head-like structure in about two weeks. No chordate has
been shown to have this ability. Our lab has shown that extensive cell death and
cell proliferation are activated during anterior regeneration in P. flava. It is
not known whether bona fide stem cells are proliferating in this animal or
whether somatic cells are de-differentiating and then becoming multi-potent to
generate new structures. To help confirm the origin and identity of
proliferating cells in P. flava, I will stain non-regenerating animals with
antibodies raised against a hemichordate vasa protein. Vasa is a marker for
germline stem cells across numerous animal phyla. Vasa is also expressed in some
non-germline, multi-potent stem cells. I will also use in situ hybridization
with the stem cell markers, c-Myc, pax6, and alkaline phosphatase. If expression
of these markers co-localize with staining of vasa protein in non-germ cells,
this will support a hypothesis of bona fide stem cells in P. flava. If this is
confirmed, P. flava presents an exciting model to study the molecular mechanisms
of stem cell recruitment and specification during central nervous system
regeneration in the deuterostomes. Further experiments will be required to prove
that the stem cells can self renew and also differentiate into other cell types
during regeneration.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.