* 1614496
* Collaborative Research Connected STEM Promoting STEM Education through Connected Devices and Building Automation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Max Hibbs, Blinn College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2019
* USD 214,710.00

This project will advance efforts of the innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will answer questions about: 1) the
effectiveness of experiences to promote competency, motivation, and persistence
for productive participation in STEM; 2) how to engage teachers to use and
integrate technology related to STEM careers; and 3) the role industry plays in
motivating students to pursue STEM careers and preparing teachers to support
STEM career awareness. The project will promote junior high and high school
students' interest, skills, knowledge, and career aspirations in engineering
through authentic engineering design activities related to building automation.
The approach is to use connected devices (known as the internet of things) and
additive manufacturing (3D printing) as the basic technological learning tools
to be used by the junior high and high school students. The project will
acquaint students to these new technologies in which the workforce of the future
will need to be comfortable working with these connected devices, how new
manufacturing processes work, and understanding the role these technologies can
play in the modern enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the
combination of teacher training, community outreach, industry support, and
community college partnership to promote STEM careers among junior high school
and high school students. The project plan consists of three main activities: 1)
the incorporation of authentic design activities related to building automation
and supported by industry professionals into junior high and high school
classes; 2) the creation of summer programs for junior high school students to
create connected devices; and 3) the creation of a dual credit course to be
offered in high schools for community college credit using examples from
building automation. The project will systematically evaluate the effect of
authentic experiential learning activities related to engineering design on
students' interests, skills, knowledge, and career aspirations. The work will
also examine the effectiveness of a teacher professional development program in
preparing teachers to implement authentic engineering design activities. Both
the university faculty and industry representatives as collaborators, the
project will examine the role these other professionals play in helping teachers
overcome any doubts or apprehension they have in engineering design instruction.
The project will allow a diverse group of students to learn about new
technologies and STEM careers through authentic experiential learning activities
and the participation of industry will allow students to better understand what
engineers do and why math and science are critical to these technical
professions. The project partners with the Houston Independent School District
(HISD), the largest school district in Texas and the 7th largest in the United
States, and the proposed work will have significant impact with HISD and their
62% Hispanic and 25% African-American student population, allowing an
underserved populations to learn about potential careers in STEM.