* 1614246
* Regularity Problem on Two Models from Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 207,184.00

Wu&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1614246&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies two
well-known partial differential equations modeling geophysical fluids: the
surface quasi-geostrophic equation and the magneto-hydrodynamic equation.
Partial differential equations are fundamental tools in understanding many fluid
phenomena, and they have played pivotal roles in many practical applications.
The surface quasi-geostrophic equation models large-scale motions of atmosphere
and oceans such as frontogenesis, the formation of sharp fronts between masses
of hot and cold air. The magneto-hydrodynamic equation models electrically
conducting fluids in the presence of a magnetic field, such as plasmas, liquid
metals, and electrolytes. This project focuses on the fundamental problem of
whether physically relevant solutions to these equations are globally regular
for all time or they develop singularities. Studying this problem for the
surface quasi-geostrophic equation leads to a better understanding of the
formation and evolution of violent meteorological phenomena such as
thunderstorms and tornadoes. Study of the magneto-hydrodynamic equation sheds
light on the singular behavior of magnetic reconnection and magnetic turbulence.
Magnetic reconnection refers to the breaking and reconnecting of oppositely
directed magnetic field lines in a plasma and is at the heart of many
spectacular events in our solar system, such as solar flares and northern
lights. Graduate students are involved in the work of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project addresses a number of fundamental
problems concerning the surface quasi-geostrophic equation and the magneto-
hydrodynamic equation, including the issue of whether classical solutions of
these equations can develop finite-time singularities. Effective techniques and
unconventional approaches are developed to understand the nonlinear and
potentially singular and turbulent dynamics of these models. In addition,
extensive numerical computations are carried out to simulate the evolution of
various solutions, to provide insight into the perplexing behavior of solutions
to these equations. The project integrates research with education and training
of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars.