* 1614151
* EAPSI:Investigating an Unknown Sensory Structure in Eastern Leaf-dwelling Praying Mantises
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Sydney Brannoch, Brannoch                Sydney         K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The role sensory systems play in mediating an organism?s environment is critical
to developing our understanding of how information is perceived and processed. A
potentially new sensory organ, the furcasternal tubercle, was discovered within
a family of leaf-dwelling praying mantises (Mantodea, Iridopterygidae) that
reside on the undersides of broad-leaf vegetation, a unique ecological niche
within Mantodea. This research seeks to uncover the environmental information
that the sensory organ encode. The work will be conducted in collaboration with
Drs. Marie Herberstein and Kate Barry, prominent researchers in ethology and
ecology, at Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia. The characterization of a
novel sensory organ will provide further insights into neural systems as they
relate to ecological niche specialization.

Preliminary investigations of the furcasternal tubercle revealed that it is
surfaced with a variable number of articulating surface hairs, suggesting a
mechanosensory function, and histological sectioning uncovered the presence of
neural tissue within the structure. Behavioral and neurophysiological assays
will be conducted to determine what behaviors the furcasternal tubercle
modulates; extracellular recordings from the neural tissues within the structure
will conclusively demonstrate the neural activity generated when the structure
is stimulated. This research seeks to uncover the furcasternal tubercle?s
physiological role within the context of the group?s unique habitat use.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.