* 1614408
* EAPSI: Moving Toward High-Efficiency, Cost-Effective Tandem Solar Cells through Real-time Study of Novel Substrate Preparation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Calli Campbell, Campbell                Calli          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

To meet the needs of a growing society, the clean, abundant power produced by
solar energy holds tremendous promise. To scale up this powerful energy source,
solar conversion efficiency must be maximized while manufacturing cost must be
minimized. Optimization of tandem solar cell technology has the ability to cause
a beneficial disruption in current commercial-scale solar energy research and
production, resulting in higher efficiency, lower cost power. Tandem solar cells
feature a stack of semiconductor materials. This unique configuration enables
the absorption of more sunlight than one just material alone. Chemical surface
pretreatment techniques will aim to reduce the thermal and time budget of the
preparation of Silicon (Si) substrate surfaces in order to grow Indium Gallium
Phosphide/Silicon (InGaP/Si) tandem solar cells with an optimized and cost-
effective light-collecting configuration. Silicon is already a relatively cheap
and very manufacturable semiconductor material which is efficient at collecting
longer wavelength sunlight. Simplifying the growth on top of Si of high-quality
indium gallium phosphide (which collects higher wavelength light) will make this
tandem solar cell technology more scalable to industrial applications. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Masakazu Sugiyama of the
Integrated Photonics Institute at the University of Tokyo.

Metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) growth of Gallium Phosphide (GaP) on
silicon has been studied for several decades with the goal of providing a
suitable surface with which to grow high-quality indium gallium phosphide
(InGaP) in order to achieve InGaP/Si tandem solar cells with a 1.7 eV/ 1.1 eV
configuration for optimized sunlight absorption. Few researchers have been able
to produce GaP films with low dislocation densities, notably device-efficiency
degrading anti-phase boundary (APB) defects, on silicon substrates. Silicon
surface preparation involving vapor etching and surface passivation are non-
equilibrium processes and are thus very dependent upon time. Without real-time
analysis, important dynamic processes can be misunderstood and overlooked.
Recent advancements in Si(100) surface preparation for APB-free GaP thin film
growth has been greatly facilitated by real-time data provided by reflectance
anisotropy spectroscopy (RAS) techniques. This study will be an in-depth look at
RAS as it enables in-situ, real-time surface-sensitive analysis of the Si(100)
dimerized surface undergoing preparation and subsequent GaP layer-by-layer
epitaxial growth.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).