* 1614423
* EAPSI: Reconciling Overprediction of Liquefaction-Induced Damage in Christchurch, New Zealand by Considering Spatial Variability
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Sean Munter, Munter                  Sean           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Widespread soil liquefaction during the events of the 2010-11 Canterbury
Earthquake Sequence caused severe damage to the infrastructure and economy of
Christchurch, New Zealand. Liquefaction occurs during earthquake shaking in
sandy and silty soils, prevalent in the Christchurch region, and is
characterized by strength loss resulting in ground deformations that can damage
buildings, roads, pipelines, etc. In certain areas of Christchurch, conventional
methods for assessing liquefaction damage potential tended to overpredict
damages expected from these earthquakes; a common characteristic of these areas
is the presence of thin liquefiable soil layers that are interlayered with non-
liquefiable soils. Through collaboration with Dr. Misko Cubrinovski of the
University of Canterbury in Christchurch, this project will utilize available
field and laboratory data to perform numerical modeling of several sites with
such interlayered soil deposits. Dr. Cubrinovski is an expert in geotechnical
earthquake engineering and has been involved extensively in post-earthquake
reconnaissance and research in Christchurch. The results of this work and the
knowledge gained will provide a foundation for improved methods and guidance for
evaluating liquefaction damage potential. Previous work by the researcher has
shown that in deposits of finely interbedded liquefiable and non-liquefiable
soils, ground deformations can be limited by the non-liquefiable soil when
pockets of liquefiable soil are laterally discontinuous. This is not considered
in conventional methods, which are one-dimensional. The modeling to be performed
will involve using a geostatistical approach along with available site data to
build stochastic two-dimensional subsurface models of the sites and then
performing dynamic analyses using ground motion records from the earthquakes.
The intent is to see if inclusion of spatial variability in stratigraphy
explains why liquefaction did not lead to damaging ground deformations for the
shaking levels produced by the earthquakes. The issue of overprediction of
liquefaction-induced damages has great significance, as the conventional methods
for assessing damages are widely used in engineering practice around the world.
As such, this work not only contributes to the ongoing recovery of Christchurch
but also has an impact on assessment of liquefaction hazards in general.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.