* 1614105
* EAPSI: Exploring the Causes and Consequences of Extreme Spine Evolution in a Diverse, Widespread, and Ecologically Dominant Group of Spiny Ants
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Benjamin Blanchard, Blanchard               Benjamin       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Why are some species successful in their environment, while others are rare? Why
do some groups of species persist over evolutionary time, while others go
extinct? My project will address these questions using a diverse genus of ants
called Polyrhachis, which is found throughout tropical Africa, Asia, and the
Pacific Islands. This group of species varies greatly in physical structure:
some species have many very long spines while others have short spines, or no
spines at all. In order to determine how these spines impact the evolutionary
and ecological success of this group, the principal investigator will conduct
research at the Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Gardens (XTBG) in collaboration
with Dr. Cao Min and Dr. Akihiro Nakamura. Several species of Polyrhachis will
be collected and various measurements taken to determine the association between
extreme spine length evolution and the rate of species generation, using a
published tree of life for the genus. Competition trials to test the impact of
spines on ecological interactions will also be conducted. The results of my
project with contribute to our understanding of the success of this widespread
and environmentally important group of ants.

Morphological traits are often linked due to underlying genetic, developmental,
or functional constraints; this phenomenon is called 'integration'. Integration
may allow for increased adaptability and specialization or instead constrain the
adaptability of a species and limit the rate of speciation, thereby influencing
evolutionary dynamics. Here, a highly speciose and morphologically diverse genus
of ants, Polyrhachis, is used to determine causal forces driving and potential
constraints on morphological evolution and the rate of speciation in the group.
In collaboration with Dr. Cao Min and Dr. Akihiro Nakamura, professors at the
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Gardens (XTBG), the PI will collect ants in
three tropical locations in Yunnan, China, and identify, image, and measure
specimens in the lab at XTBG. Furthermore, preliminary interspecific competition
trials with live ant specimens will be conducted. The results of my project will
inform theories about the ecological causes and evolutionary consequences of
morphological specialization.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.