* 1614252
* EAPSI:Investigating a Nonparametric Method to Predict Longevity of Engineering Monitoring Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Geoffrey Schuette, Schuette                Geoffrey       H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

As systems in engineering continue to become larger and more complex in nature,
real time condition monitoring of such systems continues to be an important area
of study in order to more accurately predict system failure and develop systems
to prevent catastrophic consequences. Using probability and statistics tools,
this research will develop a robust method to predict long term conditions of
the systems being analyzed and to do so under conditions of unknown prior
distributions. The research will be conducted under the mentorship of Professor
Ming-Yen Cheng of National Taiwan University.

In the Bayesian approach, prior distributions are assumed, and posterior
distributions are then established from assumptions of the prior and the model.
Hence, we can find the probability via the appropriate threshold failure time
and access the long-term condition of the system. When the prior is unknown,
however, it is then important to be able to estimate the prior from samples
generated by the signal time. The focus of this research proposal is to fit the
unknown prior distribution with a smooth empirical distribution function based
on kernel function and sequence of bandwidths to estimate the unknown prior
distribution. The research will be conducted under the mentorship of Professor
Ming-Yen Cheng, a noted statistician of National Taiwan University Department of
Mathematics.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.