* 1614204
* EAPSI: Urban Microclimate Monitoring in Seoul, Korea: Identifying and Investigating Fine-Scale Heat-Health Relationships
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Alexandria Herdt, Herdt                   Alexandria     J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The city of Seoul is the 6th most densely populated city in the world, and has a
growing metropolitan area. The increasing density has enhanced the urban heat
island (UHI) effect over the last four decades. This UHI along with projected
warming over the coming century will cause heightened energy use and heat
stress. Changes to the built environment can provide heat adaptation strategies
and improve urban sustainability, helping human health and the economy of the
city. Quantifying the complex urban environment at human scales of exposures
with mobile and place-based measurements is needed to address these issues and
guide climate adaptation in large, growing cities. The goal of this project is
thus to quantify intra-urban air and surface temperatures on days of extreme
heat, and map these and other meteorological variables to identify, at a fine-
scale, the locations of increased risk of heat stress and hazards that will
impact human health. This research will be conducted at Seoul National
University in collaboration with Dr. Joon Kim and Dr. Kyu Rang Kim of the
National Institute of Meteorological Sciences, both noted experts in urban
microclimate processes.

The proposed research will determine the locations of the highest surface
temperatures in the neighborhood of Gangnam in Seoul, Korea, and link urban
surface characteristics with measured ambient variables of radiation, surface
temperature, and air temperature. Within these hot urban microclimates, the
human energy budget will be modeled using the COMFA energy budget model to
predict heat stress, and fine-scale heat stress hazards will be identified and
mapped. In major metropolitan areas, such as Seoul, pinpointing the zones where
an individual is at escalated risks of heat-related illnesses or surface burn
hazard provides important information to focus mitigation and adapting
strategies to lessen energy use and protect human health. Such multi-scale
modeling of urban and neighborhood ambient environments is one of the major
frontiers of mathematical geosciences and the interdisciplinary perspectives
will advance the fundamental knowledge of fine-scale urban surface
micrometeorology.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.