* 1614289
* EAPSI: Toward Cosmic Expansion in the Framework of Supergravity Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Chien-I Chiang, Chiang                  Chien-I
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Due to the attractive nature of gravitational interaction, one would expect that
our universe is expanding at a decreasing rate. Nevertheless, observations have
shown that our universe is undergoing accelerating expansion at present era, and
there is much evidence to indicate that a much more rapid expansion occurred in
the primordial universe. Even though many phenomenological models have been
proposed, the physical origin behind these mechanism is yet unknown. In
particular, what kind of particles is responsible for the expansion? Is it
possible to accommodate these particles with all other particles that have been
discovered so far under a unified theoretical framework? With Prof. Hitoshi
Murayama, a leading expert on supersymmetry, supergravity and particle physics
cosmology, and with other potential collaborators at Kavli Institute for the
Physics and Mathematics of the Universe at Tokyo, Japan, the awardee will
attempt to extend our understanding of these fundamental questions under the
theoretical framework of supersymmetry, which is a potential candidate that can
unify all known interactions in particle physics.

The accelerating expansion of our universe at current the era is often
attributed to an exotic form of particle/field called dark energy. From the
phenomenology point of view, a scalar field with a sufficiently flat potential,
named quintessence, could describe dark energy. In this project we aim to
construct a quintessence dark energy model that couples to the supersymmetric
Standard Model of particle physics, in the framework of supergravity. When
combining quintessence model with supersymmetric model of particle physics,
generically the flat potential of the quintessence will be spoiled by the
supersymmetry breaking. We therefore consider a form of Kahler potential that
sequesters the particle physics and quintessence sector, inspired by the brane-
world scenario. We will then attempt to build a model based on this and
investigate various observational constraints.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.