* 1614429
* EAPSI: A Developmental Analysis Across Cultures: Asymmetries in Blue-Yellow Color Perception in Infants and Adults
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Kara Emery, Emery                   Kara           J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Individuals can vary widely in their experience of color. Whether these
differences are more closely tied to innate differences in the brain or to
experience and learning remains actively debated. Recent studies in adults show
systematic biases in the perception of blues and yellows and also striking
differences in how they perceive these colors in images. This project will use
behavioral measurements to examine whether these perceptual differences are also
present in infants, and explore the potential role of development and experience
in color perception. The research will be conducted at Chuo University in Japan
in collaboration with Dr. Masami Yamaguchi, a noted expert in infant perception.
With the paradigms designed in Japan, data will also be collected in the United
States to explore cross-cultural factors. The results of this project will help
reveal how both visual sensitivity and color appearance are shaped by experience
and the timescales of these effects.

Human observers show a reduced sensitivity to blue and yellow compared to other
hues. This sensitivity bias is postulated to represent an adaptation to the
natural environment, which varies predominantly in blue and yellow. Individuals
also show ?higher-order? differences in how they experience blue and yellow,
with the bluish tints more likely to be attributed to the lighting than the
object. This may again reflect a learned property of the world (e.g. that
shadows tend to be bluish). Little is known about how these effects develop, and
this project will explore this development by testing for parallel color biases
in infants. At Dr. Masami Yamaguchi's lab, preferential looking techniques are
used to investigate the color perception of infants, and this project will use
this technique to evaluate color sensitivity and appearance in infant observers.
Results from infants and adults in the United States and Japan will be compared
to inform whether the blue-yellow axis asymmetry is also influenced by the
observer?s specific visual environment.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.