* 1614460
* Research in Strong-Interaction Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Perry, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 630,000.00

The strong interaction is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons
into atomic nuclei. Improved quantitative understanding of how this happens is
essential not only for fundamental nuclear research at US experimental
facilities but for progress in astrophysics, for experiments on the nature of
neutrinos, and for applications to energy and homeland security. An era of
precision calculations of nuclear structure and reactions is underway, enabled
in part by research results from previous NSF grants to the PIs. Tools and
diagnostics that have been developed will be applied to confront a range of
issues raised by this progress. These issues include improving the description
of forces and other inputs for microscopic calculations of nuclei, applying new
methods to assess the theoretical uncertainties, and improving the extraction of
information from experiment that minimally depends on model assumptions. The
training received by undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
research associates in carrying out the proposed activities contributes directly
to the building of a diverse scientific workforce. The mix of analytical and
numerical computation thethe students and postdocs must employ is excellent
preparation for both academic and industrial research, which is validated by the
strong track record of past members of the group.

Particular issues to be addressed by this project include robust uncertainty
quantification, parameter estimation for effective field theory (EFT),
consistent operators for EFT and renormalization group (RG) methods,
understanding regulator artifacts, formulating many-body power counting,
explicating the role of high-momentum/short-distance physics (including short-
range correlations), and extracting process-independent quantities from
experiment. Projects will apply to inter-nucleon interactions, few-body and
many-body systems, and electroweak probes. Specific tools to be used include
Bayesian statistical methods for EFT, basis extrapolation methods, analysis of
many-body contributions, contact (pionless) EFT, and similarity RG (SRG)
evolution. These tools provide interconnections in attacking issues and
extending applications; they will continue to be developed and will be made
widely available. The target applications include Bayesian parameter estimation
and model selection for hadronic and nuclear problems, new SRG generators to
address the growth of many-body operators, consistent knock-out reactions for
few-body systems, and the use of pionless EFT to study operator evolution and
assess perturbative versus non-perturbative approaches. These all contribute to
the goal of model independent, microscopic calculations of nuclei. The projects
will impact forefront problems in low-energy nuclear physics such as the physics
of nuclei far from stability, which is relevant for astrophysics and the
upcoming Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), and at Jefferson Laboratory.