* 1614130
* A Novel Many-Body Method for the Description of Open-Shell Nuclei From First Principles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Heiko Hergert, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This project seeks to find answers to a number of key questions in nuclear
theory: How does subatomic matter organize itself, and what patterns emerge? Are
the fundamental interactions that govern the structure of matter understood?
These are two of the major questions that drive the research efforts in the
field of nuclear physics in years to come. The experimental push towards exotic
neutron-rich nuclei has already forced us to revise our understanding of nuclear
physics, and facilities like FRIB, the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams, will
provide a wealth of new data from isotopes that could not be studied under
laboratory conditions before. In these nuclei, structural changes are driven by
a complex interplay of nuclear forces, the continuum, and strong many-body
correlations which signal the breakdown of traditional single-reference models
of nuclear structure. This has far-reaching implications, e.g., on the half
lives of key nuclei for astrophysical processes, or the limits of nuclear
existence, explaining why O-24 rather than O-28 is the heaviest oxygen isotope
found in nature.

As its name suggests, the Multi-Reference In-Medium Similarity Renormalization
Group MR-IM-SRG) developed by the PI is a novel many-body method that can be
applied to nuclei (or other many-body systems) for which single-reference based
descriptions are no longer an appropriate starting point. Under the current
award, the MR-IM-SRG will be extended to the computation of excited state
properties in medium-mass and heavy open-shell nuclei, including electromagnetic
and weak transition rates. Using state-of-the-art interactions and currents from
Chiral Effective Field Theory (EFT) the PI and his students will investigate the
erosion and emergence of the so-called magic numbers, compute masses and decay
rates relevant for nuclear astrophysics, and study effects like the formation of
neutron skins that constrain the nuclear equation of state. The systematic
improvability of the MR-IM-SRG and the inputs from Chiral EFT will allows us to
control and quantify the theoretical uncertainties of these results. These
efforts will help to identify potential issues in the theoretical framework
through the confrontation with experimental data, and guide experimental efforts
at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and FRIB, as well as
other facilities worldwide. The project will provide partial support for one
graduate student, who will participate in research at the forefront of nuclear
physics, and receive training in high-performance computing.