* 1614267
* EAPSI: Using Amino-acid Isotopes to Investigate Dietary Patterns and Specialization of Bats
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Caitlin Campbell, Campbell                Caitlin        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Knowledge of the diets of animals is critical to identifying the ecological and
evolutionary processes that shape their populations, as well as to developing
effective conservation measures. However, such information is unavailable for
many species because of difficulty in assessing food sources. The research
conducted under this award will integrate bulk nitrogen isotope and compound-
specific (amino-acid) nitrogen isotope data to examine the trophic positions and
dietary breadth of three closely-related, but poorly understood, migratory bat
species (Lasiurus cinereus, Lasiurus borealis, and Lasionycteris noctivagans).
The work will be conducted in the lab of Dr. Naohiko Ohkouchi at the Department
of Biogeochemistry at the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology
(JAMSTEC), which has pioneered the development and application of amino-acid
nitrogen isotope analysis to the study of animal diet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research provides an unparalleled opportunity to advance research
concerning the degree of dietary specialization vs. flexibility of three bat
species of conservation concern. It would also pioneer the application of
established methodologies that not available at the U.S. home institution to a
novel study system (bats). Prior studies differ greatly in their assessment of
the degree of dietary specialization vs. flexibility that these species exhibit.
One reason is that prior studies have been largely based on morphological
analysis of the content of gut and/or fecal material, which is known to only
detect persistent and identifiable prey parts from a recent meal. Stable isotope
analysis overcomes this challenge, because it integrates dietary information
over a longer period. Nitrogen isotope values increase from food source to
consumer, which provides the basis for this approach. However, besides the
trophic status of a consumer, nitrogen isotope values of bulk tissue can also be
influenced by variation in the baseline nitrogen isotope values of a food web.
Thus, I plan to integrate bulk tissue nitrogen isotope data with amino-acid
specific nitrogen isotope data, which will allow me to distinguish such
'trophic' and 'source' effects. Based on (1) preliminary bulk nitrogen isotope
data (collected at the home institution) and (2) existing knowledge of bat diet
and foraging ecology, I hypothesize that the dietary habits of these bats will
indicate varying degrees of specialization and dietary flexibility, as well as
some degree of trophic differentiation. Greater insight into the feeding
behavior and dietary flexibility these species across their ranges would aid
efforts to better conserve them in the context of global environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.