* 1614434
* EAPSI: Using Genetics to Compare Olfactory Imprinting Ability in Hatchery and Wild Salmon from the Pacific Northwest
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Katharine Self, Self                    Katharine      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This award supports research to compare olfactory imprinting abilities of
hatchery and wild salmon from the state of Oregon in the Pacific Northwest
region of the United States. The conflict between hatchery-raised fish and wild-
origin fish has reached a crescendo in the last decade due to the heavy-handed
management and lofty conservation goals both in Japan and the United States.
Salmonid species are culturally important, economically important,
scientifically important and struggling or, worse, disappearing in some
locations. Although Japan and the United States have different modern views of
the value of salmon, both countries have traditionally managed salmon using
hatchery systems and face similar issues today. This study will support an
ongoing effort to understand the underlying mechanisms in salmonid olfactory
systems and, therefore, homing behavior strategies. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hiroshi Ueda who leads a world-renowned lab
at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan where he focuses on the study of salmon
olfactory homing methods.

The study will be based on previous research in the Ueda lab on the involvement
of hormones in olfactory imprinting and homing in chum salmon (Oncorhynchus
keta). The Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) specimens to be used will
be obtained from Western Oregon streams and reservoirs prior to departure. Data
regarding the gene expression levels of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRHa/b)
and an essential subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NR1) will be
measured using information from the prepared brain including the olfactory bulb,
the telencephalon, and hypothalamus. TRH levels have been shown to increase
during downstream migration to the sea, and higher levels of NR1 expression have
correlated with increased stream odor discrimination ability in some juvenile
salmonids native to Japan. This study will allow for comparison of these
findings to the results from salmonid species native to the Pacific Coast of the
United States.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.