* 1614381
* Position-Dependent Space Weather Hazards of Societal Significance in the Earth-Ionosphere Waveguide
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Jamesina Simpson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2017
* USD 8,505.00

The goal of the proposed research is to greatly improve our ability to
understand and predict&lt;br/&gt;space weather hazards to (1) electric power
grids; and (2) electromagnetic wave propagation in&lt;br/&gt;the Earth-
ionosphere waveguide up to ~20 kHz. The methodology of the proposed work is
to&lt;br/&gt;advance and apply detailed, high-resolution Maxwell's equations
models of the Earth-ionosphere&lt;br/&gt;waveguide developed by the project over
the past decade. The project's three-dimensional (3-D) models&lt;br/&gt;uniquely
include such details as the Earth?s complete topography, oceans,
lithosphere&lt;br/&gt;composition, geomagnetic field, and ionospheric plasma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research study is unique as existing
analytical formulations or computational&lt;br/&gt;approaches applied to the
investigated topics above do not solve the complete
Maxwell's&lt;br/&gt;equations while also accounting for all of the 3-D
geometrical details and time variability as&lt;br/&gt;permitted by the project's
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 2008 National Academies report indicates that
extreme space&lt;br/&gt;weather events, "though rare, are likely to occur again
some time in the future." However, a re-occurrence&lt;br/&gt;of an
1859-magnitude CME-driven geomagnetic storm could disrupt today's
human&lt;br/&gt;society to a much greater degree than in 1859 due to the
proliferation of vital but vulnerable&lt;br/&gt;electro-technologies. The first
goal of the proposed modeling is to help individual power
grid&lt;br/&gt;stations understand their specific vulnerability to space
weather. The second goal of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed modeling is to help improve
our understanding of electromagnetic propagation in the&lt;br/&gt;Earth-
ionosphere waveguide under disturbed conditions. Applications that may benefit
from this&lt;br/&gt;work include: remote sensing of the lower ionosphere,
hypothesized electromagnetic earthquake&lt;br/&gt;precursors, propagation from
lightning, geolocation, communications, and even global&lt;br/&gt;temperature
change.