* 1614338
* EAPSI: Comparing pre-service Teacher Motivation in Teacher Preparation Programs in Singapore and the United States to Improve Learning Outcomes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Tracy Arner, Arner                   Tracy          I
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of this project is to create online teacher preparation courses that
include the program attributes and curricula that have made the teacher
preparation program at the National Institute of Education in Singapore an
internationally ranked program. In collaboration with Dr. Zachary Walker,
professor of Early Childhood and Special Education and expert in mobile
learning, existing traditional courses will be adapted into courseware that can
be completed online instead of a traditional classroom. Online courseware will
include rigorous content and development of a learning community in the online
environment. The researchers will identify the instructional strategies,
curriculum design, and student-to- professor, student, content relationships
that will increase and sustain student motivation to learn. The researchers seek
to increase availability of a high-quality curriculum for teacher preparation
without the constraints of the traditional higher education program.

The goal of this project is to create online teacher preparation courses that
include the program attributes and curricula that have made the teacher
preparation program at the National Institute of Education in Singapore, ranked
10th in the world. In collaboration with Dr. Zachary Walker, professor of Early
Childhood and Special Education and expert in mobile learning, the researchers
will identify curriculum elements including instructional strategy, practice
method, and motivational factors. These elements will be used to design
rigorous, asynchronous courseware combined with strategies to develop virtual
learning communities. Researchers will measure elements of student motivation;
specifically, self-regulation, self-efficacy, and goal orientation. Researchers
will also measure readiness for online learning, connectedness, and learning
outcomes at each institution following administration of the asynchronous
courseware developed during the research program. The research outcomes will
increase the rigor, quality, and availability of teacher preparation courseware.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.