* 1614219
* EAPSI: Exploring 3-D DNA Organization and Evolution in a Microbial Eukaryote
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Xyrus Maurer-Alcala, Maurer-Alcala           Xyrus          X
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Over the last few decades, our understanding of how DNA is organized in the
nucleus has evolved from a ?sack? full of chromosomes to a highly ordered
structure. Despite the growing evidence for conserved and adaptive patterns in
how the genome is organized in the nucleus, there are few studies exploring the
relationship of genome evolution and its organization in 3-dimensions. This is
partly due to the way that genome evolution is currently perceived, where
genomic sequences are treated as long linear molecules rather than the highly
folded chromosomes that actually exist inside the eukaryotic cell. In
collaboration with Dr. Meng-Chao Yao, at Academia Sinica, this project will work
with Tokophrya sp. (an unusual microbial eukaryote with ?gene-sized? chromosomes
and a complex life cycle) as the study organism to explore patterns of evolution
and how evolution is reflected in its nuclear
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there are few studies exploring
the evolution of the eukaryotic genome beyond its sequence. Through the use of
molecular tools such as qPCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization, the project
will be able to estimate the actual abundance of different ?gene-sized?
chromosomes, their relative expression, and their position as well. Coupling
these physical properties of Tokophrya with bioinformatic approaches to explore
patterns of molecular evolution such as pairwise distances and codon bias will
provide the basis for a strong comparative study. Previous work in microbial
eukaryotes has helped to demonstrate some ?universal? patterns in nuclear
architecture, such as the organization of DNA into DNA rich regions surrounding
DNA poor corridors. Further work with divergent organisms such as Tokophrya sp.
will provide intimate details about relationship between molecular evolution and
how evolutionary forces participate in the non-random organization of the
3-dimensional genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology
of Taiwan.