* 1614430
* EAPSI: Measuring Public Preferences for Prioritizing Health Services under Taiwan?s National Health Insurance System
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Rebecca Schoon, Schoon                  Rebecca        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

All health systems struggle with unlimited needs for health care, yet limited
resources with which to address them. Under national health insurance systems,
policymakers have recognized the need to include public values in decisions
around distributing funding and other resources across health priorities. Given
the complex nature of these decisions, however, research into how to effectively
measure public preferences is underdeveloped. Measuring community values poses
special challenges since they involve personal opinions that can be interpreted
differently across individuals and communities. This study will test a new
method to promote community participation in health policymaking. The project
will integrate two established methods for measuring community values, Discrete
Choice Experiments (DCEs) and Citizens Juries (CJs), with the aim of maximizing
their respective strengths. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Tsai-Ching Liu, a health economist and chairwoman of the Department of
Public Finance at National Taipei University in Taipei, Taiwan. Advancing these
methods can assist national health insurance systems to better reflect the
priorities and concerns of the populations they serve.

The study?s first objective is to evaluate differences in preferences when
solicited through individual quantitative surveys (DCEs) versus an informed,
dialogue-based group setting (CJs). The second objective is to test
methodological issues in the integration of DCEs and CJs, including issues of
representation and validity. This methodology is innovative in incorporating
three traits that are critical to engaging the public in priority setting: i)
exposing community participants to relevant technical information, ii) testing
ideas and values across community members with diverse backgrounds and
perspectives, and iii) providing quantifiable data compatible with national
priority setting tools. The results of this study will offer an innovative
research framework for the design of health systems that meaningfully represent
community preferences, which is critical for public acceptance in democracies.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.