* 1614028
* EAPSI:The Study of Novel Liquid Crystal Structures for use in Organic Solar Cell Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Eric Carlson, Carlson                 Eric           D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,750.00

Solar cells represent a promising technology to replace fossil fuels due to the
abundance of energy the sun provides to the Earth?s surface every day.
Industrial solar cells currently use inorganic materials which have some
advantages over organic materials; primarily the former are more efficient than
the latter. However, inorganic materials are also expensive, inflexible and
bulky, and are restricted to relatively small area devices. Novel organic
materials can be used to overcome the cost and manufacturing limitations of
current solar cell technologies. One unique organic material?a liquid crystal
structure called a helical nanofilament?will be studied for its potential
effectiveness in solar cell devices. This work will be conducted at KAIST in
Korea with Professor Dong Ki Yoon, a world-leading expert in liquid crystal
alignment techniques.

Liquid crystals have been observed to have excellent organic semiconducting
properties, making them a good candidate for use in organic photovoltaics.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that bent core liquid crystals that form
?nanowire-like? helical nanofilaments can be aligned using various techniques
including convection cooling, substrate surface energy modification, and nano-
confinement. This offers the ability to align these filaments, and composites
containing a second ?guest? material, within photovoltaic devices with relative
ease, potentially leading to more efficient exciton splitting and charge
transport within devices. A first look at helical nanofilaments for use in
photovoltaics will be studied by placing them within an organic field effect
transistor device to extract charge carrier mobility in orthogonal directions,
giving insight to the efficacy of aligned helical nanofilaments in photovoltaic
devices.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.