* 1614148
* EAPSI: Using New Tools in Mantle Geochemistry to Interpret a Nickel Anomaly in Basalt in Niihau Island
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Alexander Valentine, Valentine               Alexander      J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The study of ocean-island volcanic geochemistry is one of the main gateways for
investigating the processes and characteristics of the Earth?s mantle. One
important disputed topic in the field is the enrichment of nickel (Ni) in ocean-
island basalt. This project will attempt to determine the source of this Ni
enrichment by analyzing iron and magnesium (Fe and Mg) isotopes within crystals
of the mineral olivine found in a sample of basalt. Fe-Mg isotopic analysis of
several olivine crystals will be conducted at the University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC) in collaboration with my host researcher, Dr. Fang
Huang. Dr. Huang and several of his colleagues have developed precise methods
for detecting Fe-Mg isotopes in several geologic samples, including olivine. The
outcome of this project will determine the mantle source of Ni enrichment in
olivine at a relatively understudied ocean-island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will analyze olivine crystals in a basalt sample from the Hawaiian
island of Niihau in order to determine the magmatic source for Ni enrichment.
Preliminary data has indicated that the process of Fe-Mg interdiffusion likely
contributed to an increase in Ni at a given magnesium oxide composition in the
sample?s olivine crystals. In order to confirm whether this process contributed
to Ni enrichment, Fe-Mg isotopic analysis of several olivine crystals from the
basalt sample will be conducted using new methods in geochemistry. This analysis
will be performed on a multi-collector inductively-coupled plasma mass-
spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) at USTC. Digital output from these analyses will display
distribution of Fe-Mg isotopes across the diameter of the olivine crystals,
making it possible to infer the source for Ni enrichment at Niihau.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.