* 1614727
* Investigating Digital Badges as Alternative Credentials to Broaden STEM Participation Among Underrepresented Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Wendy Martin, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,293,503.00

The project will develop and research an innovative credentialing process called
Design League Badge Portfolios. (A digital badge, like a badge earned in a scout
troop, is a validated indicator of accomplishment or skill that is housed and
managed online and can be earned in informal or formal environments.) The
process will give underserved youth a technology-supported method for presenting
their Information Communication Technology (ICT) achievements in an out-of-
school program in ways that are personally meaningful and that address the
expectations of higher education institutions. Digital badge systems have the
potential to become alternative credentialing methods. Beginning in the fall of
each school year, high school participants meet weekly for several hours in an
afterschool program that teaches them human-centered design principles and
practices. The youth identify two or three social problems they would like to
take on in a design project. Over the following months, they learn to interview
end users who will benefit from the technology, and to brainstorm and prototype
technological solutions. They use CAD software, 3D printers, microprocessors,
simple motors, building materials, hand tools, and other design technologies to
create, and in some cases code, their prototypes. Students also integrate user,
peer, and expert feedback into their prototypes. The project partners
(Educational Development Center, Mouse, DreamYard Project, and Parsons School of
Design) will redesign the existing Design League badge system, with input from
current and former Design League youth participants, and formalize a procedure
for Parsons administrators (and eventually other higher education institutions)
to endorse badges as admissions credentials in its undergraduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate whether a group of 11th-grade
high school students who engage in at least some of the activities for building
a digital badge portfolio will be more likely than a comparison group of
students who do not to express interest in ICT as a career or academic
opportunity, to persist in ICT-related higher education and employment pursuits,
and to envision themselves in those careers in the near future. The project will
implement design and research in three phases: (1) Program Expansion, Iterative
Development, Formative Testing, and Documentation; (2) Feasibility Testing of
the research instruments and analysis methods adequately; and (3) Pilot Testing
of whether and how the creation of Design League badge portfolios shows promise
of supporting underrepresented youth to persist in STEM and ICT pursuits.
Project research will contribute knowledge to research and development
communities about alternative credentialing methods, particularly for
underserved youth. The research findings will help determine whether digital
badge portfolio systems that bridge out-of-school learning activities and the
college admissions process show evidence of promise as tools to increase
underrepresented youth persistence in STEM activities, at a time when digital
badge and other alternative credentialing systems are proliferating.
Documentation of the collaboration processes among project partners will enable
future partnerships between informal learning organizations and higher education
institutions to create badge systems that can used to assign meaningful
credentials to personally meaningful experiences into college and career
pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program that supports
projects that build understandings of best practices, program elements, contexts
and processes contributing to engaging students in learning and developing
interest in STEM, information and communications technology (ICT), computer
science, and related STEM content and careers.