* 1614171
* EAPSI: Detailed Three-Dimension Simulations of an Unexplored Progenitor System for Type Ia Supernovae
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Malia Jenks, Jenks                   Malia
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Type Ia supernovae are thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars. They are
great cosmic probes because their brightness is almost always the same and can
be standardized empirically. These objects were used to discover the Dark Energy
in 1999, an accomplishment recognized with the Nobel Prize in 2011. However, the
nature of the stars that blow up?the progenitor system?remains a bit of a
mystery. The mass of the white dwarf is increased by accreting material from its
companion star. While Type Ia supernovae have been studied for over 30 years the
progenitor system for these explosions is still disputed. This project seeks to
study one proposed progenitor system that has remained largely unexplored. In
collaboration with Keiichi Maeda, an expert in dynamical explosion models, at
Kyoto University the researcher will create a computer simulation of a Type Ia
supernova from the merger of two white dwarfs of differing masses. This
simulation will explore the case where the less massive white dwarf is tidally
disrupted and accretes onto the more massive white dwarf. This model is expected
to resolve some discrepancies between previous models and observations. A better
understanding of the progenitor system will improve its usefulness to as probes
of the nature of Universe.

This project will create a hydrodynamic simulation of a Type Ia supernova from a
tidally disrupted double degnerate merger. This simulation will be used to test
several properties of this type of explosion. It will explore the range of
possible explosion masses due to spin up. This would allow this model to fit
both Chandrasekhar mass as well as superchandra explosions. This explosion type
should not be easily observable as a supersoft X-ray source, and should be a
nearly spherical explosion. Both of these will make it compatible with current
observational constraints. This model can test the abundances predicted from
this type of explosion and test for the presence of carbon at low explosion
velocities.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.