* 1614420
* EAPSI: Characterizing the Structural Evolution of the Longmen Shan Fault Zone in Eastern Tibet
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Christopher Creason, Creason                 Christopher    G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

On May 12, 2008, a Mw 7.9 earthquake devastated the Longmen Shan region of
Sichuan, China, near the eastern margin of the Tibetan Plateau. The earthquake
resulted in numerous casualties and extensive damage to the regional
infrastructure. Despite decades of research, the tectonic history of this
seismically active region remains poorly understood. This project, by PI C.
Gabriel Creason, seeks to improve our understanding of the geologic evolution of
the Longmen Shan fault zone by better constraining the movement of its major
faults. The project will be a joint effort between the PI and host researcher
Dr. Erchie Wang, a Senior Researcher at the Institute of Geology and Geophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and renowned scientist in the field of Tibetan
geology. The objectives of this collaborative effort are two-fold: 1) construct
geologic-cross sections in order to refine interpretations of regional geology
of the Longmen Shan; and 2) during a two-week field campaign, interpret the
local stratigraphy and structural geology of the area. Additionally, the project
will also serve as a backdrop to strengthen ongoing international collaboration
between research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding when and how the
Longmen Shan region reached its high modern elevation (&gt;5000 m) are intrinsic
questions that underlie broader questions in the fields of tectonic
geomorphology (e.g., characterizing the topographic and structural response of
the Tibetan Plateau to the northward incursion of the Indian continent) and
seismology (e.g., assessing seismic hazard in regions with active tectonics).
Thus, the overarching goal of this research is to reconstruct the magnitude and
kinematics of Cenozoic fault slip along the Pengguan, Biechuan and Wenchuan
faults located within the Longmen Shan. Several geologic cross-sections
demonstrating the tectonostratigraphic framework of these faults will be
constructed with the collective aim to better elucidate the region?s Cenozoic
evolution. Data collected during fieldwork will be used to test for correlations
between Cenozoic deposition of sediments and exhumation of the range-front to
the west, and, subsequently, to assess the possibility of a linkage between
fault motion, exhumation, and sedimentary deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer
research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.