* 1614334
* EAPSI: Investigating 'electricity-generating' Microbial Communities for Enhanced Conversion of Biomass to Hydrogen
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Alex Lewis, Lewis                   Alex           J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will study how 'electricity-generating' microbial communities work
together to convert biomass streams into energy products. The researcher will
use sequencing techniques to investigate the microbial community?' response to
certain operational conditions, and will be combined with other collected data
to effectively characterize it. This project will be conducted at the Japan
Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) under the mentorship of
Dr. Shunichi Ishii, who is an expert in studying microbial communities with a
developed pipeline for sequencing analysis. The resulting data will provide the
foundation for understanding microbial community structure and function, and how
to utilize process conditions to maintain optimal performance. The broader
implications for this research stretch to all bioenergy technologies, where we
are striving to demonstrate the advantages of integrated systems for fuel and
chemical production.

The overall goal of the proposed research is utilize modern metagenomics and
transcriptomics techniques as part of a systems biology approach for
investigating bioelectrochemical systems to uncover the effects of process
parameters and biomass-derived streams on community dynamics. This project will
be conducted at the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology
(JAMSTEC) under the mentorship of Dr. Shunichi Ishii, who is an expert in
studying microbial communities with a developed pipeline for sequencing
analysis. The resulting data will provide the basis for developing process
parameters as a management tool for directing and engineering optimal community
structure, metabolic capacity, and electrochemical performance in a
bioelectrochemical systems. Furthermore, the broader implications for this
research stretch to all bioenergy technologies, where we are striving to
demonstrate the advantages of integrated systems for fuel and chemical
production.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.