* 1614014
* EAPSI:Impacts of Projected Climate Change on Physiological Performance of Coral Reef Fishes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Elizabeth Duncan, Duncan                  Elizabeth      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Increased sea temperatures and decreased ocean pH due to human induced climate
change will have both direct and indirect impacts on marine life. This project
is designed to investigate variation in the physiological responses of reef fish
to projected end-of-the-century environmental conditions. Temperature is perhaps
the most significant abiotic factor influencing the performance and fitness of
marine organisms and decreased pH, or ocean acidification, has been shown to
impose trade offs to fish between behavioral and physiological performance. Such
research will help scientists to better understand how climate change might
impact population dynamics and the long term viability of economically valuable
species. This study will be a collaborative effort between the fellow and Dr.
Jodie Rummer of James Cook University in Queensland, Australia. Dr. Rummer is a
leading expert in fish physiology and behavior at the ARC Centre of Excellence
for Coral Reef Studies, an international hub of tropical research.

To investigate how the physiology of particular reef associated fish species are
impacted by increasing temperature and ocean acidification, this project will
quantify the changes to various aspects of fish metabolism and swimming
performance following sustained exposure to realistic, near future climate
conditions. The results from this EAPSI award will, in part, contribute to
knowledge of species-specific, whole organism responses to changing
environmental conditions and will identify potential mechanisms underlying
altered performance. Fish play key roles in marine food webs and are a valuable
source of protein for humans. As a consequence, information linking individual
performance to population and community scale dynamics will help shape marine
management strategies to ensure the persistence of coral reef biodiversity in a
rapidly changing world.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.