* 1614491
* Massively-parallel Electronic Structure Calculations for Energy Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Sohrab Ismail-Beigi, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 14,000.00

It has been estimated that the entire world-wide demand for energy will double
in the next&lt;br/&gt;two decades, therefore it is critical to investigate
revolutionary energy technologies&lt;br/&gt;to meet this demand. A potential
hydrogen economy is a key player in this market&lt;br/&gt;space. However,
hydrogen as a fuel requires efficient storage materials that retain and
release&lt;br/&gt;a great deal of hydrogen as desired. This proposal aims to use
large scale and accurate quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanical calculations on an
important class of porous hydrogen storage materials: metal-
organic&lt;br/&gt;frameworks (MOFs). The research team will study the properties
of hydrogen inside of MOFs&lt;br/&gt;and seek to understand their physical
properties and how one can design improved MOFs that&lt;br/&gt;should deliver
improved storage of hydrogen per unit weight under reasonable and real-
world&lt;br/&gt;operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand and
improve MOFs for hydrogen storage applications, it is key to study the
microscopic&lt;br/&gt;physical properties of MOFs that govern hydrogen uptake,
release, and diffusion&lt;br/&gt;inside the MOFs. This requires simulation of
hydrogen inside of MOFs at the atomistic scale.&lt;br/&gt;The project propose to
perform highly accurate quantum mechanical simulations of hydrogen
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;inside of MOFs using first principles density functional
theory to describe the electronic&lt;br/&gt;state of the system coupled to
molecular dynamics of the nuclear degrees of freedom including&lt;br/&gt;quantum
nuclear effects (via the path integral formalism). The effect due to the
quantum&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations of the nuclear degrees of freedom are critical
for understanding the binding&lt;br/&gt;and dynamics of light elements such as
hydrogen. The project will use this advanced and accurate
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;framework to address three questions of key importance to
this field: (1) How do quantum&lt;br/&gt;nuclear effects alter hydrogen dynamics
inside of MOFs? (2) How do the transition metal atoms&lt;br/&gt;incorporated
into the MOF structure change the hydrogen binding and dynamics properties
and&lt;br/&gt;which metals are best for real-world applications? (3) How does
the flexibility and temperature-dependent&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations of the MOF
framework affect hydrogen storage?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific outcomes
of this research will be of interest and importance to
researchers&lt;br/&gt;studying MOFs and hydrogen storage. The aim is to provide
useful understanding and information&lt;br/&gt;that may lead to the creation of
materials that will help create a hydrogen economy. The&lt;br/&gt;results of the
work will be published in high quality journals, presented widely at
international&lt;br/&gt;conferences, and form the basis for outreach events to
the broader public in order to elevate&lt;br/&gt;general interest in science and
technology as well as how simulations and computations can&lt;br/&gt;address
important real-world problems. Junior researchers carrying out the research
work&lt;br/&gt;will be trained in the use of advanced computational methods,
attendant software infrastructures,&lt;br/&gt;and materials design approaches
that are all highly useful skills in the twenty-first century.