* 1614622
* Data-driven, biologically constrained computational model of the hippocampal network at full scale
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Ivan Soltesz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 5,000.00

Information processing in the brain is organized and facilitated by the complex
interactions&lt;br/&gt;of intrinsic biophysical properties of distinct neuronal
types, neuronal morphology, and network&lt;br/&gt;connection topology. These
properties give rise to specific types of network oscillations&lt;br/&gt;and
other dynamic processes that govern neural information encoding and exchange.
This project is &lt;br/&gt;designed to create a detailed picture at
unprecedented scale of how the&lt;br/&gt;intrinsic properties of hippocampal
principal neurons and interneurons define the network&lt;br/&gt;activity under
normal conditions, and how pathological changes in those properties under
epileptic&lt;br/&gt;conditions disrupt hippocampal function. The overarching
goal of this activity is to construct&lt;br/&gt;a 1:1 scale, realistic and
detailed computational model of the CA1-CA3-dentate gyrus network&lt;br/&gt;in
the rat hippocampus and study physiological and pathophysiological network
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;The project will use the Blue Waters supercomputer to
execute this detailed model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the project aims
to achieve broader impact in the neuroscience community by providing
the&lt;br/&gt;software infrastructure necessary to put unprecedented petascale
computing capability within&lt;br/&gt;reach of neuroscientists regardless of
their expertise in high-performance computing (HPC).&lt;br/&gt;The support for
GPUs and the Intel MIC architecture being developed in the widely-used
NEURON&lt;br/&gt;simulator will enable neuroscientists to fully utilize
supercomputing accelerator architectures&lt;br/&gt;and thus catalyze greater
research productivity and pave the way for wider use of large-
scale&lt;br/&gt;and full-scale detailed modeling of the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the neuroscience model code and
simulation support software being developed as part of the&lt;br/&gt;research
goals behind this proposal will be made publicly available and will remove
the&lt;br/&gt;barriers of setting up simulations and managing results data that
traditionally have impeded&lt;br/&gt;the utilization of high-performance
computing resources.