* 1614052
* EAPSI: Using the Trans-Pacific Dispersal of the Monarch Butterfly to Better Understand Its Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Micah Freedman, Freedman                Micah          G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus) are best-known from their North American
range but more recently have also become established on nearly every Pacific
island chain. Because of their geographic isolation, these island populations of
monarch butterflies provide ideal ?natural experiments? for addressing
ecological and evolutionary questions about the monarch butterfly. This project
will focus on museum specimens and live-caught monarchs from Australia?where
populations of migratory and non-migratory monarchs co-occur?and will be in
collaboration with Dr. Myron Zalucki (University of Queensland), the world?s
foremost expert on Pacific island monarchs. Results from this research will
contribute to a better understanding of (1) the genes and environmental cues
that govern monarch migration, (2) how migratory and non-migratory monarchs may
differ in their morphology, behavior, and interactions with parasites and (3)
the strategies employed by milkweed host plants to cope with monarch herbivory.
This information will contribute to strategies for protecting North American
monarchs, which are currently being petitioned for federally protected status.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic islands have long served as valuable natural
laboratories for understanding evolutionary processes over both contemporary and
long-term time scales. Monarch butterflies on Pacific islands provide replicated
natural experiments for investigating transitions from migratory to non-
migratory status as well independent re-associations with their milkweed host
plants. For this project, I will focus on Australian monarchs (both museum
specimens and live-caught individuals) and their milkweed host plants. This will
enable me to answer questions about (1) the short-term evolution of monarch wing
morphology and antennal circadian rhythm expression in relation to migratory
status, (2) the prevalence and virulence of the protozoan parasite Ophryocystis
elektroschirrha, and (3) the evolution of resistance and/or tolerance traits in
novel milkweed host plants. The results of this research will contribute to a
greater understanding of the basic biology of the monarch butterfly and
potentially aid in its conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award under the
East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a
U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of
Science.