* 1614976
* Geotechnology Experiences for Students and Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,199,127.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by its focus on
geotechnology (also called GIS or geospatial information systems) careers. The
programmatic goal of this project is to prepare teachers to engage middle and
high schools students in high-needs and high-potential school districts with
cutting-edge web GIS knowledge and skills in order to motivate students to
pursue formal school-based and informal out-of-school educational experiences.
Project research, guided by social-cognitive career development theory and other
work, will investigate what programmatic experiences contribute to student
motivation and cognitive gains and what factors contribute to teacher
integration of GIS content into the school
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During three years of the project, the project
will offer a summer teacher workshop and a student GIS summer camp each year,
The camp will include field trips to GIS-related industry and government
agencies, supported by mentors from these organizations. The workshop and camp
will support teachers and students in learning GIS concepts and skills. Teachers
will also learn approaches to integrate GIS- and career-related in STEM and
social studies classes. Students who attended the summer camp will be supported
in organizing a GIS after-school club. This project will research one of the
guiding questions of the ITEST program: What coherent sets of experiences
effectively and efficiently support student competency, motivation and
persistence for productive participation in the STEM-related workforce of today
and the future? The project will use mixed methods research design including a
quasi-experimental study. Research findings from this project will help
educators better understand and address the context and factors that influence
integration of GIS in middle and high school curricula.