* 1614405
* EAPSI: Determining Grain Size Effects on Ferroelectric Switching Speed by Time-Resolved Neutron Diffraction Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jacob Ivy, Ivy                     Jacob          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Ferroelectric materials possess an inherent polarization that can be reoriented
(or ?switched?) with an applied electric field. Understanding how defects, grain
size, and other material parameters affect this switching process is important
to be able to improve device performance in applications such as capacitors in
consumer electronics, inertial sensors such as those in automotive collision
detection systems, or precise positioners used for camera focusing. This EAPSI
project seeks to identify the effects that grain size has on ferroelectric
switching speed by collecting time-resolved neutron diffraction data on barium
titanate ceramics with a broad distribution of grain sizes during electric-
field-induced polarization. This work will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. John Daniels, an Associate Professor at the University of New South Wales
who helped pioneer this time-resolved diffraction technique, at the Australian
Nuclear Science and Technology Organization.

The effect of grain size on the magnitude of dielectric permittivity of
ferroelectrics is well known, but the effects on switching speeds are not yet
completely understood. Current hypotheses claim that new domains form at grain
boundaries due to local electric field enhancements caused by a difference in
permittivity between the grain boundary and the lattice. This theory will be
explored via time-resolved, stroboscopic neutron diffraction experiments
performed on barium titanate samples with a broad range of grain size
distributions while undergoing electric-field-induced polarization. Strain
contributions from intrinsic (piezoelectric) and extrinsic (non-180Â° domain
switching) components are easily separable and the ability to collect structural
information on time scales of interest to ferroelectrics (<1 s) with this
technique. These combined pieces of information will allow for accurate
detection of piezoelectric strain rate and the associated ferroelectric
polarization speeds. This work will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. John
Daniels, an Associate Professor at the University of New South Wales who helped
pioneer this time-resolved diffraction technique, at the Australian Nuclear
Science and Technology Organization.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australia Academy of Science.