* 1614187
* Promoting Student Interest in Science and Science Careers through a Scalable Place-Based Environmental Educational Program at a Public Aquarium
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Ram, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,235,476.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a place-based STEM enrichment program for fifth graders in a large urban
school district. The Detroit Public Schools will collaborate with the Belle
Island Aquarium to develop a field-trip program that will enrich learning in
biology, with cross-curricular impacts on chemistry, physics, business, literacy
and the arts. The project will include teacher professional development
opportunities and will promote student interests in careers of regional
significance associated with fisheries, wildlife, habitat restoration, and the
aquatic sciences. Scientists and educators at the aquarium will work together
with teachers in preparing for field trips and developing place-based curriculum
materials with real world examples of phenomena and concepts being studied. A
project goal is to develop self-sustaining Communities of Learning comprising
scientists, teachers, students, and community members to establish a self-
sustaining program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage approximately
2,300 students and 120 schoolteachers over a three-year period, and the research
plan will employ a pretest-posttest, switching replications quasi-experimental
design with teachers being randomly assigned to three cohorts of treatment
groups. Over the 3-year course of the project, each cohort of teachers will
participate in the treatment being examined. Teacher attitudes and behaviors
will be assessed each year of the project, and student attitudes, knowledge, and
behavior will be assessed each year. Science career interest and knowledge will
also be assessed annually. A series of classroom observations, focus groups, and
surveys will be used to validate collected data and provide feedback for the
program development process. The research goal of the project is to investigate
the effects of the field trip program and its components on student attitudes,
knowledge, and behaviors, and the effects of the teacher professional
development activities on teacher classroom practices, confidence in teaching
science, and attitudes toward teacher science.