* 1614853
* The First Billion Years: a Petascale Universe of Galaxies and Quasars
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rupert Croft, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

The Hubble Deep/Ultra Deep fields are iconic, and almost certainly
the&lt;br/&gt;most studied space telescope observations. Upcoming observations
from an enormous range of&lt;br/&gt;current and planned instruments, from the
successor to Hubble, The James Webb Telescope, to&lt;br/&gt;the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST), to the WFIRST Satellite will also have
the&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to reach galaxies and black holes at the same extreme
magnitudes or deeper, but&lt;br/&gt;over unprecedentedly wide fields. This will
open up the study of the highest redshift galaxies&lt;br/&gt;and quasars to the
type of statistical studies that have made modern cosmology a
precision&lt;br/&gt;science. This project aims to compute theoretical
predictions to make contact with current&lt;br/&gt;and upcoming observations of
the high-redshift universe using the Blue Waters supercomputer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will extend the BlueTides simulation, with an
unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;volume and resolution, to cover the evolution of the
first billion years of cosmic history.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to significantly
increase the scientific impact of this calculation to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the project will attempt to make
contact&lt;br/&gt;with observations of quasars, which have not been discovered
at redshift greater than 7 (while&lt;br/&gt;the simulation now has run to
redshift equal 8). In addition the project will be using BlueTides
as&lt;br/&gt;a path-finder for developing methods/calculations for future
cosmological hydrodynamical simulations&lt;br/&gt;of galaxy formation with
volumes and resolutions suitable for creating mocks for next
generation&lt;br/&gt;surveys. The impact of the proposed work will extend way
beyond BlueTides. Large hydrodynamical simulations&lt;br/&gt;will be more and
more useful in all stages of major observational projects in
astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;and cosmology. For example, a simulation that covers a
significant fraction of the entire&lt;br/&gt;observable universe with BlueTides
resolution and runs to the present day (an epoch which&lt;br/&gt;is fully
dominated by the hydrodynamic computations) will be needed for
LSST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a theoretical framework
for understanding the role of galaxies&lt;br/&gt;in the evolution of the
universe at high redshifts. Different communities&lt;br/&gt;of scientists are
interested in the behavior history of quasars and galaxy assembly,
including&lt;br/&gt;cosmologists, the galaxy evolution community and high energy
astrophysicists, so the results&lt;br/&gt;would have a wide impact across many
different scientific communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the image
and catalog generation, and&lt;br/&gt;database techniques developed by the
project will&lt;br/&gt;strengthen the project already on-going synergistic
activities with computer science, machine learning&lt;br/&gt;and statistics.
Furthermore, the project will have a strong education component by involving
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and graduate students in this research. Finally, the
project propose to perform outreach using&lt;br/&gt;the visualization and
interactive Gigapan software.