* 1614864
* Nuclear, Particle, and Weak Interaction Physics of the Big Bang and Stellar Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* George Fuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 330,000.00

The research supported in this Project will provide insights into how atomic
nuclei and radiation behave in extreme conditions of temperature and density. In
turn, this research will seek to leverage these insights to provide important
clues about the nature of elementary particles, the mysterious neutrinos in
particular, and about how the elements are synthesized in nature, e.g., in the
fiery interiors of stars. These are grand science questions and a significant
part of the world's physics and astronomy endeavor is directed toward answering
them. For example, recent experiments have revealed some of the properties of
the ghost-like neutrinos, and planned experiments seek to uncover more. An
objective of this Project will be to better understand the implications of these
properties for the grand questions described above. This will require honing
humanity's fundamental theory of nature, i.e., Quantum Mechanics, into a tool
capable of modeling the behavior of neutrinos in the extreme environments
provided by the cosmos. Another key product of this Project will be the training
of young nuclear physicists, at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported in this Project will be directed
toward probing the fundamental physics of neutrinos and nuclei by exploiting the
intersection of exciting new developments in nuclear physics and neutrino
physics on the one hand, with rapidly advancing probes of astrophysical
environments on the other. A key issue in this enterprise will be studying how
neutrinos interact in dense matter and how these interactions may cause
neutrinos to change their flavors (e.g., electron type neutrinos changing to tau
type and vice versa) and/or their spins (e.g., left-handed to right-handed, and
vice versa - if neutrinos are Majorana in character this is tantamount to
changing neutrinos to antineutrinos). This is a fiercely nonlinear problem
because neutrino flavor/spin determines how neutrinos interact, and how they
interact determines how flavors/spin change. To these ends, the P.I. and his
graduate and undergraduate students will work toward: (1) Understanding and
modeling the quantum kinetic equations which govern neutrino flavor and spin
evolution in a general medium; (2) Constructing large-scale numerical
simulations of neutrino flavor/spin evolution in various supernova, stellar
collapse, and compact object merger environments and assessing the feedback of
this neutrino flavor physics on the prospects for the synthesis of nuclei in
these sites; (3) Understanding nuclear structure, neutrino-nucleus interactions,
nuclear partition functions, and weak strength distributions in high temperature
environments.