* 1614049
* EAPSI: Radioactive Cesium Level in the Environment and its Interaction with Post-Disaster Land Management--A case study of Fukushima, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Misa Yasumiishi, Yasumiishi              Misa
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The nuclear plant accident following the strong earthquake and tsunami in
Fukushima, Japan in 2011 released radioactive cesium into the atmosphere which
then accumulated in the soil. Radioactive cesium can be transferred from soils
to humans through the food web, with the potential of causing health hazards.
Recovery from such an accident requires long-term monitoring and appropriate
land management. Unfortunately, rushed decisions following a disaster often do
not fully consider the environmental processes and fail to mitigate the
contamination, or, even worse, leave a long lasting negative impact on the
environment. This research examines changes in cesium levels in soils in
Fukushima as well as the effects of land management on cesium levels. The
research will be conducted under the mentorship Japanese experts in the
agriculture and environmental engineering fields, Dr. Taku Nishimura at the
University of Tokyo and Dr. Kazutoshi Osawa at Utsunomiya University.

The size of the cesium ion (Cs+) is similar to the size of the potassium ion
(K+) and the ammonium ion (NH4+) which are commonly applied as agricultural
nutrients and could be exchanged with Cs+ in clay structure. The radiation
levels of collected soil samples in Fukushima will be measured by a germanium
semiconductor detector. The results will be compared with the prior readings to
determine the change rate. Cs+ adsorbed in soils can be translocated, exposed to
the air, or leached by soil erosion and land management practices. Soil erosion
rates in the area will be determined by GeoWEPP, a soil erosion modeling
software. Land management practices, which were implemented following the
accident, will be reviewed based on the data obtained from local governments.
The field data and the land management data will be loaded into GIS software and
the best practice for chemical hazard mitigation will be modeled.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.