* 1614355
* Cis and Trans Determinants of Polycomb Recruitment in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2020
* USD 764,999.00

As we face the twin challenges of increased population growth and climate change
it is important to understand how plants can survive water stress (drought).
Plants as sessile organisms have to continuously defend themselves against
environmental stresses and optimal stress responses are critical for survival,
reproduction and crop yield. Stress responses require reprogramming of gene
expression. Additionally, gene expression changes need to be rapid and
reversible. This project will investigate how the essential Polycomb gene
silencing mechanism contributes to plant water stress response and whether rapid
synthesis of a class of non-expressed RNA molecules directs the Polycomb
silencing machinery to the appropriate genes to be silenced. The project will
provide insight into how plant drought responses can be enhanced and will
provide authentic research experiences for undergraduate and high school
students. Undergraduate students will participate in experimental research in
laboratory courses and in the research laboratory using state-of-the-art
experimental approaches. Students will design experiments, implement procedures
and learn to communicate about science. Formative and summative assessments will
help improve the efficacy of the laboratory course. Related high school
laboratory exercises will be developed and PI Wagner will give lectures and
workshops to high school students about this project during summer research
academies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years it has become apparent that the
majority of the genome is transcribed as noncoding transcripts, the roles of
which are poorly understood. RNA abundance can change more rapidly than protein
abundance, making lncRNAs ideally suited to direct chromatin regulatory
complexes to new sites in the genome in response to environmental cues. This
project will identify lncRNAs that recruit Polycomb complexes to new loci upon
water stress sensing using four complementary approaches. First, regions to
which Polycomb complexes are rapidly recruited and that are silenced upon water
stress sensing will be defined by genomic approaches. Second, lncRNAs that
specifically associate with the Polycomb complexes in response to the stress
will be identified by combined biochemical and high-throughput sequencing
approaches. Third, nuclear protein-bound lncRNA will be identified whose
abundance increases under stress conditions by high-throughput sequencing.
Finally, Polycomb-associated lnRNAs that increase in abundance upon stress
sensing will be tested for biological roles in plant stress response and in
Polycomb recruitment using reverse genetic approaches. Findings from this study
will significantly enhance understanding of Polycomb recruitment, lncRNA
function and transcriptional reprogramming during water stress response. The
results ultimately will enable us to modulate chromatin regulatory complex
recruitment to enhance desirable traits in plants such as tolerance to drought
and other stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.