* 1614379
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Cultural Interaction In Hierarchical Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Gregory Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 25,100.00

The political expansion of large-scale complex societies is best understood as a
dynamic between elite power and local innovation. Earlier studies of culture
contact, migration, and political expansion have exaggerated the diffusion of
cultural practices from a dominant core polity to its peripheral settlements.
However, this emphasis on the core overlooks the experiences of local
communities in culture contact situations, and the implications these
interactions have on identity and everyday life. Dr. Gregory D. Wilson and
Christina M. Friberg of the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) will
conduct archaeological research to evaluate how and why the complex
Mississippian society of Cahokia (A.D. 1050-1375) extended its influence over
the North American midcontinent and how the process of "Mississippianization"
unfolded in the Lower Illinois River Valley (LIRV) of west-central Illinois.
This research will highlight the complex process of culture contact whereby
local peoples do not passively adopt the practices of a more powerful core
polity, but engage, or resist engagement, in reference to their own identities.
The project will also provide educational opportunities, and hands-on experience
in both fieldwork and lab work, to undergraduate students, training them in the
practical skills necessary to pursue a career in archaeology. Results will be
shared with the scientific community through publication, and with local
communities through public talks addressing the prehistory of their hometowns
while stressing the importance of context and the scientific method in
archaeology, as a means to discourage the widespread practice of looting.

Cahokia, near modern-day St. Louis, Missouri, was the largest PreColumbian city
in North America and its inhabitants spread aspects of Mississippian culture as
far north as northwest Wisconsin. However, little is understood about how
Cahokians initiated these distant interactions, and how and why local groups
participated in them. Settlements in Cahokia's American Bottom region of
southwestern Illinois show evidence of direct political and economic ties with
the paramount center of Cahokia. Archaeological research farther north has also
shown that the inhabitants of frontier settlements selectively adopted certain
aspects of a Mississippian way of life, while maintaining a number of their
existing traditions. An analysis of craft production and exchange, subsistence
patterns, and community organization at the Audrey North Site in the LIRV will
add valuable insight to archaeologists' understanding of the Mississippian
phenomenon in Cahokia's immediate periphery. The proximity of the LIRV to
Cahokia likely facilitated regular interaction between the two regions, enabling
certain social, political, and economic interactions with American Bottom groups
that did not transpire with more distant groups. Using magnetic gradiometry data
as a starting point, excavation should reveal evidence of the production and
exchange of economically important Cahokian crafts. Bayesian statistical
analysis of Radiocarbon assays will establish a timeline for the
Mississippianization process in the LIRV. Finally, additional analysis of
everyday practices such as food processing and storage and community
organization will shed light on the degree to which local LIRV people
incorporated Cahokian practices and/or maintained traditions with reference to
their existing understanding of world order.