* 1614389
* EAPSI: Does Branch Photosynthesis Mitigate Water Loss in Tropical Trees During Drought?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Samantha Stutz, Stutz                   Samantha       S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This award supports research on how branch photosynthesis varies in four
tropical tree species under drought and non-drought conditions. Tropical
rainforests are some of the most productive and diverse biomes on Earth.
However, climate change is expected to increase the frequency and severity of
droughts in tropical rainforests. For plants to survive a drought they must
continue to photosynthesize while minimizing water loss. This study aims to
understand how tropical trees utilize branch photosynthesis to minimize water
loss and survive droughts. While previous research has measured branch
photosynthesis, little effort has gone into understanding or modeling branch
photosynthesis under drought. The research will be conducted at the Daintree
Rainforest Observatory in Queensland, Australia, under the direction of
Professor Lucas Cernusak, a world expert in branch photosynthesis.

Most CO2 for photosynthesis is obtained through stomata, small pores in the
leaves; however, this CO2 gain comes at the expense of water loss. Drought
severity and frequency in tropical rainforests is expected to increase with
climate change, which in turn will lead to a decrease in photosynthesis and an
increase in plant mortality. Plants can minimize water loss while still
photosynthesizing through branch photosynthesis, which recycles respired CO2.
The researcher will conduct field work at the Daintree Rainforest Observatory
operated by James Cook University Cairns Campus. Collaboration with Professor
Cernusak, a world expert in branch photosynthesis, will be an essential
component of the project. This research will increase the knowledge of how
tropical trees respond and adapt to drought stress. Additionally, this research
will provide mathematical models of branch photosynthesis that can be applied to
other tree species.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.