* 1614001
* EAPSI: Reconstructing Past Coastal Groundwater Discharge and Implications for Future Water Resource Management
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Kyle Broach, Broach                  Kyle           H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

As climate change continues to add heat energy to the oceans and the atmosphere,
the water cycle may undergo significant changes in the amount and timing of
precipitation. For regions that depend on seasonal rainfall for water resources
such as California and the Caribbean, such changes may drastically alter the
freshwater resources available, impacting a wide array of agricultural and
municipal activities. In order to predict and plan for these changes, it is
necessary to understand the variability of rainfall and groundwater resources in
the past to accurately replicate the hydrologic cycle in climate models. This
study will use fossil shells from a coastal lagoon in the Yucatan Peninsula as
archives of past water chemistry, including the element boron. These fossils
record groundwater discharge which is directly related to the amount of
precipitation falling over the Yucatan. The researcher will collaborate with Dr.
Chen-Feng You, a world expert on boron, at the National Cheng Kung University in
Tainan, Taiwan, which has the clean lab facilities necessary to measure boron in
fossil shells.

Two sets of samples will analyzed: one from the Yucatan and one from Taiwan. The
Yucatan field site is a brackish lagoon influenced by groundwater springs and
ocean water that result in seasonally persistent salinity and pH gradients.
Samples consist of several 3 meter long sediment cores covering the past 5,000
years. Foraminifera picked from the core tops and downcore centimeter intervals
will be analyzed for the boron isotope 11B, a proxy for pH. Microfossil and
water samples will be analyzed on a multi-collector inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer at Dr. You's lab. Variations in 11B suggest changes in water
pH and thus changes in the amount of rain-recharged groundwater entering the
lagoon. The Taiwan field site is a similar estuary where modern samples will be
collected to establish baseline 11B and compared to the Yucatan as a proof of
concept for the 11B groundwater discharge proxy.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.