* 1614083
* EAPSI: Investigating the Drivers of Invasive Raccoon Spread in Japan and its Effects on the Native Raccoon Dog
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jamie Kass, Kass                    Jamie          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Invasive species are the second largest cause of global species extinction after
habitat destruction, and they have an especially strong impact on islands. The
North American raccoon, introduced to Japan in the 1970?s, has since infiltrated
forested and urban areas country-wide and poses a significant wildlife
management problem. It is thought to affect many native species, including the
charismatic raccoon dog, but its impacts are not well understood. The researcher
will work with Professor Fumito Koike of Yokohama National University, an expert
on invasive species and spatial modeling, to investigate the factors causing the
raccoon?s spread. The research team will use various environmental variables to
model raccoon movement. They will also use camera 'traps' placed in areas
predicted by the model to determine impact on the raccoon dog. This research
will contribute modeling techniques and field methods useful for invasive
species management both in Japan and elsewhere.

Invasive species are the second largest cause of global species extinction after
habitat destruction, and they have an especially strong impact on islands, where
endemism is high and movement is restricted. The North American raccoon,
introduced to Japan in the 1970?s, has since infiltrated forested and urban
areas country-wide and poses a significant wildlife management problem. It is
thought to affect many native species, including the charismatic raccoon dog,
but its impacts are not well understood. The researcher will work with Professor
Fumito Koike of Yokohama National University, an expert on invasive species and
spatial modeling, to investigate the drivers of invasive spread by simulating
raccoon movement over various resistance surfaces of differing complexity (e.g.
land use, ecological niche models). They will use camera traps placed in areas
predicted by the model to measure both species' abundances and quantify impact
on the raccoon dog. This research will contribute modeling techniques and field
methods useful for invasive species management both in Japan and elsewhere.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.