* 1614297
* EAPSI: Improving Material Growth for Electronics to increase their Efficiency
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Georges Pavlidis, Pavlidis                Georges
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The project will investigate the different methods to grow materials needed for
LED lighting and Power Electronics. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with 2014 Nobel Prize Winner in Physics, Dr. Hiroshi Amano at the
University of Nagoya. The collaboration provides direct insight into the state
of art technology used to create advanced materials for future electronics.
Understanding the method to grow complex materials will lead to the development
of more efficient electronics used for lighting, electric vehicles and renewable
energy. This will allow for more neighborhoods across the country to have light
at night and ensuring a safer environment throughout the whole day. It will
further reduce the nation?s overall power consumption making the country have a
more sustainable future.

The objective of this work is to investigate the effects of buffer layers and
dislocations on the thermal properties associated with Gallium Nitride (GaN)
based electronics. . The research will be conducted in collaboration with 2014
Nobel Prize Winner in Physics, Dr. Hiroshi Amano. Group III-nitride
semiconductors, such as GaN, have almost exclusively been grown on non-native
substrates such as Silicon, Silicon Carbide. In order to accommodate the large
lattice mismatch between GaN and non-native substrates, buffer layers have been
used. The heterogeneous epitaxy of GaN, unfortunately, introduces defects that
alter the material?s electrical and thermal properties. These defects have been
suggested to decrease the layers? thermal conductivity, causing High Power
Electronics to operate at higher temperatures and thus lead to failure. Previous
research has shown that the growth conditions and type of buffer layers can
reduce the amount of material defects. Successful implementations have varied
the thickness or method of deposition of an aluminum nitride (AlN) buffer layer,
or implemented a stripe pattern on sapphire designs. Very little research,
however, has been conducted to determine what effect these techniques have on
the thermal properties of the materials. The project will address this issue by
material and basic device characterization of GaN samples grown on different
substrates. Advanced microscopy, surface morphology, electrical characterization
and laser based thermal metrology characterization methods will be used for this
purpose.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.