* 1614053
* EAPSI: Radiocesium Dynamics in Irrigation Ponds Surrounding the Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Plant
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Ian Byrnes, Byrnes                  Ian            T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of the summer research project is to improve the understanding of the
transport and dynamics of toxic pollutants in the environment around the
Fukushima Prefecture of Japan. Radioactive cesium forms (radiocesium) were
deposited in the environment as a result of the accident at Fukushima Dai-ichi
Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP) on March 11, 2011. The research will be completed in
conjunction with the Institute of Environmental Radioactivity (IER), which is
hosted at Fukushima University, Fukushima City. Understanding the continuing
effects of the disaster is critical to environmental and policy studies in the
both the US and Japan. Studies will be conducted with Dr. Alexei Konoplev at the
IER, who pioneered radiocesium transport research at the Chernobyl accident
site. The long half life of radiocesium ensures that it will remain in the
environment for years to come and the planned research will support the clean up
effort in Japan.

To collect the required data, samples will be taken from four irrigation ponds
that are within ten kilometers of the Fukushima accident site. Cores will be
extracted from the bottom sediment in these ponds at a depth of 30 centimeters
and returned to the IER. There, the samples will be sliced and counted for
radiocesium content. The counting will be accomplished by gamma ray spectrometry
with a high purity germanium detector. The characterization accomplished by
counting the samples will provide a measure of the volume of radiocesium in the
sediment of the irrigation ponds. The results will be compared against data from
an analytical model to determine the model's accuracy. Validating the model is
important as models are used for making decisions and policy with respect to the
nuclear industry. As the world confronts the need for more electricity, nuclear
power is a viable alternative that must be weighed against the carefully
researched effects on the environment.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.