* 1614253
* EAPSI:Laboratory Scale Testing of the Thermal Improvement of Soft Clays
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Pedro Bengochea, Bengochea               Pedro          O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The main objective of this summer research is to study how soft clays are able
to gain strength by the injection of high temperatures. This newly developed
concept is called thermal consolidation. The researcher will work under the
supervision of Dr. Chang-Young Yune at the Gangneung-Wonju National University
in South Korea and Dr. Guney Olgun from Virginia Tech in the USA. Dr. Yune is a
world-renown expert in soft clay engineering and has developed a consolidation
chamber to study the compression of soft clays. This is a one-of-a-kind
experimental setup that will allow the researcher to inject a range of high
temperatures into a variety of clayey soils to assess how this increase in
temperature affects the strength of the soil. The improvement of soft soils is
of paramount importance because it will enable the construction of heavy
structures on soft soils.

The thermal consolidation will be conducted by circulating hot fluid in a piping
system that goes down and up through a borehole contained in a consolidation
chamber. Clay particles increase in volume due to thermo-elastic expansion,
which causes a reduction in pore volume between the clay particles, and a
subsequent increase in strength. This experimental study will allow the
researcher to understand the behavioral mechanisms of pore pressure development,
drainage, and strength gain during the thermal improvement. The thermal
improvement of soft clays represents a major scientific and engineering
breakthrough to improve in-situ conditions of soft clay deposits for the
construction of buildings with heavy structural loads. The expected findings
will also positively impact the engineering practice by reducing the costs
associated with in-situ ground improvement of soft clay deposits. The summer
research will lay the foundations for more detailed experimental and analytical
studies to further investigate the thermo-mechanical phenomenon related to
thermal improvement of soft clays.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.