* 1614545
* Studies in Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Interactions at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Joshua Long, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* James Thomas
* 04/30/2021
* USD 5,534,914.00

It is now a well established fact that the proton and neutron are made from
constituents known as quarks and gluons. The research supported by this award
investigates how a property of the proton called spin is distributed among its
parts. The goal is to extract the gluon contribution to the spin of the proton
and compare this with theoretical predictions. The group will also search for
indications that strongly interacting matter is expected based on symmetry
principles. For example, interactions of neutrinos with nuclei is important for
the understanding of supernova explosions. In addition, this group will measure
the lifetime of the free neutron, since this is important input to test the Big
Bang theory of element creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
research supported by this award investigates: (1) How the spin of the proton is
distributed among its parts. Particles emitted when high-energy beams of spin-
aligned protons collide in the STAR detector at Brookhaven National Laboratory's
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider can reveal how much of the proton's spin is
carried by its gluons or by different types of quarks and anti-quarks. The group
will search for the gluon contribution to the spin of the proton and explore
spin differences among antiquarks. They will also measure how polarized quarks
turn into mesons and baryons and search for indications that strongly
interacting matter breaks mirror symmetry;(2) The properties and interactions of
neutrinos in nuclei with a large number of neutrons and protons: this is
important for the understanding of supernova explosions; (3) How long the free
neutron lives: this is important input to test the Big Bang theory of element
creation; and (4) whether or not neutrons possess exotic interactions that are
not (yet) a part of our current list of forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities of the group will contribute toward educating the next
generation of skilled PhD scientists for jobs in research and teaching
universities, industry and national labs, and medical and computer technology.
The investigators co-organize and lecture at summer schools. They participate in
the NSF REU program. They mentor their postdocs to facilitate their future entry
into teaching and research institutions and the scientific community. They
develop undergraduate laboratories emphasizing nuclear technology, bring
undergraduates on field trips and assist with programs that encourage pre-
college participation in the Indiana University science curriculum. They engage
bright young undergraduates in science through jobs or projects, which develop
the research skills they will need for success in graduate school. They reach
out to the local community through a variety of activities to awaken the
interest of students in the local public school system by visiting local high
school science classes, acting as judges in local science fairs and for the
State Science Olympiad, and presenting physics demonstrations at the Indiana
State Fair. They actively recruit female and minority applicants for positions
at all levels within the group and the physics department by serving on
selection committees for faculty searches and research fellowships for women.
They work to make their activities known to the public at large through
laboratory tours and Open House presentations, science cafe discussions, radio
interviews, and press releases in the local media.