* 1614261
* EAPSI: Investigating a Novel Approach for Biological Named Entity Recognition in Text  Mining
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Dally Shvets, Shvets                  Dahlia         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Currently, using computational resources to extract information from biological
literature faces many challenges due to the domain specific terminology of
biological texts. In order to read and obtain information from the vast amount
of available biological literature, a large amount of funds, time and manpower
are required. The amount of research literature and data is always increasing,
and a scalable solution to gleaning information from biological text is
necessary. This project aims to develop a new technique for extracting specific
annotations from biological literature. For this project, the PI will travel to
Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan to work with Dr. WenLian Hsu, whose expertise
in the areas of natural language processing and text mining of biological
literature is necessary for the implementation of this approach.

DNA methylation is regarded as a potential biomarker in the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer. Recent studies have identified relationships between
aberrant gene methylation and cancer development. In previous approaches of
mining biological literature, a combination of manual curation and machine
learning-based approaches have been used to extract gene methylation cancer
relations. This project will utilize a novel statistical pattern based approach
which focuses on identifying deep and important linguistic patterns described
for disease terms and physical interactions. This approach has a unique flexible
matching mechanism that captures existing disease terms or protein names within
the text, regardless of their previous presence in the training data. This
project provides a solution to the resource limitation of reading and analyzing
large amounts of biological literature in a short amount of time.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.