* 1614055
* EAPSI: Early, Non-Invasive Detection of Microbial-Induced Degradation in Reverse Osmosis Membranes Using MRI
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Simkins, Simkins                 Jeffrey        W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

As fresh water becomes more scarce in the coming century, traditional water
sources will need to be supplemented to meet demand. This will primarily be
accomplished using reverse osmosis (RO) membranes, which extract clean water
from saltwater or wastewater, due to their low energy consumption. However, RO
membranes are easily degraded by microbial growth, and we have limited ability
to detect bacterial-induced damage before the degradation becomes irreversible.
The present project will pioneer a new, non-invasive method for identifying
bacterial growth on RO membranes using Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
technology. This will allow for the first time the non-invasive detection of
microbial activity on these membranes in the early stages of growth, when
membrane damage can still be prevented. To conduct this research, the principal
investigator, an expert in oxygen measurement using MRI, will collaborate with
Dr. Michael Johns, an expert in applying MRI to RO membranes, at University of
Western Australia. As fresh water availability decreases over the next century
due to dwindling reserves, pollution, altered weather patterns resulting from
climate change, and population growth, traditional water sources will need to be
supplemented in order to meet demand. Over the last half century, reverse
osmosis (RO) membranes, which isolate clean water from wastewater or saltwater,
have become the gold standard of water purification due to relatively low energy
consumption. A significant problem exhibited by RO membranes is susceptibility
to biofouling, or degradation due to bacterial growth, which is often
irreversible by the time the problem has been identified. In the last few
decades, medical researchers have devised a new method for measuring oxygen
concentration using Magnetic Resonance Imagine (MRI), and have used it to
quantify oxygen in tissues and tumors. Because bacterial growth is associated
with oxygen consumption, the researcher of the present project will repurpose
this oxygen measurement technique for the identification of biofouling in RO
membranes. Because MRI is non-invasive, this will permit for the first time the
early detection of microbial growth without destructive sampling, allowing
industrial membrane operators to treat their membranes before damage becomes
irreversible.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.