* 1614190
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Excitocell: A rewired eukaryotic cell model for the analysis and design of cellular morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* William Bement, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2021
* USD 376,000.00

Virtually every important thing cells and tissues do involve changes in cell
morphology: cell division, cell migration, and wound healing all involve
profound changes in cell shape. These shape changes are powered by the outer
layer of the cell, which is called the "cortex". The cortex contains a meshwork
of fibrous proteins that can contract, protrude, and slide. These movements
provide the basis of cell shape changes. The control of this fibrous network is
the domain of a protein called Rho. Rho is somehow activated in distinct
patterns, each of which corresponds to a different cell shape change. Thus, in
order to understand and control processes such as cell division, cell migration
and wound healing, it is essential to learn how to understand and control
patterns of Rho activation. In this collaborative project, investigators from
the US and the UK use synthetic cell biology and mathematical modeling to test
mechanisms underlying cortical pattern formation. This project will provide
research opportunities for interdisciplinary training at the interface between
quantitative cell biology and mathematical modeling for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs. The project also offers embedded research opportunities
for high-school teachers as well as topic-specific K-12 and public outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies by the PIs demonstrated that
cells can support sustained waves of dynamically-coupled Rho activity and actin
assembly, and mathematical modeling followed by experimental verification
revealed that cortical wave propagation is based on Rho autoactivation and
actin-mediated Rho inactivation. This constitutes the basis of an "excitable"
system, a family of well-established theoretical models with few previously-
known cellular manifestations. This project will deduce and experimentally
validate a minimal molecular mechanism and basic design elements required for
cortical excitability. To achieve the goals of this project, a novel semi-
synthetic platform for replicating complex cell behaviors using simple
macromolecular parts will be employed, enabling manipulation of the molecular
network at escalating complexity instead of by dissecting a complex
physiological network. The project will couple computational modeling of
excitable dynamics to live-cell imaging in whole cells and in a new ex vivo
model of cortical dynamics. First, excitable dynamics will be reconstituted in
resting, non-mitotic cells (oocytes of frogs and echinoderms) using natural
regulators and their mutants, followed by their replacement with synthetic
equivalents. Second, a quantifiable ex vivo model will be developed (using frog
oocyte or egg extracts and supported lipid bilayers) that permits precise
control of system composition in a simplified context. Third, to achieve on-
demand control of cortical pattern formation, an optogenetic approach in animal
oocytes will be used to explore the repertoire of both natural and synthetic
cortical pattern formation. Iterative experimentation and computational modeling
will be employed throughout the project to 1) interpret biological data, 2)
express candidate mechanisms in the form of mathematical models, 3) generate
predictions, and 4) test those predictions experimentally.