* 1614140
* EAPSI: Defining Resource Preferences of Single Cells from Aquatic Microbial Communities using Raman Microspectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Brandon Kieft, Kieft                   Brandon        P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This research project will determine the microbial populations that are
consuming amino acids in Osaka Bay and Muko River, Japan. This objective will be
accomplished using Raman microspectroscopy to measure cells that have taken
amino acids from the environment and used them for growth. Dissolved amino acids
are an important organic matter source for both energy and biomass production in
aquatic microorganisms, thus, turnover and recycling of this substrate by
microbes is a critical step in the carbon cycle of coastal margins around the
world. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Shinsuke
Shigeto, a noted expert in biological and chemical analysis using Raman
spectroscopy, at Kwansei Gakuin University in Kobe, Japan. Few laboratories are
equipped with a Raman microspectrometer set up to scan living biological cells,
thus this collaboration represents a unique opportunity to combine the expertise
of the project PI and the Japanese collaborator. This research project will
measure the incorporation of 13C-labeled amino acids (AAs) into the biomass of
single bacterioplankton cells in natural microbial communities from Osaka Bay
and the Muko River, Japan. This objective will be accomplished using a
combination of stable isotope probing, fluorescence in-situ hybridization, and
Raman microspectroscopy. After incubating communities with 13C-labeled AAs,
incorporation of the isotope into biomass of individual cells from dominant
populations will be measured by a ?red-shift? of the phenylalanine peak in their
Raman spectra. This study will develop a non-destructive technique to identify
single cells from a natural microbial community that utilize a specific
substrate. Prokaryotic 16S rRNA gene amplicons will also be sequenced before and
after incubations to correlate community-level data with population- and single-
cell level AA incorporation data.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.