* 1614272
* EAPSI: The Effect of Elevated Nitrogen on Lignin Degrading Microbial Communities in Mt. Changbai Soil
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Hannah Woo, Woo                     Hannah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

This project will investigate the effect of China's pollution on plant litter
decomposition. Plant litter consists of dead plant foliage, wood, and roots. Its
turnover is an essential process in maintaining organic carbon within soils and
is facilitated largely by microorganisms. The unprecedented levels of nitrogen
in China due to industrial pollution have drastically increased soil nitrogen
concentration. It is unclear how the elevated nitrogen will effect plant litter
decomposition and the native microbial communities. Creating laboratory
incubations of Mt Changbai field site soil amended with nitrogen, researchers
can monitor changes in the composition of plant litter and the microbes involved
in plant litter turnover. This research will be conducted in collaboration Dr.
Xudong Zhang, a noted expert in soil geochemistry, at the Chinese Academy of
Science Institute of Applied Ecology (CAS IAE). Researchers aim to elucidate the
long-term impact of elevated nitrogen on forest soil ecosystems because they are
important reservoirs of carbon.

The project will investigate the effect of elevated nitrogen deposition on the
plant litter-degrading microbial community in Mt. Changbai forest soil. This
experiment will directly test for the link between stable soil organic carbon
lignin and nitrogen deposition. Fresh soil from a field site in the Mt. Changbai
will be sampled and amended with lignin and varying concentrations of ammonium
nitrate. During incubation, all soil microcosms will be routinely sampled for
degraded lignin analysis using alkaline copper oxide. The microcosms will also
be sampled weekly for microbial community structure and function analysis via
next generation sequencing. Using bioinformatics, samples will be compared to
determine differentially abundant species in lignin microcosms at the different
levels of nitrogen addition. A better understanding of nitrogen and carbon
cycling will lead to better management practices of soil carbon.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.