* 1614159
* EAPSI: Microscale Gradient Generation Device for Creating the Cellular Types Observed Across the Bone-Cartilage Interface
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Alexander Boys, Boys                    Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Articular cartilage is soft tissue that covers the ends of long bones in human
joints, such as the knee joint, and acts to mitigate stress and wear. Articular
cartilage transitions into bone through the osteochondral interface. The
breakdown of articular cartilage and the osteochondral interface results in
osteoarthritis, a disease affecting approximately 27 million Americans according
to the CDC. Articular cartilage shows poor healing properties due to its lack of
blood flow. Tissue engineered implants offer a promising method for healing
articular cartilage in that they can be customized to fit the specific shapes
and sizes of defects in articular cartilage, but these implants must show
similar structure to cartilage found in the body. The structure and composition
of articular cartilage changes with depth and proximity to bone, and these
changes are consistent with changes in chondrocyte phenotype (the general shape
and size of cartilage cells). This study is directed at recreating these
cellular changes by placing chondrocytes into a collagen gel to simulate the
knee environment and then applying a gradient of chemical factors that cause the
cells to act as they would at the osteochondral interface. This work is
performed in collaboration with Dr. Xingyu Jiang of the Chinese National Center
for NanoScience and Technology (NCNST), an expert in using small fluid-based
devices to affect cellular phenotype.

The study will create a flow-less chemical concentration gradient that allows
for intercell signaling in a collagen gel environment that is similar to the
extracellular matrix of articular cartilage. This gradient will be created
through the design and construction of a microfluidic device that relies on
diffusion-based principles to apply different chemical compounds that have been
shown to affect chondrocyte phenotypes, creating a cellular gradient in
hypertrophy similar to what is observed at the osteochondral interface. This
work will be used to inform the design of tissue engineered implants for
articular cartilage repair.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.