* 1614738
* III: Small: Scalable Probabilistic Inference for Large Knowledge Bases
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 516,000.00

Large Knowledge Bases are constructed today automatically from large corpora of
text, like Web pages, journal articles, news stories. The construction proceeds
in two major stages. First, several database queries are computed on the corpora
of text, to extract candidate data items; the resulting data, called a factor
graph, can be thought of as a very large, noisy, uncertain, redundant, and
inconsistent database. Second, a complex probabilistic inference is performed on
the factor graph to produce a large, probabilistic knowledge base. Both stages
are computationally expensive, but only the first stage has benefited so far
from advances in database query processing techniques. This project develops new
database processing techniques for the probabilistic inference task. These new
techniques have theoretical guarantees, either in the form of absolute
guarantees on the runtime of the probabilistic inference, or in the form of a
trade-off between the run time and the precision of the probabilistic
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technique pursued by the project is
called lifted probabilistic inference, and consists of algorithms that compute
the probability of a SQL query inductively on the structure of the query,
without having to first ground the query to compute the large factor graph.
Lifted inference is very efficient, but possible only for some queries. The
project has four thrusts. First, it combines sampling with lifted inference for
efficient approximate probabilistic inference for any query; this algorithms can
pushed in the database engine, and can therefore benefit immediately from all
optimizations available today in modern, parallel query processors. Second, the
project studies the complexity of query evaluation on symmetric databases, a
special case of high practical importance, since it scales easily to arbitrarily
large domains. In the third thrust, the project extends lifted inference
techniques to queries with negations by combining probabilistic inference with
resolution; this is necessary because soft constraints in knowledge bases almost
always have negations. Finally, the project develops a system prototype and
benchmarks.