* 1614938
* Collaborative Research: Equipment for the PSI MUSE Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Ronald Ransome, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2020
* USD 738,135.00

It is well known that protons and neutrons are made from constituents, called
quarks and gluons. The quarks and gluons give rise to a finite size of the
proton, which is about 10,000 times smaller than the size of a single atom. The
goal of this project is to measure the size of the proton. An on-going puzzle is
that the proton size appears to be different when measured with atomic hydrogen
as compared with its counterpart, called muonic-hydrogen, where the electron in
a hydrogen atom is replaced by its heavier cousin, the muon. This project will
specifically build equipment to be used in an experiment to provide an
independent measurement of the proton radius. In addition to the direct
scientific goals of the project, the experiments provide students and young
scientists experience and training in working in the international
collaborations of modern scientific experiments, with state of the art
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seven standard deviation discrepancy
between the proton radius measured with muonic hydrogen and with electron-proton
scattering may point to physics beyond the standard model of particle physics,
or result from novel aspects of conventional physics or from issues in
extracting the radius from experimental data. The Muon Scattering Experiment
(MUSE) aims to resolve the proton radius puzzle. MUSE uses a mixed pion, muon
and electron beam at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland. MUSE will
determine the proton radius through both muon-proton scattering and electron-
proton scattering, in addition to performing these reactions with positive and
negative leptons. This not only reduces systematic uncertainties but also
provides sensitivity to two-photon exchange contributions that may be
responsible for some of the discrepancies seen in earlier experiments. This
collaborative project supports the construction of MUSE over the period
September 2016 - August 2018. There will also be ongoing testing and
commissioning activities at PSI, including a dress rehearsal run with a partial
spectrometer in late 2017.