* 1614384
* EAPSI: Working to Increase Agricultural Productivity through Agrobacterium-Mediated Transformation in A. Thaliana
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Wei Wei, Wei                     Wei
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Understanding microbe-plant interactions is crucial to combating agriculturally
important plant diseases and improving plant production. Agrobacterium species
cause crown gall disease on over 300 plant genera, including many economically
important crops. Current control methods for crown gall disease are not very
effective, resulting in up to 80% infection and loss in nursery plants.
Alternatively, Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is a powerful tool for
creating transgenic plants with increased agricultural productivity. But many
crops are recalcitrant to transformation. This award supports research that will
employ novel methods developed by Professor Sanjay Swarup?s lab at the National
University of Singapore (NUS) to look at the community composition of the
rhizosphere microbiomes of transgenic and untreated A. thaliana using 16S rRNA
metagenomic analysis. Understanding how an Agrobacterium virulence protein
manipulates plant response to increase infection can help improve prevention and
control strategies for crown gall disease, as well as create better plant
transformation technologies for making useful transgenic crops.

Bacterial and plant metabolites are abundant in the rhizosphere environment and
modulate plant-microbe interactions1. I propose to investigate the changes in
root exudate metabolites of transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana expressing an
Agrobacterium rhizogenes effector protein, GALLS-CT, from a betaestradiol
inducible promoter2, and assay if expression of this protein alters the plant
rhizosphere microbiome. The GALLS-CT protein is transferred from Agrobacterium
into the plant3 and alters host defense gene expression to enhance infection
(unpublished data). I will employ novel methods developed by Professor Sanjay
Swarup?s lab at the National University of Singapore (NUS) to look at the
community composition of the rhizosphere microbiomes of transgenic and untreated
A. thaliana using 16S rRNA metagenomic analysis. The goal is to observe changes
in the microbial community that might be caused by GALLS-CT expression. I will
also collect root exudates from induced GALL-CT expressing plants and untreated
plants and perform metabolomics analysis using ultra high-pressure liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) to look for differences in
metabolite profiles that might be caused by GALLS-CT.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.