* 1614233
* EAPSI: Do Abstract Syntactic Representations Help Adult Second Language Learners Acquire Novel Word Types?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Karen Clothier, Clothier                Karen          K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Some words do not directly translate into other languages. For example, where an
English speaker would say either "John heard that Bill praised himself/him,"
depending on who is being praised, a Japanese speaker would say roughly "John-ga
Bill-wa praised self heard-that," and mean either John or Bill was being
praised. Him, himself, and the Japanese self are examples of anaphora, words
that refer back to already-mentioned linguistic information (e.g. Bill or John).
The use of anaphora is partly constrained by universal, syntactic principles,
but also language-specific rules. This project investigates whether learners can
develop native-like understanding of these cross-linguistically varied
constructions from mere exposure, and if so what information is relevant and
influential. This project, conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hajime Ono at
Tsuda College, will form a cross-linguistic data-set that will allow the
researchers to better understand the linguistic factors that enhance or reduce
adults' ability to learn new words and grammatical constructions. Results from
this project should provide insight into the kind of information that is
especially relevant or influential in helping adults learn a new language. This
project seeks to better understand the nature of language learning mechanisms,
and whether abstract syntactic representations can be used to acquire the
correct interpretations of novel anaphora. Anaphora in both Japanese and English
are constrained by universal principles, but language-specific parameters must
also be learned. This project uses a novel language learning task developed by
the awardee to test if the learning mechanism can track repeated co-occurrences
of a word-form, syntactic representation, and context-based interpretations in
order to map that word-form to the correct anaphora type, which will increase
our understanding of the role of syntactic representations in the language
acquisition process.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.