* 1614023
* AF: Small: Rare Events - New Probabilistic and Algorithmic Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Shachar Lovett, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Randomness is a powerful tool in mathematics and computer science. In
mathematics, it underlies the "probabilistic method," a method to prove that
certain mathematical objects with desired properties exist, by simply picking an
object at random, and arguing that with a positive probability, the object has
the required properties. In computer science, randomness is a powerful tool in
algorithm design. Randomized algorithms are often simpler or perform better than
their deterministic counterparts, and have found applications in many fields
such as graph algorithms, linear programming, routing algorithms, coding theory,
communication protocols, approximation algorithms, cryptography, and many
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main reasons that randomness is ubiquitous
in algorithm design, is that typically the probabilistic method shows that the
desired events, which control the success of the algorithm, not only occur with
a positive probability (which would be sufficient to prove existence), but that
they in fact occur with overwhelming probability. As such, it immediately lends
itself to the design of randomized algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is on regimes where this is not the case. There are several
probabilistic techniques which can prove the existence of "rare events." That
is, they show that the desired events occur with a positive (yet tiny)
probability. Although we do not have many such techniques, they have proven to
be extremely valuable, with applications in many domains: combinatorial
optimization, learning theory, approximation algorithms, distributed algorithms,
computational geometry, numerical analysis, and more. The main reason is that
such techniques, and more importantly, their algorithmic realizations, provide
algorithm designers with new sets of tools that they can apply that go beyond
"vanilla" probabilistic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus
both on the development of new mathematical and algorithmic tools and
techniques, as well as on their assimilation by students and researchers. This
involves mentoring students, creating and teaching relevant classes, writing
expository surveys, and organizing workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
technical side, the project focuses on two main domains. The first is
discrepancy theory. Discrepancy theory studies irregularities within
distributions, and has intimate relations with rounding techniques for integer
programs, and more generally with combinatorial optimization. There are several
important open problems in discrepancy theory (most notably the Komlos
conjecture), which this project sets a concrete plan to
resolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second domain is pseudo-randomness. Pseudo-
randomness is the study of deterministic objects which attain certain properties
satisfied by random objects. As such, this is a wide area of study, with many
applications both in mathematics and computer science. In this project, we focus
on pseudorandom objects which, for some bounded family of tests, behave exactly
like random objects. While in some settings such objects are deeply understood
and widely applied (for example, k-wise independence, which has applications in
coding theory, data structures, de-randomization, and more), in many other
settings they are much less understood. This project explores new approaches to
better understand such objects and to develop new algorithmic applications of
them.