* 1614479
* Study of the Electroweak Structure of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Paul King, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 540,000.00

This project seeks answers to two of the overarching questions central to
nuclear physics: "How does subatomic matter organize itself and what phenomena
emerge?", and "Are the fundamental interactions that are basic to the structure
of matter fully understood?". The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics is
successful at describing interactions of elementary particles, but it is known
to be incomplete, because the SM fails to describe phenomena that shape our
universe, like the difference between matter and anti-matter or the nature of
dark matter. Furthermore, the mechanisms by which the strong force binds three
light elementary particles, quarks, to make massive composite particles, proton
and neutrons, are not well understood quantitatively. Over ninety nine percent
of the mass of the visible matter in the universe is generated by the strong
force in this way. In this context, the PIs are involved in two experimental
programs using the electron beam at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility, first to investigate the internal structure of the proton as a means
of investigating the nature of the strong force, and second to search for
physics beyond the Standard Model by performing precision measurements of
interactions with precise Standard Model predictions. The PIs will train two
graduate students and undergraduate students in carrying out the research
program, and will engage in STEM outreach activities through the "Adopt a
physicist" program.

This project will support in part the use of Deeply Virtual Compton Scattering
of electrons from the proton to produce a 3-D tomographic picture of the
internal structure of the proton against which models of the strong force can be
tested. Roche is one of the spoke persons for experiment E12-06-114 at JLab, and
this project will support the data taking and data analysis for this experiment.
The immediate goal of this experiment is to test the hypothesis of scaling on
which the Generalized Parton Distribution formalism used to interpret this kind
of experiments is based. The second project supported by this award will further
the involvement of the PIs and their students in the JLab parity violating
electron scattering experiments, QWEAK and MOLLER. These experiments test the
Standard Model by studying the electromagnetic and weak forces in electron-
proton and electron-electron scattering. The PIs will continue their work with
QWEAK up to publication of the final results, and will use their expertise in
data acquisition and software development for the preparation of the MOLLER
experiment.