* 1614903
* The Influence of Mercury's Magnetosphere on Its Outermost Atmosphere
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Luke Moore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 06/30/2020
* USD 374,407.00

Many different processes can free atoms from the surface of the planet Mercury.
Most atoms then fall back to Mercury's surface. However, some atoms having
higher energies can be picked up and pushed by the sun's radiation, extending
Mercury's thin atmosphere farther away from the sun. During Mercury's orbit
around the sun, the contributions of all of these processes change at different
times. Monitoring the signals from emissions of sodium atoms is an excellent way
to trace these processes as they occur during Mercury's orbit. The investigators
will build an instrument that can see Mercury's surface and its thin atmosphere
at the same time, so that they can measure and model sodium's activity in order
to understand Mercury's surface/atmosphere processes. This instrument will be
installed on a Japanese telescope located in Hawaii. This project will involve a
new collaboration between Japanese and United States astronomers, fostering
international co-operation that benefits the U.S. The results of this work will
be included in university astronomy classes, benefiting student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atoms can be liberated from the
surface of the planet Mercury by many processes, including photon-stimulated
desorption, thermal evaporation, ion sputtering and meteoroid vaporization. Most
of these atoms follow a ballistic trajectory, and return to the planet's
surface. However, those atoms released with higher energies can be accelerated
by solar radiation pressure, creating a coma-like extension of Mercury's
exosphere. The relative contributions of these mechanisms to the exosphere are
disputed, and recent modeling suggests that no single source mechanism dominates
during the entire Mercury year. The investigators will build a new instrument
for spectral high-definition imaging to conduct regular, ground-based
observations of sodium on Mercury and in its exosphere. Sodium is an excellent
tracer of the morphology and dynamics present in Mercury's exosphere system. By
producing near-simultaneous spectral images of the sodium brightness
enhancements above Mercury's surface and the anti-sunward variations in
exospheric sodium, the variability of both sources can be tracked. The
observations will then be comprehensively modeled. This investigation will
strengthen international collaboration between the Japanese Tohaku University
and Boston University through joint observations at the Tohuku 60 cm
(24")Telescope on Haleakala, Hawaii. The results from the research will be
incorporated into university classes.