* 1614623
* Collaborative research: Integrable systems, inverse scattering and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gino Biondini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 60,735.00

This project involves theoretical and applied investigations of certain
ubiquitous nonlinear wave phenomena. More specifically, the systems that will be
studied belong to a class of nonlinear evolution equations referred to as
soliton equations or integrable systems, which arise as mathematical models in
various areas of applications, ranging from fluid dynamics and nonlinear optics,
to low-temperature physics and Bose-Einstein condensates, to name a few. In
particular, one of the model equations that will be studied describes the
formation of rogue waves in the open ocean. These extreme events, which are
characterized by wave crests up to four times bigger than the average, have been
known to cause significant damages to vessels and other equipment. Effects
similar to rogue waves have also been recently observed in optical fibers. A
precise mathematical description of these model equations is also a key
component in the design of optical fiber transmission systems. The project
outcomes will help to better characterize the behavior of these systems and the
properties of their solutions, they will elucidate the role that such solutions
play in the generation of rogue waves, and they will contribute to paving the
way for a deeper understanding of these important nonlinear phenomena. The
project will provide a rich educational experience through research for graduate
students at the State University of New York at Buffalo and undergraduate
students at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs.

Mathematically, the overarching goal of the project is a wide-ranging
investigation of initial and initial-boundary value problems for integrable
nonlinear evolution equations, thereby contributing to closing the gap between
our knowledge of linear and nonlinear integrable systems. More precisely, the
project comprises problems where the boundary conditions play a key role, as
well as various kinds of singular limits. Specific problems that will be studied
include: (i) the development of the inverse scattering transform for coupled
systems of equations of nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) type with non-zero boundary
conditions at infinity; (ii) the study of initial-boundary value problems for
NLS equations on a finite interval with linearizable, periodic or nearly
periodic boundary conditions; (iii) the study of the long-time asymptotics of
NLS systems affected by modulational instability and of semiclassical and
dispersionless limits for NLS equations and the Korteweg-deVries equation with
periodic boundary conditions.