* 1614428
* EAPSI: Sensitivity Enhancement in Solution NMR by Nonlinear High-Field Effects
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Sayoni Ray, Ray                     Sayoni
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project supports research in a collaboration with Prof. Ying-Chih Lin, a
world-renowned expert on high-field NMR and instrumentation, in the department
of Chemistry, National Taiwan University (NTU) in Taiwan to develop innovative
methodology in the field of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). This new
development could significantly enhance the spectral sensitivity in NMR and
image contrast in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for heteronuclei such as of
Carbon-13. Over the 8-week funding period, we will focus on MRI contrast
enhancement. Current MRI technique suffers from the poor contrast and
sensitivity and the presence of huge background signals in our body.
Heteronuclear molecular imaging (e.g. Carbon-13) can resolve the problem of
background signal, but again suffers from poor sensitivity. The current
collaborative project is to develop innovative approaches to enhance the
sensitivity and/or contrast using Carbon-13 MR spectroscopy and micro imaging
based on the nonlinear spin dynamics. The broader impact includes the very early
detection (stage I or II) of tiny malignant tumor, which can save about 30% of
those who die of cancers.

This project will encompass a balanced approach to develop a rigorous
theoretical understanding of nonlinear spin dynamics at UCLA on one hand and
sound methodology and instrumentation to demonstrate significant sensitivity
enhancement in biomolecular NMR during the EAPSI research at NTU. This will
utilize two major findings i) active feedback mechanism and ii) indirect
detection of Carbon-13 through dipolar interaction to alleviate the fundamental
limitation in NMR sensitivity. The intellectual merits of the proposed research
lie in channeling progress in spin physics (Active-Feedback Magnetic Resonance)
into significant improvements in heteronuclear MRI with valuable biomedical
applications (molecular imaging and early tumor detection). Its broader impacts
lie in accelerating future developments of MR-based physical oncology and nano
medicine, thereby transforming magnetic resonance and fundamental imaging
research into life-saving applications.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.