* 1614576
* III: Small: Discovering and Characterizing Implicit Links in Graph Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2020
* USD 503,123.00

Graph data represent a variety of phenomena, ranging from traffic data,
biological networks to social networks. Social networks enable people to
participate in a variety of online activities. A typical social networking site
allows users to explicitly specify "positive" links to other users with "labels"
such as family, friendships, Twitter follower, etc. Little attention is paid to
"implicit links" which are unspecified links among social users that may
indicate competition, distrust, dislike, or antagonism. This project studies
fundamental data analytics issues of understanding and identifying implicit
links in graph data. The project explores new computational techniques to
discover actionable and insightful patterns in large-scale graph data (e.g.,
social networks) and enables a large-scale study of social media user behaviors
in computational social science. The research insights gained through this
project are expected to lead to better design of supervised and unsupervised
learning algorithms on networks with both positive and implicit links. The study
of implicit social network links will be applicable to the design of new
recommender systems, leading to improved services and user experience. The
proposed research will involve graduate and undergraduate students in pursuing
their theses or projects. Research topics and findings will be integrated in
undergraduate and graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research addresses issues of link analysis in large-scale, incomplete, and noisy
networks, such as underlying social media. As implicit links between users are
typically invisible on social networking sites, discovering them entails novel
challenges. The research team proposes to evaluate the value of implicit links
for relationship discovery and better social network understanding. The project
includes development of algorithms for graph data analytics, machine learning
for positive and unlabeled link discovery in heterogeneous cross-media data, and
computationally efficient implicit link predictions. The team proposes to apply
the research insights to improving recommendation systems design, classification
of implicit user relationships, and social user clustering. The research team
plans to share results of this project, including benchmark data with the
research community to promote the research on implicit link discovery in social
networks via the project site
(http://www.public.asu.edu/~huanliu/projects/ImplicitLinks/).