* 1614283
* EAPSI: Harnessing Microbial Potential to Address Challenges in Groundwater Remediation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Nannan Jiang, Jiang                   Nannan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

With the rise of the human population as well as industrial and agricultural
activities, global sustainability is becoming an increasingly critical issue.
Although environmental pollutants are of global concern, these contaminants
generally differ in terms of type and concentration across the globe. Therefore,
it is essential to investigate multinational pollutants and their associated
degradation pathways across different geographic distributions. In this study,
we will collaborate with Professor Yufang Song in the Institute of Applied
Ecology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences to examine the biodegradation of
China-specific subsurface contaminants and compare the results to those obtained
in the United States.

A recent survey by China's Ministry of Water Resources estimated that 80% of
groundwater in China has already been contaminated with chlorinated solvents,
with chlorinated methanes among the most common. Chlorinated methanes such as
carbon tetrachloride and chloroform have been classified as probable human
carcinogens resulting from their adverse effects on organ function.
Biodegradation has proven effective in multiple scenarios by transforming many
toxic chlorinated compounds into environmentally benign end-products. However,
the fundamental microbial pathways for mitigating chlorinated methane
contamination still remain largely unknown. To this end, we will establish
microcosms with samples collected from several contaminated sites to enrich and
identify the microorganisms responsible for the biodegradation and
biotransformation of chlorinated methanes. Identifying these microorganisms can
lead to their use as predictive biomarkers in evaluating the bioremediation
potential at contaminated sites. The overarching goal of this proposal is to
apply established molecular tools to identify novel microorganisms, assess the
bioremediation potential and develop remediation technologies in China. These
shared results can be applied on a global scale and will effectively complement
NSF?s current focus on the intersection of food, energy and water.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.