* 1614611
* Neutrino-less Double-Beta Decay with CUORE and the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Frank Avignone, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2021
* USD 935,975.00

This grant partially supports neutrino research at the University of South
Carolina (USC). The group studies the properties of the neutrino, the most
prolific particle in the universe, about which much is still unknown. The
primary effort is the search for the hypothesized, but not yet discovered,
nuclear-radioactive decay called zero-neutrino double-beta decay. The existence
of such a radioactive decay mode has important consequences. Its existence
requires that neutrinos have mass, and that they are their own anti-particles.
Most importantly, this process would require the violation of an important
fundamental conservation law of elementary particle physics. The USC group has
leadership roles in two of the leading experiments in this field: the MAJORANA
DEMONSTRATOR, in the Sanford Underground Research Facility in South Dakota, and
the Cryogenic Underground Observatory (CUORE) in the Laboratori Nazionali del
Gran Sasso (LNGS) in Italy. The spin-off technology from the required
radiopurity of materials for the ultra-low background detectors has transitioned
directly into Homeland Security. Four past USC PhD students from the program
hold important positions in Homeland Security, at the Pacific Northwest and
Savannah River National Laboratories.

CUORE, nearing completion in the LNGS, is an array of 988 tellurium oxide
single-crystal bolometers that operate at ~8-10 mK to search for the zero-
neutrino decay of tellurium-130 (Te-130); the detector will contain 200-kg of
Te-130. The predicted half-life sensitivity is ~10^(26) years, to reach into the
inverted hierarchy neutrino-mass region. USC leads part of the R&D to determine
the feasibility and cost of enriching CUORE to 93% in Te-130 from 33.4%, and
equipping the bolometers with Cherenkov-light detectors to discriminate against
alpha-particle background. These upgrades are designed to reach the sensitivity
required to cover the inverted neutrino mass hierarchy. USC leads the CUORE data
analysis to search for zero-neutrino double-beta decay of Te-130 to the first
excited 0+ state in xenon-130, by detecting the coincidence events from the two
electrons and cascade gamma rays. This technique achieved zero-background in the
prototype experiment, CUORICINO. Finally, the USC group was responsible for the
production of the CUORE front-end electronics, and will participate in its
installation, commissioning and maintenance.