* 1614741
* Preparing African American Males for Energy &amp; Education (PAAMEE)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Jason Lee, Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,098,944.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project, Preparing
African American Males for Energy and Education (PAAMEE), is an ITEST Strategies
project designed to expose, motivate and prepare African American males for
technical careers and post-secondary education in the Power Generation and
Renewable Energy industries. The project will engage 240 Metropolitan Detroit
African American males, grades 10-12, in project based out-of-school time
science and engineering activities that teach concepts related to the production
and storage of energy. Using a cohort model, students will engage in STEM
educational programming, college readiness and youth mentoring over a 15 month
period. In addition to technical concept mastery, students will be meeting
business professionals, entrepreneurs and university students pursing degrees in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major content areas of the
program includes project based engineering and leadership courses, career
exploration activities, and a community service opportunity. Each course will be
structured to meet the learning needs of high school students. Courses will
rotate throughout the campuses of Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program
with partners located in the Detroit Metropolitan Area, Michigan State
University (Lansing, MI) and Michigan Technological University (Houghton, MI) A
key aspect of the program is to provide the opportunity for student participants
to engage in academic and technical work in the university environment. The
program will conduct a mixed methods research study to directly address three
guiding research questions: 1) What coherent sets of experiences effectively and
efficiently support student competency, motivation and persistence for
productive participation in the STEM-related workforce today or in the future.
2) What roles might business and industry workforce members play in motivating
students to become aware of, interested in, and prepared for careers in the
STEM-related workforce? 3) Given the shifting demographics reflected in our
current classrooms and in our country, what are effective and productive ways to
ensure broadening participation by engaging divers underrepresented populations
in STEM programs and careers?