* 1614336
* EAPSI: Understanding the Integral Forms of Vertex Operator Algebras and their Applications in Theoretical Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Danquynh Nguyen, Nguyen                  Danquynh       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The theory of vertex operator algebras is a mathematical framework whose
importance reaches well outside of mathematics. It is prevalent in theoretical
physics, in particular, conformal field theory and string theory, which attempts
to provide a unified description of all the forces of nature. While a vertex
operator algebra is most often considered over the field of complex numbers or
fields of characteristic zero, little is known about those over a field of prime
characteristic p. Integral forms are known to bridge this gap and are precisely
the primary interest of this project. A better understanding of vertex operator
algebras over fields of prime characteristic plays an important role in the
study of modular representations of finite groups, rational vertex operator
algebras, and rational conformal field theory. The project will be conducted at
the School of Mathematics at Sichuan University under the mentorship of Prof. Li
Ren. Prof. Ren, who specializes in vertex operator algebras. Prof. Ren is a
coauthor of a manuscript regarded as the first paper dealing with modular vertex
operator algebras.

This project aims to answer the question: When does a vertex operator algebra
have an integral form? In this branch of mathematics, rationality and
C2-cofiniteness are among the most important concepts. The research will
investigate the conjecture that if V is a rational, C2-cofinite, and self-dual
simple vertex operator algebra, then V has an integral form. Professor Ren's
recent works include new results on the representations of vertex operator
algebras over an arbitrary field, not just fields of characteristic zero.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and
China's Ministry of Science and Technology.