* 1614364
* EAPSI: Impacts of Levels of a Pesticide Mixture on Hormones and Behavior in the World?s only Self-Fertilizing Fish
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Lauren Gillespie, Gillespie               Lauren         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The only self-fertilizing vertebrate, the mangrove killifish, serves as an
indicator of environmental pollution in disappearing wild mangrove habitat. The
research will explore varying lengths of exposure to biologically and
environmentally relevant levels of mixtures of insecticides, fungicides, and
herbicides on aggressive behavior, contest dynamics, testosterone (T), and
cortisol (F) in the mangrove killifish (K. marmoratus) utilizing a novel
experimental approach analyzing flexibility in behavioral and hormonal response
phenotypes. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yuying Hsu
of National Normal Taiwan University in Taipei, Taiwan. The Hsu lab houses
captive populations of the mangrove killfish, offering a unique opportunity for
international collaboration. The research augments dissertation research
examining behavior and hormones in golf course living birds. Using the killifish
as a model, the research in Taiwan will examine how pesticide mixtures commonly
in use at this, and other, golf courses may influence behavior and hormones
expanding upon my dissertation work. This research may inform on impacts (if
any) of levels of contaminants currently thought to have minimal physiological
impacts. Studying a unique species while fostering international collaboration
with a world leader in scientific research will be valuable to my personal and
professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic control with predictable
relationships between aggressive behavior, testosterone, and cortisol regarding
responses to conspecific conflict are well studied in the mangrove killifish.
This provides valuable and difficult to achieve control of genetic variation,
often thought responsible for individual variation in hormone-behavior
relationships. The experimental design is unique, as fish will be exposed to
environmentally relevant levels of a pesticide mixture. Exposure will occur for
short (7 days) and long intervals (14 days); while traditional methodology
typically uses shorter exposure periods this is unrealistic compared to what is
experienced naturally. Measuring aggression, testosterone, and cortisol after
exposure also deviates from traditional endpoints measured in laboratory
contaminant studies. By utilizing novel animal models and toxicological
endpoints, in concert with biological methodology, and accounting for
synergistic impacts of multiple contaminants, a realistic perspective concerning
sensitive impacts of contaminants on physiology and behavior is possible.
Interdisciplinary approaches combining behavioral endocrinology and toxicology
are necessary for understanding how contaminants may impact behavioral and
hormonal profiles, and ultimately, the health of human and wildlife
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology of
Taiwan.