* 1614186
* EAPSI: Developing Iridium-based Alloys as Effective Catalysts for Direct Ethanol Fuel Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Lida MehdizadeganNamin, MehdizadeganNamin       Lida
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Fuel cells enable the conversion of different chemicals directly into electrical
energy, and are much more efficient than conventional combustion engines. Direct
ethanol fuel cells (DEFC) use ethanol as a fuel source. However, a limitation in
commercialization of DEFCs is a cheap, efficient catalyst to break apart
ethanol. Iridium alloys (a combination of two or more materials) are promising
catalysts as they possess high catalytic activity and are cheaper than platinum,
the traditional fuel cell catalyst. Synthesizing and testing all possible alloys
experimentally is not realistic. The aim of this project is therefore to develop
atomic models of Iridium-based alloys in order to predict which alloys may be
stable, good catalysts. Simulations using high-performance computers allow fast,
economical prediction of potential alloys, which may then be tested in the
laboratory. This work thus will speed up commercialization of new DEFC catalysts
and will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Koretaka Yuge, a noted
expert in modeling metal alloys, at Kyoto University, Japan.

Developing efficient catalysts for direct ethanol fuel cells (DEFCs) is of
special importance in the catalysis and fuel cell communities. DEFCs have
several advantages compared to other types of fuel cells mainly because of their
feed, ethanol, which has high energy density, is safer than hydrogen and is less
toxic than methanol (both hydrogen and methanol are fuel cell feeds). To find
the best Ir-based alloys the PI will use a combination of density functional
theory (DFT) and the cluster expansion (CE) method. By using these two
techniques simultaneously, the limitation of DFT methods due to finite
computation power will be resolved. This project will be conducted at Kyoto
University under the mentorship of Professor Koretaka Yuge who has done
tremendous research on combining the DFT and CE methods.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is funded jointly by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.