* 1614766
* Multiscale Modeling of Phase Transitions Driven by Multivalency and Disordered Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2021
* USD 963,476.00

This project will uncover how biological matter is organized into tiny
functional compartments inside cells. These compartments resemble liquid
droplets. They are known as membraneless organelles and they perform different
functions in different types of cells. They collect different types of molecules
and form in different locations within cells. An example of a specific
membraneless organelle is one that collects key protein and RNA molecules to
assist in the formation of connections in the brain. This is essential for
learning and the development of memories. Distinct protein molecules drive the
formation of distinct membraneless organelles. In some cases, the identities of
the relevant proteins are known. It is also known that membraneless organelles
form by processes known as phase separation, which are similar to processes that
lead to the separation of oil from vinegar. Research in this project will
uncover the relationships between specific proteins and the physical and
chemical interactions that lead to the formation of membraneless organelles via
phase separation. This research is important because membraneless organelles
control a variety of cellular functions that can go wrong and give rise to
diseases. The research will use computations that combine physics and chemistry
to answer biologically relevant questions. The research will also fuel the
development of specific instruction modules, which will be used in the INSPIRE
program at Washington University. The goal is to attract rising high-school
freshmen from the St. Louis area and teach them the importance of quantitative
sciences for driving discoveries in biology. This will help prepare the next
generation of scientists to take on technological challenges at the intersection
of physics, chemistry, mathematics and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane-
less organelles are dense, highly viscous liquids that form via liquid-liquid
phase separation. This refers to the separation of polymers into dense, polymer-
rich liquids that are in equilibrium with polymer-poor dispersed phases. It is
often the case that a single protein is necessary and sufficient to drive the
formation of a specific organelle. Multivalent interactions and intrinsic
disorder are defining features of proteins that drive phase separation. The
project will focus on the specificity of interactions among short linear motifs,
their valencies, and the patterning of motifs in archetypal sequences that drive
phase separation. The research will also test specific predictions that have
been made recently regarding the role of disordered linkers as modulators of the
phase behavior of multidomain proteins. A suite of novel multiscale,
multiresolution, high-throughput computational methods will drive the project
research. These will be combined with experiments in test tubes and in cells.
The experiments will be performed in collaboration with accomplished
investigators in the field of intracellular phase separation. Polymer physics
theories will be adapted to facilitate integration of computational results with
experimental data. Integration of the results investigations using polymer
physics theories will lead to a comprehensive understanding of how sequence
features of low complexity IDPs influence the driving forces for phase
separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics.