* 1614645
* US-French Collaboration: Mechanisms of emergent OscillaTIONs in the septo-hippocampal network-MOTION
* BIO,IOS
* 07/22/2015,08/31/2016
* Ivan Soltesz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 213,584.00

The hippocampus in mammals is a brain area important for learning and memory
that is also implicated in several major neurological and psychiatric disorders
including epilepsy, autism, schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. Prior
research revealed that learning and memory-related information processing in the
hippocampus critically depends on clock-like, rhythmic electrical signals
elicited by an adjacent brain structure called the septum. However, how the
oscillatory neuronal activity emerges from the closely interconnected neuronal
networks of the septum and the hippocampus is not understood. The current
project will employ novel, uniquely high-throughput experimental approaches in
mice integrated with innovative, biologically realistic, large-scale
supercomputer-based theoretical modeling techniques to identify key mechanisms
underlying rhythmic electrical signal generation in septo-hippocampal circuits.
The project represents a potentially major milestone in the development of
biologically based realistic computer models of the brain, as it would allow the
generation and testing of hypotheses concerning network mechanisms of
behaviorally relevant oscillatory neuronal activity with unparalleled biological
realism, precision and speed. In addition, the experimental knowledge base and
the large-scale computational brain models will be placed in open-source
databases (including ModelDB for network models at
http://senselab.med.yale.edu/modeldb/, and Neuromorpho for biological structural
data at http://neuromorpho.org/) that are freely accessible for the unrestricted
use by the scientific community. This project involves extensive postdoctoral
training in neuroinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by
NSF's Office of the Director, International Science and Engineering, and a
companion project is being funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).