* 1614422
* EAPSI:Strengthening the Weather Research and Forecasting Model for Antarctica by Assimilating GPS Radio Occultation Profiles from the 2010 Concordiasi Campaign
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Sussman, Sussman                 Jeffrey        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This award supports research that aims to enhance weather forecasting in
Antarctica by assessing the impact of additional data observations on the
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model. The study will integrate GPS radio
occultation data from the 2010 Concordiasi field campaign, which collected data
in the stratosphere over Antarctica through a balloon-borne collection system,
into the WRF model. Assimilating the new data into the WRF model may improve
forecasting and understanding of Antarctic cyclones and wind speeds, along with
air-sea ice interaction in the future. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Shu-Chih Yang, an expert in model evaluation and data
assimilation in the Department of Atmospheric Sciences at National Central
University in Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the sparsely sampled Antarctic
region, this study will assess the impact of additional in situ observations, as
provided by balloon borne GPS RO, on Antarctic weather forecasting. The study
will take GPS radio occultation refractivity profiles from the 2010 Concordiasi
campaign over Antarctica and assimilate them into the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model using one of the WRF Data Assimilation (DA) schemes. The
GPS RO profiles provide additional in-situ measurements in a sparsely sampled
region of the world. The project will determine the impact that these additional
profiles have on WRF model forecasts, particularly in relation to cyclogenesis
along the sea ice edge and winds that advect sea ice. At National Central
University in Taiwan, Professor Shu-Chih Yang will assist in the data
assimilation process and analysis of the model output. Her expertise will be
critical for the data assimilation process and for understanding the results and
behavior of the WRF model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia
and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.