* 1614398
* EAPSI: Leveraging Microalgae Metabolism to Address Sustainability Challenges
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jared Broddrick, Broddrick               Jared          T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Exploring and developing new sustainable resources to counter increasing
consumption has become a focus of research efforts in the academic and private
sector. Considerable hope in meeting these challenges has been placed on using
photosynthetic organisms that are able to collect carbon dioxide and use it to
create important natural products. Diatoms are microalgae responsible for
approximately 20% of global photosynthesis, are attractive biofuel candidates
based on their cellular composition. They also generate large amounts of omega-3
fatty acids; important nutrients in the human diet but the demand is stressing
global fisheries. However, our understanding of diatom metabolism is not on par
with their potential to address these societal challenges. This research,
performed in conjunction with Dr. Yusuke Matsuda at the Kwansei Gyakuin
University, Sanda Japan, will address fundamental aspects of this discrepancy.
Using state-of-the-art metabolic computer modeling coupled with Dr. Matsuda's
diatom biology expertise, the details of diatom metabolism will be investigated.
The results will increase our fundamental understanding of diatom biology
enabling new microalgae solutions to sustainability challenges.

A recent investigation into the metabolic capabilities of the model diatom
Phaeodactylum tricornutum revealed several key metabolic enzymes were predicted
to be simultaneously sorted to multiple intracellular compartments. This
research will experimentally determine the exact compartmentalization and
investigate the possibility of dual or dynamic targeting of these key enzymes.
Using a genome-scale metabolic model of P. tricornutum, the phenotypic impact of
differential localization of these enzymes will be analyzed and used to drive
experimental design. Fluorescent protein tagged enzyme constructs of these
enzymes will be developed by the Matusda lab. Diatoms cultured under the in
silico determined experimental conditions will be analyzed by fluorescent
microscopy to determine the in vivo localization of the proteins. The results
will be contextualized by refining the genome-scale model and the implications
of enzyme localization will be extended to other environments via in silico
simulations. The output from this research will elucidate core aspects of diatom
central metabolism.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.