* 1614407
* Entanglement in Biology-Pierced Lassos and Deep Knots
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Patricia Jennings, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 720,000.00

Unexpectedly, proteins can tie themselves into knots in their native folds.
Since protein folding from an unstructured molecular chain into the native-state
is already complex, the existence of knotted chains immediately raises the
questions: how does the chain cross itself to form a knot and how does the knot
affect function? The PIs discovered a class of proteins, with leptin as the
founding member. This growing class now includes well over 350 protein families,
spanning a huge range of fold types and including all secondary structure
elements. The goal of the current project is to use a multifaceted approach to
investigate how the fundamental mechanisms of knotting/unknotting/threading are
initiated and relate to overall protein folding, and how the knotted functional
and folding landscapes are related. One of the PIs has been involved in K-12
outreach by performing scientific experiments at local grammar schools which are
greater than 50% minority students, by also helping to train children in middle
school for the Science Olympiad, hosting High School students as research
interns for the summer and by hosting people interested in a career in teaching
in primary and secondary schools as research assistants in her laboratory. This
effort will allow the PI to convey a true excitement for science to the K-12
population and she is currently in the planning stages of intensifying her K-12
outreach efforts by coordinating visits to local bilingual schools accompanied
by successful minority, male and female students from UCSD that will provide
role models for the local students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simplest backbone,
deep-knotted proteins are the 31 trefoil knots such as in the trefoil
methyltransferase (MT) families. The PIs showed that an extended time in the
denatured state is required for unknotting in these proteins. The PIs will
investigate whether specific regions identified as barriers to untying in the
MTs also contribute to functional regulation and ligand gating in the native
states because of long-range coupling of topologically frustrated regions. The
preliminary data are consistent with this hypothesis. Further exploration
building upon these foundational studies will allow the PIs to investigate the
interplay between the strained topology inherent in a knotted conformation and
communication between functional sites. These studies will allow the PIs to
describe, for the first time, the physical-chemical variables necessary to
overcome the topological barrier for initiating threading as well as the role of
the PL on the functional dynamics of a protein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the
Division of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.