* 1614287
* EAPSI: 3D Printing of Ceramic/Metal Composites for Aerospace and Automotive Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Tulsi Patel, Patel                   Tulsi
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), also known as 3D printing, has been the focus of
research in the automotive and aerospace industries. Metal AM is advantageous
for its ability to produce efficient and complex parts. However, the major
drawback of AM is the lack of reproducibility and mechanical integrity, which
conventional methods offer. In this project, the feasibility of embedded sensors
in metal AM parts in order to monitor variations in mechanical properties will
be investigated. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Hyonkee Sohn, the project manager of the powder bed fusion metal printing group
and a noted expert in laser materials processing, at the Korean Institute of
Machinery and Materials (KIMM). This partnership will provide access to laser
materials processing equipment and an original metal 3D printer designed by
KIMM. Ultimately, this will initiate a global effort in the advancement of AM
technology.

The integration of functional materials such as ferroelectrics and
piezoelectrics into metal AM parts will enable sensing applications for in-situ
monitoring. Despite the difficulty of depositing such ceramics onto metal
substrates, preliminary results indicate that this can be achieved using
industry-standard metal-organic solution deposition methods. In this research,
ferroelectric thin films will be deposited onto metal substrates and further
evaluated for its structural and electrical properties. Typical materials for
ferroelectrics include: lead zirconate titanate (PZT), barium titanate (BT), and
strontium bismute tantalate (SBT). As for the materials of choice for the
substrate, additively manufactured Inconel 718, Ti-6Al-4V, and 17-4PH stainless
steel will be considered. Different ceramic/metal combinations will be assessed
for the best compatibility and performance.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.