* 1614690
* Advanced Statistics in the Search for Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Eric Feigelson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 383,032.00

The search for planets outside our own Solar System (exoplanets) has been very
successful. One search method looks for changes in brightness as a planet
crosses in front of its parent star. Another looks for small wobbles in the
star's motion. Both methods are hurt by noise that can overwhelm the weak
planetary signals. A new approach uses advanced statistics to clean out the
stellar signal and find planets in the residual signals. This could transform
the field by uncovering interesting planetary systems. It introduces modern
methods into astronomy. This will improve calculations of planet populations. It
will also benefit all studies that concern the time domain, especially those
with complex variability. This award helps support training science teachers in
the exciting topics and methods of astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search
for exoplanets with photometric transit and spectroscopic radial velocity
surveys has been very successful to date, but progress is stymied by the
presence of signals from stellar magnetic activity or other nuisance noise
sources that can overwhelm the weak planetary signals. A new approach has been
developed that uses parametric statistical techniques to remove most of the
stellar signal, and then searches for planetary signals from the residuals.
Preliminary work on the Kepler mission database is showing excellent results,
and this study will extend these methods to ground-based surveys. It is clear
that astronomy has not taken sufficient advantage of modern advances in
statistical methodology, such as the autoregressive modeling of time series
developed in signal processing and econometrics. This project will start by
investigating how well these sorts of models work on typical ground-based
cadences, and then test the successes on a photometric database of several
million stars. Autoregressive models will also be tested on a densely cadenced
radial velocity survey of bright stars, chosen for the confusing effect of
magnetic activity on correlated jitter. All of the methods developed will be
widely promulgated, and can serve a wide range of other time series analysis
problems in astronomy. The exoplanetary community will benefit from the
discovery of new candidate planets, uncovering interesting planetary systems,
and improving calculations of planetary populations. The time domain
astronomical community will benefit from using autoregressive methods to treat
the complex variability behaviors of cosmic populations.