* 1614438
* EAPSI: Tracing the Evolution of Sauropterygia toward the Double-Flipper Body Plan of Plesiosauria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Mark DeBlois, DeBlois                 Mark
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Sauropterygia is an extinct group of marine reptiles that evolved a unique body
plan characterized by two pairs of wing-shaped flippers for underwater flight.
This body plan is fully realized in Plesiosauria, the most successful subgroup
within Sauropterygia. Since thrust is produced via oscillations of the limbs in
underwater flight, two pairs of flippers would provide more thrust than one.
Yet, all other lineages that converged on underwater flight (e.g. penguins, sea
turtles, and sea lions) possess only a single pair. Their remaining limbs are
distinctly different and serve ancillary functions such as steering in sea
turtles. Indeed, the additional set of propulsors may have enabled plesiosaurs
to attain much larger body sizes than other underwater flyers. The aim of this
project is to ascertain how this body plan arose in Sauropterygia alone. This
project will investigate the sequence of transformations in the shape and
function of the limbs and body of early sauropterygians leading to plesiosaurs.
Since the fossil remains of early sauropterygians most closely related to
plesiosaurs are found in China, this project will be conducted in conjunction
with Dr. Da-Yong Jiang, an expert in extinct Chinese marine reptiles, at Peking
University Geology and Geological Museum. This collaboration will enable access
to critical specimens and produce insight into the possible ecological context
that underlie sauropterygian evolution.

The morphological and concomitant functional transformations toward the
plesiosaurian body plan will be investigated via soft tissue reconstruction and
direct measurements of the limbs, girdles, and axial skeleton. Comparisons will
be made among early sauropterygians (pachypleurosaur-grade taxa and
nothosauroids), plesiosaurs, and those that bridge the morphological and
phylogenetic gap between them (Wangosaurus and Yunguisaurus). This project is
possible because these two newly discovered species from China are superbly
preserved and nearly complete. This project will provide insight into
sauropterygian paleobiology and convergent evolution across the land-sea
transition.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and
China?s Ministry of Science and Technology.