* 1614436
* IDEAS: Inventing, Designing, and Engineering on the Autism Spectrum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wendy Martin, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,193,170.00

With current research indicating that up to one in 68 children is on the autism
spectrum, it is critical to create programs that prepare students with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) to achieve their full potential in the workforce. This
three-year project will bring together a team of researchers, Maker program
developers from New York Hall of Science, educators with expertise in supporting
students with ASD, and students on the autism spectrum to create a hybrid
formal/informal program that prepares middle-school students with and without
ASD for careers as inventors, designers, and engineers. The goal is for the
program to be sustainably implemented in New York City's ASD inclusion middle
schools by educators in those schools. Not only will this project benefit
students, educators, and staff in the largest and most diverse ASD inclusion
program in the country, it also will serve as a model of collaborative program
development and implementation that other ASD inclusion programs in urban school
districts can follow. This project will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics contributing new knowledge about how theoretically grounded,
research-based techniques for supporting students with ASD can be incorporated
into Maker programs, and how to implement such programs in formal and informal
inclusion education settings. This will expand our understanding of design and
engineering workforce preparation for middle school students with ASD, provide a
model for how to translate informal STEM programs to school-based environments,
and demonstrate how such cross-setting programs can be tailored by stakeholders
to various educational contexts. The resources made available through this
project will support the adaptation of the program by other
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use Clements' (2007)
Curriculum Research Framework to structure a collaborative co-design approach,
organized around the following phases of work. Phase 1: Collaborative program
redesign. Test and redesign a museum-based Design and Fabrication Make Academy
afterschool program to include techniques for supporting students with ASD, and
to add classroom and lunchtime components to the afterschool program. Phase 2:
Pilot test and revise. Conduct a pilot test of the redesigned program and
research instruments in three inclusion middle schools, and make revisions based
on findings. Phase 3: Research study. Implement the revised program and conduct
research that examines whether it shows promise for (a) helping program
participants learn the Engineering Design Process, (b) increasing the science
and engineering interest and career motivation of program participants, and (c)
creating a sustainable program and implementation process for urban ASD
inclusion programs.