* 1614330
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Relationship Among Environment, Culture And Agricultural Intensification
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Zhen Qin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 18,995.00

Over the last 10,000 years, agriculture has gradually replaced hunting and
gathering, and became the globally dominant food resource. Agricultural
productivity provides a solid foundation for population growth, social
complexity and the emergence of cities and states. However, there is a huge
intellectual gap between our understanding of the earliest domestication and
cultivation of limited crops and intensive agriculture practiced by early
states. How was agriculture intensified over time? What resources were required
to intensify food production? What is the driving force behind the processes of
agricultural intensification? Questions concerning agricultural intensification
have attracted but also puzzled scholars in various fields for a long time.
Within this broader context, Dr. Tristram R. Kidder and Mr. Zhen Qin, of
Washington University in St. Louis, will undertake research in the Central Plain
of China to explore the process of agricultural intensification, defined as an
increase in the productive output per unit of land, and its relationship with
environmental change. This project will provide first-hand field data on buried
agricultural fields and therefore be helpful for both testing ideas about
agriculture put forth in historical written documents and gaining new
comprehension of agricultural intensification; it will also make theoretical
contribution to agricultural intensification from an site-specific, bottom-up
perspective by use of well-preserved archaeological datasets. Beyond academia,
this project also has broader impacts. Firstly, it will contribute to the local
community by recruiting local people to do fieldwork, including coring, test
excavation, and sampling. Through their participation, a deeper understanding of
their history and identity will be gained. Secondly, this project will be
carried out in collaboration with the local institute and this collaboration
will promote mutual understanding and trust through the team working and
reciprocal learning between U.S. and Chinese researchers who are from different
cultural traditions.

To obtain a further understanding of how agricultural intensification was
achieved and why agriculture was intensified, Dr. Kidder, Mr. Qin and their
collaborators in China will conduct a large-scale excavation of ancient fields,
a systematic collection of soil samples, and a comprehensive analysis of
geoarchaeological results. The excavation will be carried out at Sanyangzhuang
site, Neihuang County, Henan Province in central China. In this site, three
strata of ancient agricultural field with ridge-and-furrow features, have been
found. Based on these unique relics well preserved by the Yellow River flood
sediments, the research team will explore the question of "how" by examining the
field management techniques, including plowing, manuring, and irrigation, as an
implementation path of agricultural intensification; micromophology and
elemental analysis also will be deployed. For the question of "why", local
paleoenvironment will be reconstructed and environment-induced risks, such as
climate changes and the Yellow River floods, will be investigated as one of
major driving forces of agricultural intensification by means of isotopic
analysis and conventional geoarchaeological analysis.