* 1614860
* Investigating Lithospheric Evolution Beneath the Southern and Northeastern United States
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Aibing Li, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 159,923.00

Throughout Earth?s history, the tectonic plates that make up the lithosphere
have converged to form super-continents and then pulled apart over time-scales
of hundreds of millions of years. The southern U.S. near the Gulf Coast and the
eastern U.S. bordering the Atlantic experienced two cycles of super-continent
formation and break-up. These episodes of collision and rifting altered the
crust and mantle lithosphere of the North American plate, thickening these
layers in some regions, thinning them in others, and producing distinctive
structures by aligning mineral grains and melting small amounts of rock. In this
project we will use earthquake waves to construct three-dimensional models of
the crust and mantle lithosphere, and we will interpret these models to better
understand how continental collision and rifting affect continental
lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to improve resolution
of crust and mantle structure in the southern and eastern U.S. in order to
better understand lithospheric evolution and modification through the last
Wilson cycle. The southern and eastern margins of the North America continent
experienced two complete Wilson cycles of orogeny and rifting, leaving varied
signatures of deformation and magmatism in the crust and mantle lithosphere of
these regions. However, many aspects of crust and mantle structure remain poorly
known at the scales relevant to distinguishing the effects of orogeny, rifting,
and other processes such as hotspot interaction. Using data from the NSF
EarthScope USArray/Transportable Array (TA), now completed in the contiguous
U.S., we propose to image crust and mantle seismic structure in new detail. We
will focus on two regions: one spanning the southern craton edge, the entire
Ouachita orogeny and the Gulf of Mexico coastal plain, and the other containing
the eastern craton edge, the central and northern Appalachians, and the Atlantic
coast. We will use seismic data from TA stations, supplemented by other
temporary and permanent broadband stations, to image crustal and mantle
discontinuities using Sp and Ps receiver functions, construct 3-D anisotropic
models based on Rayleigh wave, Love wave and shear-wave-splitting analyses, and
we will integrate these data and methods through joint analyses and inversions.
The seismic models will be used constrain the style and geometry of deformation
in the crust and mantle lithosphere due to the last episodes of orogeny and
rifting. This interpretation will be guided by geological and active source
indicators of deformation in the shallow crust and by the type and age of
magmatism across the region, bearing in mind that some facets of crust and
mantle structure may reflect events that predated or followed the last cycle of
orogeny and continental rifting. Variations in the impact of orogeny and rifting
on the lithosphere will be compared between and within the study regions. The
proposed project will support the education and career development of graduate
students at the University of Houston and at Brown. It will also contribute to
undergraduate senior theses, lab exercises and group research projects in
undergraduate and graduate courses, and to science outreach activities with
local public schools. Students from diverse backgrounds will be recruited to
participate in this research.