* 1614208
* EAPSI: A Political Geographic Analysis of Greenbelt Agriculture for Resilience and Sustainable Development in Seoul
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jay Bowen, Bowen                   Jay            E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

As the threat of climate change to political and economic security increases,
urban agriculture has become an important component of resilience strategy for
many local and national policy makers. The Seoul Metropolitan Government in
Korea promises to build resilience to climate change through the expansion of
urban farming, which they anticipate will provide new social, economic, and
environmental amenities. The research is a political geographic analysis of
Seoul's greenbelt as a site of policy conflict over urban land use for
agriculture and sustainable development. The project investigates both civic
engagement with recent government policies that reorganize urban farming for
sustainability, as well as the implications for residents, commercial farmers,
and urban development. This research is a collaboration with Dr. Youngmin Lee, a
noted social scientist and expert on issues of urban revitalization, sustainable
development, and citizenship at Ewha University. The study employs analysis of
government urban farming policies, formal interviews with relevant government
officials, and conversational interviews and participant observation with
greenbelt urban farmers. The project will address the need for empirical data
among policymakers considering sustainable urban growth proposals in a political
context where the state endeavors to build legitimacy amid widespread dissent.
Evaluations of the interface between state and society over issues of urban
sustainability in Seoul will inform urban planning for climate change in the
United States and abroad. Seoul?s greenbelt is a legacy of developmental state
planning under the government of Park Chung-hee. Initially, the greenbelt served
as a strategic buffer against potential North Korean military incursions and the
detrimental effects of the nation?s rapid industrialization on urban air
quality. Amidst democratization and market liberalization, the greenbelt has
endured as a site of contestation between land use policies criticized as either
overly authoritarian or neoliberal. As the preeminent activation site for
Seoul?s urban farming initiatives, the greenbelt offers an invaluable
opportunity to examine the interrelatedness of geopolitical, economic, and
environmental security, as well as to assess issues of citizen participation in
the context of political and economic liberalization. As an ethnography of the
interface between the state, society, and environment, the research responds to
the need for empirical data on facilitating sustainable growth in a context
where new state priorities encounter skepticism and apprehension.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.