* 1614326
* Using a Uniform Sample of Sub-Galactic-Scale Binary Active Galactic Nuclei to Understand Changes in Galaxies Over Time Caused by Galaxy Merging
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Hai Fu, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2021
* USD 405,011.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental predictions of the cold dark
matter cosmology is that galaxies grow through a series of major and minor
mergers with other galaxies. By studying galaxy mergers through detailed
observations and theoretical models, we can understand galaxy changes over time
in general. Significant progress has been made in the past two decades, but the
problem is far from solved. The key physical processes of galaxy merging remain
poorly understood. In particular, simulations make predictions that until now
have been difficult to identify because of observational challenges, hindering
direct comparison between observation and simulation. This proposal seeks to
advance our understanding of galaxy changes caused by mergers by eliminating the
observational obstacles and characterizing the frequency of binary black holes
at small physical scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will identify, confirm, and characterize a sample of kiloparsec-scale
binary Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs). For the first time, the binaries will be
identified systematically using high-resolution deep radio and optical surveys
in a 275 square degree field. This search will increase the current sample of
kiloparsec-scale binary AGNs by an order-of-magnitude. Unbiased by dust-
obscuration, the sample will cover a range of host galaxy properties and black-
hole-accretion modes. By comparing the uniformly selected binary AGNs with
matched control samples, the team will investigate a number of outstanding
questions in the merger paradigm of galaxy formation and change: Can mergers
trigger and synchronize black hole accretion? What is the origin of the two-
accretion/feedback modes (radiative-mode vs. jet-mode)? Can AGN feedback
significantly affect the star formation activity on a short timescale
(~1,000,000 years)? How frequently does a supermassive black hole oscillate
around a stellar core because of gravitational wave recoil or a delay in binary
formation? As the immediate precursor of massive black hole binaries, studies of
kiloparsec-scale galaxy mergers will also have important implications for low-
frequency gravitational wave experiments.