* 1614061
* EAPSI: Improving and Understanding the Catalysts used to Convert Biological Oils to Diesel Fuel
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Ryan Loe, Loe                     Ryan           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Biodiesel constitutes the major renewable fuel derived from lipid-based
feedstocks such as vegetable oils and animal fats; however, several issues
hinder biodiesel from being completely fungible with traditional petroleum
diesel. Biodiesel?s poor cold flow properties, storage stability, and engine
compatibility problems stem from its oxygen content. Recently, attention has
been shifted to develop a process for the removal of oxygen from lipid-based
feedstocks to generate a renewable fuel that is chemically identical to
petroleum derived fuels. The award will help investigate unique catalysts that
are vital to this process by sending a graduate student, currently working at
the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research (CAER), to the
Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials of the University of
Queensland (UQ) in Brisbane, Australia. The graduate student will work with the
group of Dr. Jorge Beltramini at UQ to harness the materials, know-how and
instrumentation available there to develop and understand new catalysts for the
conversion of biological oils to diesel fuel.

Ni-based catalysts are attracting attention as some of the most promising
formulations for the conversion of lipid-based feedstocks to fuel-like
hydrocarbons. Nevertheless, important gaps in the fundamental understanding of
several aspects of these catalysts remain, including the effect of the support
porosity and morphology, catalyst preparation method, and the chemical and
electronic state of both Ni and Ni promoters on the performance of these
formulations. The project will include: 1) the synthesis of unique mesoporous
supports; 2) the preparation of Ni-based catalysts using these supports via
different methods; 3) the spectroscopic study of promoted and unpromoted
catalysts to acquire basic knowledge of great importance and wide applicability
for catalysis science and technology. Upon returning to the United States, not
only will new know-how on synthetic techniques be available at CAER, but the
catalysts synthesized at UQ will be screened for their ability to convert lipid
feeds stocks to fuel-like hydrocarbons.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.