* 1614839
* Precision Studies in Subatomic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Dinko Pocanic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 910,000.00

This award supports a program of experimental research to explore the limits of
our knowledge of certain subatomic particles, and of their interactions at the
smallest length scale. The project investigates three systems: the pi meson, the
muon (a more massive "cousin" of the electron), and the neutron, focusing on the
intrinsic low-energy properties of each of them. Those properties are sensitive
to some of the basic components of the Standard Model, which describes the
number and basic characteristics of the known elementary particles. Determining
these properties thus has the potential to uncover new physics beyond the
Standard Model. The project aims to advance basic science in nuclear and
elementary particle physics, contribute to building the nation's STEM talent by
educating members of the new generation of the STEM workforce, while keeping in
focus its diversity and tapping the broadest available talent pool, and,
finally, to develop new tools in fundamental research with possible broader
applications.

The proposed research continues an ongoing program of study of the electroweak
and strong interactions at low energies. The immediate goals of the project are:
(a) conclusion of the data analysis for the PEN experiment, a precise
measurement of the electronic and radiative electronic rare decays of the pion
(pi-e2 and pi-e2g), completed at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), and (b)
assembly and commissioning of the apparatus for Nab, a program of precise
measurements of the neutron beta decay parameters at the Spallation Neutron
Source (SNS). The UVa group plays a leading role in both projects. As the work
on PEN nears completion, focus will move to (c) the new precise measurement of
the muon gyromagnetic ratio, the muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab. The goal of
PEN is to reach the precision of 5 parts in 10,000 for the branching ratio of
the electronic decay of the pion, which is the most accurate experimental test
of lepton universality (LU) available. At present, precision of the pi-e2 decay
measurements lags behind the SM theoretical predictions by more than an order of
magnitude. A number of physics scenarios outside the SM would lead to LU
violation. LU, and lepton properties in general, carry added significance due to
developments in neutrino physics. Nab is a highly rate unpolarized measurement
of the electron-antineutrino correlation parameter "a" with accuracy of a few
parts in 1000, and the first measurement of the neutron decay parameter "b", the
Fierz interference term. Nab aims to resolve the persistent inconsistencies in
the determination of the nucleon axial vector form factor and, consequently, of
the Vud term in the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa quark mixing matrix, and to
provide new limits on possible extensions of the Standard Model, such as left-
right symmetric models, leptoquarks, etc., by exploiting the unique advantages
of neutron decay, one of the most basic and theoretically best understood
processes in nuclear physics.