* 1614404
* EAPSI: What do Observations Tell us about the Response of Global Carbon Cycling to Changing Temperature?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Katharyn Duffy, Woods                   Katharyn       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Terrestrial biospheric models are a critical tool used to evaluate the response
of the biosphere to future climatic conditions. With these models we aim to
understand how ecosystems will respond to changes in climate and particularly
increasing temperature, and which mechanisms currently control carbon exchange.
The objective of this project is to derive an observation-based, instead of
model-based, constraint of temperature-induced variability in the carbon cycle.
This project builds a collaborative relationship with Dr. Louis Schipper and Dr.
Vic Arcus of the University of Waikato, New Zealand, to gather observations of
terrestrial carbon cycling, coincident with sunlight, water and temperature
across every vegetated continent and major biome. Arcus and Schipper have
developed a new fundamental theory that will allow models to take into account
peculiar properties of enzymes that control cycling of carbon to provide new
insight into future changes as the globe warms.

The research team will statistically attribute both photosynthesis and
respiration to temperature, through accounting for the role of other regulating
factors (e.g. water availability, sunlight) and build mathematical algorithms
which capture observed variability. A new theoretical model of temperature
dependence of biological processes (macro-molecular rate theory) will be applied
to ecosystem scale photosynthesis and respiration. This project will use data
from 10 major biomes located around the globe to understand and better constrain
the global carbon cycle, improving the accuracy of terrestrial biosphere models,
and our predictions of future concentrations of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. This work builds our understanding of both short-term events, such
as heat waves, as well as long-term events, such as global environmental change.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.