* 1614940
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of RNA dependent RNA polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Grunwald, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2019
* USD 256,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms of early
stages of replication of a virus with an RNA genome. Viruses with similar RNA
genomes include potent human and animal pathogens, including Ebola, measles, and
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). VSV is the model being studied in this
project. To read and copy their RNA genomes, VSV and related RNA viruses make a
special RNA polymerase that makes RNA copies of the viral RNA genomes, and
therefore are called "RNA dependent RNA Polymerases" or RdRPs. This project will
examine the mechanism by which RdRPs read and copy the viral genome template in
infected cells which is critical for the replication of viruses. The results
from this study will improve scientific understanding of how RdRPs work and
identify potential target mechanisms for inhibition of viral infections. In
addition to furthering knowledge about RNA virus replication, this study will
train minority undergraduate students by incorporating them within teams doing
research at the University of Utah and UMass Medical School at Worcester. The
proposed activities will also support development of Biophysics courses that
will benefit undergraduate interdisciplinary education and encourage
participation of K-12 children in science by communicating aspects of the
scientific results through creation of virus dance projects for
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use single molecule live cell
imaging to visualize transcription events from single VSV genome templates in
infected cells and utilize fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to measure the
concentration of free RdRPs during transcription in vivo. When stretched, the
genome template of VSV is more than 4 microns in size and RdRPs can only
initiate transcription on its 3' end. While 50 RdRPs are tightly bound to this
template, how they initiate and sustain transcription is not clear. The live
cell imaging experiments will determine the number of active RdRPs per genome
and their cooperativity. Measurements of the concentration of free RdRPs not
bound to the genome will verify if a dissociation and 3' binding mechanism can
support viral transcription in vivo. This project will also use reconstituted
templates in vitro to visualize the mechanism by which RdRPs redistribute on the
genome template. We have observed single RdRP sliding on purified genome
templates in vitro. In this project we will further characterize the sliding
mechanism of RdRPs on genome templates. By measuring the dynamics of RdRPs in
vivo as well as in vitro this project will determine the mechanism of
transcription by RdRPs during VSV RNA virus infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project was funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.