* 1614168
* EAPSI: Determining the Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Fish Species that Live in Dynamic Estuaries
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Joshua Lonthair, Lonthair                Joshua         K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Ocean acidification (OA) is known to have many detrimental impacts on marine
fish species, with early life stages being particularly susceptible. These
findings have brought renewed focus onto physiological traits in early
development that may bestow resilience to OA. Acid-base balance is one such
pathway. This project will investigate the impacts of ocean acidification on the
acid-base physiology of early life stage orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus
coiodes), which is a popular commercial fish throughout Asia and inhabits
estuaries during early life stages. Estuarine fish have been underrepresented in
OA research, yet these animals regularly experience CO2 levels in excess of
those predicted for climate change. We predict that estuarine fish, such as the
spotted grouper, may be pre-adapted for resilience against OA. The research will
be conducted with Dr. Pung-Pung Hwang, a noted faculty member in the field of
fish molecular and integrative physiology, at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan.

This study will investigate the development and plasticity of acid-base
physiology in early life stages of the orange-spotted grouper. Early life stage
studies are critical for understanding the impacts of OA on commercial fisheries
because this represents a bottleneck to recruitment from early life stages to
reproductive adults. Sensitivity to OA will be measured via analysis of
survival, yolk size and standard length, as a consequence of elevated CO2. Acid-
base development will be analyzed by measuring gene expression of key proteins
over time and under varying CO2 concentrations. In situ hybridization and
immunofluorescence microscopy will subsequently determine the location of gene
or protein expression. Together these studies will determine the sensitivity of
orange-spotted grouper to OA and the role of acid-base physiology in conferring
early life resilience.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.