* 1614024
* EAPSI: Generating Word Embeddings using Extreme Learning Machines for Classifying Clinical Texts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Paula Lauren, Lauren                  Paula
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In 1950, the computer scientist Alan Turing proposed a test for true artificial
intelligence. In Turing's view, a computer must be considered intelligent if it
could understand human language. After more than 60 years of research, this is
still an ongoing effort. Recent methods, including neural language models that
use advanced statistics, have made great strides towards realizing Turing's
vision. This study builds on existing research to explore methods for improving
computer-based natural language understanding. The research will be conducted
under the mentorship of Professor Guang-bin Huang, a noted expert on machine
learning, of Nanyang Technological University.

Natural language processing (NLP) involves the development of computer-based
algorithms to understand natural language. Statistical language models are
typically used for various NLP tasks, including machine translation and text
categorization. Language models based on neural networks, also known as neural
embeddings, map words (or phrases) to a numerical representation in a low-
dimensional space. Typically, neural networks use back-propagation for training
a neural network, which results in slow training. Extreme Learning Machines
(ELM) is a type of neural network, where hidden neurons are randomly generated
hidden nodes. This study involves the use of ELM for faster training in the
generation of neural embeddings.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.