* 1614113
* Galactic Novae: Thinking Inside the Envelope
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Frederick Walter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2021
* USD 383,677.00

1. A nova is a star that brightens abruptly by a large factor. Some novae may
become as much as tens of thousands of times brighter than our Sun. The rapid
brightening is caused by a runaway thermonuclear explosion on the surface of a
white dwarf star; a small star that packs about as much mass as our Sun into a
volume the size of Earth. The white dwarf accumulates the hydrogen that fuels
the nova outburst from an ordinary star that is a close companion. The explosion
ejects mass from the surface of the white dwarf, enriching space with heavier
elements produced during the thermonuclear explosion. Although novae have been
known since ancient times, and astrophysicists have understood the cause of a
nova explosion since the middle of the last century, important puzzles still
remain. Over the past several years, spacecraft observations have revealed that
at least some novae emit very high-energy gamma radiation. This was unexpected
and is still mysterious. Some novae also may be progenitors of Type Ia
supernovae, which have significant implications for cosmology. The Principal
Investigator will conduct extensive scientific analyses of the atlas of
observational data he has accumulated for 83 novae over the past 14 years. This
research will address several key questions about novae. The results of the
investigations constitute the Intellectual Merit of this project. The Broader
Impacts stem from the PI's proposed involvement of undergraduates and high-
school students directly in the research. He points out that since 1991, five of
the high-school students he has supervised have been semi-finalists in the Intel
Science Talent Search. The PI will also collaborate with the American
Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) to enhance the experiences of
participating amateur observers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Nova eruptions are
caused by thermonuclear runaways at the degenerate base of an accreted H layer
on a white dwarf. The hydrogen layer is accumulated by mass transfer from a
close binary companion star. During outburst, a nova increases in brightness, in
some cases reaching tens of thousands of times the luminosity of the Sun. A nova
explosion ejects as much one ten-thousandth of a solar mass from the white dwarf
into the interstellar medium, enriching it in heavier elements produced in the
nuclear burning event. During the past several years, the Fermi Gamma Ray
Observatory has discovered that some novae emit high-energy gamma radiation; the
origin of these emissions is still not well understood. Some novae also may be
the precursors of Type Ia supernovae, which have important implications for
cosmology. In order to address several key questions about these eruptive
variables, the Principal Investigator will conduct exhaustive scientific
analyses of the atlas of high-cadence photometric and spectroscopic data he has
accumulated for 83 novae over the past 14 years. The results of these
investigations constitute the Intellectual Merit of this project. The Broader
Impacts stem from the PI's proposed involvement of undergraduates and high-
school students directly in the research. He points out that since 1991, five of
the high-school students he has supervised have been semi-finalists in the Intel
Science Talent Search. The PI will also collaborate with the American
Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) to enhance the experiences of
participating amateur observers.