* 1614427
* EAPSI: Investigating Neural Coding of Spatiotemporal Events Using Visual Adaptation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Katherine Mussell, Mussell                 Katherine      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

How we perceive the world depends strongly on our recent experience. For
example, after briefly looking at a red square or tilted lines, our perception
of color or orientation is biased. These adaptation effects have been widely
studied and are thought to play an important role in calibrating and optimizing
visual coding. This award research aims to test for analogous adaptation and
renormalization to the temporal structure of the world. In particular, the goal
is to test for normalization in the temporal domain, testing for adaptation to
events, to the unfolding of visual images over time, and measuring measure this
for both artificial stimuli and for videos of naturalistic events. The research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Gerrit Maus of Nanyang Technological
University in Singapore, is a leading authority on temporal and visual coding.
The research is expected to contribute to the cognitive science of vision and
visual adaptation.

This study tests whether the patterns of adaptation found for color and form
also extend in similar ways to events and time. The project will test how
adaptation affects the norms for temporal information, and whether this points
to common coding principles in the visual system. The research will test the
following hypothesis: if temporal integration of spatial features is
perceptually coded based on deviations from a norm (as is the case in other
perceptual categories), then visual adaptation will reveal the perceptual norm
for naturalistic events, giving important insight in the perception of
spatiotemporal integration.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.