* 1614011
* On the Occurrence of Resonance in Elastic-Dissipative Coupled Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Giovanni Galdi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 121,027.00

Galdi&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1614011&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Over the past two decades, the
study of the motion of a viscous liquid in the presence of rigid or deformable
bodies has become one of the main focuses of applied research. The aim of this
project is to address significant aspects of the above type of phenomenon and is
directed toward the accomplishment of the following objectives. The first one
regards occurrence of resonance phenomena in the interaction of a viscous liquid
with an elastic structure. For example, in the context of modeling of arterial
blood flow it is of the utmost importance to find out whether, for a given
model, the pulsatile action of the heart pumping blood would produce an
unrealistic high-amplitude oscillation of the arterial wall. The second one
deals with the so-called vortex-induced oscillations of a structure in the
uniform stream of a viscous liquid. This phenomenon is considered to play a
major role in the collapse of chimneys and bridges under wind load. The most
famous event in this sense is probably the failure of the Tacoma Narrows
bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; From a technical viewpoint, the above questions
are addressed by studying the existence of time-periodic solutions and the
occurrence of Hopf bifurcation in coupled systems of nonlinear hyperbolic-
parabolic equations that model fluid-structure interactions. One of the main
focuses of this project is to understand whether the dissipative mechanism (the
parabolic component of the system) can prevent the occurrence of resonance in
the elastic structure (the hyperbolic component). Some of these problems need to
be formulated in unbounded spatial domains, like infinite pipeline systems or
regions exterior to a finite number of bodies. The latter may add an even
further complication, in that the linearized relevant operators may possess, in
such cases, a non-empty essential spectrum.