* 1614085
* Promoting Robotic Design and Entrepreneurship Experiences among Students and Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Sheila Borges Rajguru, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,039,315.00

The project will develop, implement, and assess an initiative to promote robotic
design and entrepreneurship experiences among students and teachers. Each year,
16 teachers and 32 students from 8 high schools located in all 5 boroughs of New
York will attend a 4-week summer institute consisting of a 2-week guided
training and a 2-week collaborative robotic-product development. The
participants will come primarily from schools in underserved neighborhoods with
socially, economically, racially, and ethnically diverse student bodies;
approximately half of the participants will be female. During the academic year,
each school's two teachers will conduct a robotics course for at least 25
students. Classroom adoption will be facilitated through a professional learning
community (PLC). In the annual grand finale, school teams will compete in a
robot product design and business idea contest, modeled after the Inno/Vention
contest coordinated by the Incubator Initiatives of NYU Tandon School of
Engineering. Over the 3-year project duration, 48 teachers and 96 students from
24 high schools will participate in the summer institute with 160 contact hours.
Through the academic year elective, teachers will engage 1,200 students during
the project funding period. The project has formed an interdisciplinary team
including experts in robotics, entrepreneurship, K-12 curriculum design, and
assessment to support project design and implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design adapts features from research on
project-based learning (PBL), robotics and entrepreneurship in K-12 STEM
education, social cognitive career theory, and teacher professional development
embedded in a PLC. Formulating robotics activities in a PBL framework will help
participants learn content, develop planning and problem-solving skills, and
foster their higher-order cognitive skills. Integration of PBL with
entrepreneurship activities will address participant fear of failure, lack of
confidence, and creativity and communication skills. The design of the teacher
professional development will support transfer of training through content-
immersion, allow modeling and rehearsing of desired skills, and involve teachers
for a sufficient duration to support the cognitive demands of new learning. The
project will research the broad overarching question: Do robotics design and
entrepreneurship activities, experienced through PBL, positively influence
teacher practices and student outcomes? The project will investigate if
participation (1) builds teacher capacity to effectively utilize PBL,
contextualized in robotics and entrepreneurship, to promote STEM learning and
(2) positively impacts students self-efficacy, outcome expectations, goals, and
interest in STEM studies and careers. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program that supports
projects that build understandings of best practices, program elements, contexts
and processes contributing to engaging students in learning and developing
interest in STEM, information and communications technology (ICT), computer
science, and related STEM content and careers.