* 1614377
* EAPSI: Comparison of Two Different Geometric Techniques for Computing Chemical Reaction Rates
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Sulimon Sattari, Sattari                 Sulimon
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Computing chemical reaction rates is a difficult task, especially in complex
chemical systems such as combustion. Geometric techniques are promising
techniques which use a lower-dimensional slice of the system to estimate the
chemical reaction rate. For this project, the researcher will compare two
geometric techniques for computing chemical reaction rates called lobe dynamics
and transition state theory. The PI will collaborate with Hokkaido University
professor Tamiki Komatsuzaki, who is a noted expert on using transition state
theory to compute chemical reaction rates. In comparing the two techniques, the
PI hopes to help narrow down when each technique should be used to obtain
accurate chemical reaction rates.

The ionization of hydrogen in external fields resembles a chemical reaction. The
atom is injected with some energy, and, if it overcomes a certain threshold, it
becomes ionized. The ionization rate can be computed by integrating a
representative set of trajectories. For reaction systems with multiple reactants
and products, chaos makes it difficult to adequately sample the phase space and
accurately compute the reaction rate. Transition state theory and homotopic lobe
dynamics are both promising methods for computing reaction rates in chaotic
systems, but both methods have their benefits and limitations. Transition state
theory computes the reaction rate using a flux across a lower-dimensional
surface, requiring fewer trajectories. It assumes, however, that a non-
recrossing transition state exists in the system, which does not hold in
general. Homotopic lobe dynamics uses the topology of phase space structures to
characterize and compute periodic orbits, and then periodic orbit theory is used
to compute the reaction rate as a sum over their contributions. The goals of
this research are to compare the ranges of validity and computational
feasibility of the two methods, and to compute the ionization reaction rate of
the hydrogen atom in parallel fields over a wide range of field strengths.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.