* 1614178
* Distributive Conjugal Transfer: a New Paradigm and Benchmark for Bacterial Horizontal Gene Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Matthew Champion, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Candi Phoebe Lostroh
* 10/31/2020
* USD 660,000.00

The transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another accelerates the evolution of
new strains and species. On the negative side, DNA transfer could facilitate the
spread of antibiotic resistance genes, complicating infectious disease treatment
strategies. On the positive side, DNA transfer could also create bacterial
strains with improved beneficial properties, such as the remediation of
petroleum-contaminated soil. Mycobacteria are a branch of the bacterial kingdom
that includes both pathogens and brownfield soil-dwelling species. A novel kind
of highly effective DNA transfer process, in which two cells appear to swap DNA
fragments along the whole chromosome, has been described for a common laboratory
mycobacterial species. The current project will identify the genes involved in
that process, also testing whether distantly related mycobacteria can partake in
such a transfer. The project will provide opportunities for undergraduate
students and local high school teachers to gain experience in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugal DNA transfer has been described in
Mycobacterium smegmatis, generating transconjugant genomes that are mixtures of
the parental strains. Distributive Conjugal Transfer (DCT) differs from
traditional plasmid-based conjugation systems both in creating mosaic genomes
and in mechanism, and proteins usually found in plasmid transfer systems are
absent from mycobacteria. A mating identity locus (mid), which determines donor
or recipient activity, has been mapped to a six-gene cluster embedded within a
25-gene locus that encodes the ESX-1 secretion apparatus. The six genes
comprising mid will be analyzed for their contribution to establishing mating
identity, their functional association with ESX-1 secretion, and their impact on
transcriptional pathways that respond to co-culture with a mating partner. DCT
will also be tested in other isolates of M. smegmatis, and in other
mycobacterial species. Genome sequencing of new isolates will provide
comparative data for identifying the mosaicism that is a hallmark of DCT, and
provide reference sequences for transconjugants generated in the laboratory.
Successful implementation of this objective will provide a broader view of the
impact of DCT on gene flow in the Mycobacterium genus, and provide additional
genotype/phenotype information for the critical genes of the mid locus.