* 1614370
* EAPSI: Attenuating Pain with the Past: The Relationship between Nostalgia and Pain Sensitivity among American and Japanese Individuals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Mike Kersten, Kersten                 Mike
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The experience of chronic pain is associated with lower quality of life and
impacts an estimated 20% of adults worldwide. With reports of pain being more
prevalent and widespread in Japanese individuals than both non-Hispanic whites
and other ethnic minority groups, it is important to identify protective factors
that can lower the experience of pain cross-culturally given its precipitating
effects on psychological, social, and physical well-being. The proposed study
will test whether nostalgia, a sentimental longing for the past, reduces
perceptions of physical pain in both American and Japanese samples. Data in
support of these hypotheses will provide evidence that nostalgia can also serve
as a potential pain intervention among Asian cultures that have a higher
prevalence of pain-related disabilities and are more resistant to using
medication to remedy their pain. This research project will be carried out in
collaboration with Dr. Takashi Kusumi, an expert in nostalgia and cross-cultural
research at Kyoto University in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
experience of pain is universal, cultural differences in pain tolerance is a
topic of concern for many researchers and physicians. Despite evidence
demonstrating that individuals from Asian countries have higher pain sensitivity
than those from European countries and the United States, research has yet to
examine how psychological resources can be utilized to decrease perceptions of
physical pain cross-culturally. Several studies have shown that the pancultural
emotion of nostalgia, a sentimental longing for the past, offers many
psychological benefits (e.g., optimism, positive affect, social connectedness),
with other research linking these same outcomes with greater pain resilience.
Building on this work, this fellowship will allow the proposed research to (a)
examine whether nostalgic thinking can lead individuals to be less sensitive to
experimentally-induced pain, (b) identify potential mediating variables that may
explain the relationship between nostalgia and higher pain thresholds, and (c)
examine whether there are cultural differences between American and Japanese
participants on the experience of pain following a nostalgia
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.