* 1614170
* EAPSI: Examining the Effectiveness of New Zealand's Water Quality Policy in Enabling Farm-Scale Behavior Change
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Courtney Hammond Wagner, Hammond Wagner          Courtney       R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Runoff of nitrogen and phosphorus from agricultural lands is impacting water
quality in rivers and lakes across the globe. Social and political factors have
proven to be barriers to effective management of these nutrients. The Lake Taupo
and Lake Rotorua watersheds in New Zealand are implementing innovative water
quality policies which regulate nutrient use at the farm scale. The success of
this policy is dependent on the extent to which these policies change farmer
behavior. To understand how these water quality policies are affecting behavior,
the researcher will conduct a policy analysis and in-depth interviews with
farmers in each region. This research will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Suzie Greenhalgh, a noted expert on water quality policy, at Landcare
Research in Auckland, New Zealand. This project will contribute to a greater
understanding of which attributes of water quality policy promote social,
ecological and economic well-being with the goal of improving policy design.

This policy analysis will examine the effectiveness of New Zealand's governance
approach to managing agricultural nonpoint source pollution. Importantly, Lake
Taupo and Lake Rotorua?s water quality regimes are rare examples of water
quality policies that require farmers to achieve a mandated nutrient leaching
rate from their farms. Methodologically, the research will employ key informant
and stakeholder interviews, and will focus on the farmer as the unit of
analysis. The analysis will use Elinor Ostro's Social Ecological Systems
Framework and Design Principles to examine how the policies in place enable,
influence or enforce behavior change. This research will improve understanding
of the efficacy of alternative approaches to water quality policy design and
implementation. This is of importance to the numerous regions globally
approaching ecological limits in water quality and searching for means to
regulate resource use.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.