* 1614847
* Making it Stick!  Mobile Apps to Pedagogically Support Retrieval Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Peter Veronesi, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,198,187.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by employing mobile
technology to help up to 530 teachers and more than 9,000 students use proven
retrieval experiences to improve STEM learning. The project will design and
implement pedagogical and technological retrieval experiences as well as test
the hypothesis that these experiences will encourage students to learn, retain,
and apply newly acquired scientific knowledge in novel settings. The project
will accomplish this goal through the development and use of simple to complex
mobile Apps ranging from basic retrieval strategies to interactive problem
solving approaches involving interleaved and generative practices. Through an
interdisciplinary approach this project will combine STEM content with
technology and pedagogy to support more meaningful and in-depth learning.
Culturally-oriented, low-threshold technologies along with cognitively effective
retrieval practices will be used to increase students' computational thinking as
well as their scientific processing and critical thinking skills associated with
careers in the future STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deductive and
inductive reasoning will underpin a mixed-methods research design involving pre-
post surveys, rubric-scored annual competitions, classroom observations,
reflective journal entries, video recall and face-to-face interviews, activity
logs, and classroom artifacts. These measures will capture changes in student
and teacher attitudes, beliefs, and classroom instructions brought on by the use
of mobile technologies. Data analysis of information from these sources will
provide a robust characterization of the validity of research findings inclusive
of inter-rater reliability, internal consistency, and testing and retesting of
the stability of the study design. Project outcomes will include computational
models and patterns common to multiple STEM fields developed through mobile Apps
in physics, chemistry, biology, Earth science, and mathematics at different
educational levels. A database will be created to maintain and disseminate newly
developed mobile Apps. Developed resources and research findings will be shared
with Finger Lakes Learning Network of 80 regional school districts as well as
STEM practitioners and policymakers elsewhere through conferences and the
project?s website.