* 1614484
* Radiation and Transport in QCD Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ralf Rapp, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 439,118.00

A few micro-seconds after the Big Bang the universe was filled with an extremely
hot plasma made of elementary particles, the quarks and gluons. When the
expanding plasma cooled to a temperature of about two trillion degrees, quarks
and gluons condensed into massive bound states called hadrons, including the
protons and neutrons which make up the atomic nuclei of the matter around us.
This transition generated over 95% of the visible mass in the universe, and it
permanently confined quarks and gluons into hadrons. How these phenomena emerge
from the strong nuclear force between quarks and gluons is a forefront question
in modern science. High-energy collisions of heavy nuclei provide a unique
opportunity to recreate, for a short moment, the primordial medium of the Big
Bang in the laboratory. It is a formidable challenge to infer the properties of
this medium from its decay products observed in large detectors. The PI will
develop theoretical tools to diagnose this matter and rigorously interpret the
experimental data. The PI will continue to build a thriving graduate research
program and foster scientific outreach to regional high school students through
the Saturday Morning Physics program.

This project aims at quantifying fundamental transport properties of the quark-
gluon plasma (QGP) and how hadron masses emerge in the quark-to-hadron
transition. The transport of heavy quarks through the QGP will be evaluated
using innovative quantum many-body techniques, where the heavy-quark
interactions will be based on first-principles computations of lattice
discretized Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the fundamental theory of the strong
interaction. The resulting heavy-quark transport coefficients will be
implemented into state-of-the-art simulations of the fireballs formed in heavy-
ion collisions. In addition, electromagnetic radiation from these fireballs will
be calculated to determine: (a) the temperature of the medium, and (b) how the
masses of hadrons emerge as the QGP cools down. Current and future experimental
programs at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider and Large Hadron Collider have a
large emphasis on heavy-quark and electromagnetic observables. The advances
achieved through this project will provide the theoretical rigor and accuracy
required to convert systematic comparisons to precision data into robust
knowledge about the primordial QCD medium.