* 1614040
* EAPSI: Synthetically Emulating Cells using Degradable Polymeric Vesicles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Charles Figg, Figg                    Charles        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project by C. Adrian Figg will make nanoscale 'containers' to be used for
drug delivery and for 'smart' materials that can sense environmental changes and
release their cargo. Biology isolates most chemical reactions into compartments
to separate incompatible materials. Almost every reaction needed to sustain life
occurs through micro- or nanoscale compartmentalization, including the
conversion of food into energy, the fighting of certain diseases, and
procreation. Nature has a complicated, but efficient, route towards creating
these containers, such as red blood cell creation. In comparison, synthetic
chemistry is significantly limited and still in its infancy when being used to
create smart materials to fight disease. This project will study ways to
encapsulate and compartmentalize biomolecules using differences in polymer
compatibility to improve the efficiency of drug delivery, lower a drug's
toxicity to healthy cells, and generally improve the smart characteristics of
nanomaterials. The success of this project will be achieved through a
collaboration with Dr. Cyrille Boyer at the University of New South Wales and
the Australian Center for Nanomedicine to understand better ways to design drug
carriers.

Polymerization-induced thermal self-assembly (PITSA) relies on the in situ
aggregation of polymer chains during a reversible addition-fragmentation chain
transfer dispersion block copolymerization. By conjugating a fraction of the
macro chain transfer agents with a protein, the protein should be encapsulated
into vesicles as the nanoparticles undergo morphological transitions during a
PITSA polymerization. These protein-containing vesicles will then act as
?nanoreactors,? catalyzing the conversion of prodrugs to their active form and
the degradation of the vesicles into their polymeric substituents. The model
developed through this collaboration will provide the synthetic foundation to
better emulate and understand complex nanoscale compartmentalization, while
being immediately applicable to the fields of polymer chemistry, biomimetic
synthesis, and medicinal chemistry.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.