* 1614762
* An Innovative Modeling Approach for Understanding Venus' Cloud-layer Dynamics, Polar Vortices, and the Influence of Waves
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Helen Parish, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 12/31/2019
* USD 337,800.00

Even though spacecraft have visited the planet Venus many times, little is
understood about how Venus? middle and upper atmosphere and clouds move and
interact. The recent spacecraft Venus Express provides new data to consider when
modeling activity in the atmosphere. The investigators will model Venus' middle
and upper atmosphere using special, rigorous computer programs. For this
modeling, they set the base atmospheric level to be considered as the height
above Venus' surface where clouds are observed. Different types of waves will be
introduced as forces at this base atmospheric level to see how they drive the
circulation in the atmosphere. The new measurements from Venus Express will
guide and confirm the computer modeling, making more realistic models of Venus'
middle and upper atmosphere. The results of this modeling will be fed back to
other scientists modeling the Earth?s atmosphere to understand climate change,
thus benefiting the national interest. The investigators will also design
classroom experiments related to planetary atmospheres for middle and high
schools, and undergraduate and graduate college-level classes.

The dynamics and circulation of the planet Venus' atmosphere at cloud heights
and above are poorly understood. In this study, the principal investigator will
employ an innovative approach to modeling the dynamics of Venus' atmosphere,
using a computer code based on the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM). The lower
boundary of the atmosphere to be modeled is defined to begin at the height where
clouds are observed above Venus' surface. Dynamical calculations will focus on
this cloud-level atmosphere. Different kinds of waves will be introduced,
including tides, Rossby waves, and gravity waves, to effect forces at the lower
boundary of the atmosphere. New measurements from the Venus Express spacecraft
mission at cloud levels and above will guide and validate the atmospheric
modeling. Venus' middle and upper atmosphere can then be modeled at locations in
time and space where data have not yet been measured. Adaptations of the CAM
computer code for the Earth?s atmosphere resulting from this study of Venus'
atmosphere will be fed back to the Earth climate research community, benefiting
the national interest in understanding climate change. The investigators will
design a series of STEM-related practical experiments addressing the physics of
planetary atmospheres for UCLA outreach middle and high schools, and for
undergraduate and graduate university classes.