* 1614973
* PRAC: Understanding the development and evolution of violent tornadoes in supercell thunderstorms
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Cathy Finley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 38,431.00

Each year, tornadoes cause millions to billions of dollars of property damage in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;Since 1990, an average of 78 U.S. citizens were
killed annually by tornadoes. In&lt;br/&gt;2011, 553 lost their lives from 59
tornadoes out of 1,690 that occurred that year in 48 states.&lt;br/&gt;Despite
advances in observational and modeling/computing technology,
the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of tornadoes remains a mystery. We are currently unable
to predict whether a&lt;br/&gt;given thunderstorm will produce a tornado, much
less whether it will be short-lived and weak, or&lt;br/&gt;long-lived and
powerful. The proposed work will use Blue Waters to simulate many different
violent tornadoes &lt;br/&gt;at resolutions in which the tornado is resolved
from its genesis through its dissipation.&lt;br/&gt;By simulating many storms in
different environments, the project hopes to identify the factors involved
in&lt;br/&gt;the formation and maintenance of the most devastating tornadoes, as
well as learn more about its&lt;br/&gt;structure and evolution. This work has
the potential to improve the forecasting of the most
devastating&lt;br/&gt;storms, ultimately saving lives. Once specific features
related to the genesis and maintenance of&lt;br/&gt;long-lived violent tornadoes
are identified in simulations on Blue Waters, field researchers can search
for&lt;br/&gt;such features in observed storms. Such features identified on
operational weather radar could help&lt;br/&gt;forecasters issue specific,
targeted warnings for unusually violent tornadoes. Furthermore,
modifications&lt;br/&gt;to the code used in the study, CM1, will be shared with
the weather modeling community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a prior work, the
project conducted a breakthrough ultra-high resolution simulation (30 meter grid
spacing) on Blue Waters&lt;br/&gt;of a long-lived violent tornado spawned from a
supercell that was based upon the observed&lt;br/&gt;24 May 2011 EF5 tornadic
supercell in central Oklahoma. The project proposes to build upon this previous
work to explore the&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity of tornado morphology in the 24 May
2011 storm to parameters such as cloud microphysics,&lt;br/&gt;turbulence
parameterization and low-level environmental wind shear. In addition, the
project will enable the use&lt;br/&gt;of arbitrarily stretched vertical grids in
CM1 in order to focus resolution at key vertical levels, such&lt;br/&gt;as near
the ground. Moreover, the project will apply surface friction in a physically
realistic manner, add functionality&lt;br/&gt;to CM1 that enables the
centrifuging of rain and hail in regions of intense rotation, and
explore&lt;br/&gt;other storm environments in which violent tornadoes occurred.
Finally, the project will add the ability for CM1 to&lt;br/&gt;interpolate
restart files from a coarser mesh to a finer mesh, allowing the model to
simulate periods&lt;br/&gt;of the storm?s life cycle where extreme resolution is
focused on the core of storm.