* 1614406
* EAPSI:Identifying Indicator Species of Desert Steppe, Typical Steppe and Meadow Steppe Environments Along a Grazing Gradient in Inner Mongolia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Gerald Berthelette, Berthelette             Gerald         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Indicator species are a species of plant that can be used to infer conditions
within a particular habitat. The classification of such species is essential to
monitoring rangeland conditions and implementing proper land management
strategies. Over the last few decades, the nomadic people of Inner Mongolia have
been under intense pressures from desertification, overgrazing, and degrading
landscapes from the rapidly growing coal-mining industry. In the United States,
indicator species are used to identify environmental conditions of a region, and
propose early action for change when indicator species are recognized as
endangered. With this research, the principal investigator (PI) will work in
collaboration with Dr. Guodong Han of the Inner Mongolia Agricultural University
(IMAU). As a leading expert on ecosystem services, grassland management systems,
and grazing techniques, Dr. Han will be invaluable while conducting research on
the grasslands of the Mongolian Plateau. The PI will take measurements within
the plant communities of three different regions to gauge the vulnerability of
the ecosystem to encroaching sands. A collaborative effort between the PI and
IMAU will encourage a partnership between land management agencies in the US and
China, and provide the opportunity for scientific knowledge to be shared between
both nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify indicator species on the
Mongolian Plateau, the researcher needs to understand the structure of the
ecosystem. The PI will measure attributes including species abundance, species
presence or absence, density, frequency, biomass, and basal and canopy cover.
Sampling vegetation attributes will allow for the researcher to make better-
informed decisions, and develop effective mitigation strategies for grassland
management within the study area and beyond. The research will be conducted
using a 3 x 4 design with 1m x 1m quadrats easily constructed from minimal
material; factors will be ecological site (n=3) and grazing intensity (n=4).
Grazing intensities will be categorized as heavy, moderate, light, and none
(control), as defined by increased distances from water. Vegetation attributes,
combined with general traits of each species (e.g. growth form, life span,
reproduction strategy, flowering time, and size) will provide a framework for
the identification of indicator species within the research
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.