* 1614101
* The energy landscape for folding and function of biomolecules: integrating physical models, genetic information and experiments
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,390,775.00

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the Physics of Living Systems in
the Division of Physics and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The life of cells is orchestrated by
a network of chemical reactions involving numerous proteins and nucleic acids,
and the transport of these molecules between cellular compartments. The research
supported by this award focuses on the structure-function relationship of
biomolecules, focusing mostly on proteins but also with extensions to nucleic
acids. Using the power of theoretical approaches, this project investigates how
proteins distribute their energy between structure and function. The project
also explores the three-dimensional organization of the genome by creating new
physical models for chromatin organization. The theoretical work may be used to
guide and influence the research in folding and function in both theoretical and
experimental communities. This research provides training for students and
postdoctoral fellows in the highly interdisciplinary field of molecular
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structure based models (SBMs) have been shown
to be a useful tool for understanding the global geometrical features governing
folding. Grounded on energy landscape theory (ELT) and the funnel concept, these
models are supported by the fact that most naturally occurring proteins have
sufficiently reduced energetic frustration. Structure-based models are limited
by the availability of structural information, particularly those pertaining to
all the different functional configurations. Direct Coupling Analysis (DCA) may
predict amino acid contacts in proteins. The research is based on SBMs
supplemented by DCA information and integrated with explicit solvent all-atom
simulations. The project focuses on proteins and several biomolecular machines.
Finally, inspired by the early successes of this approach to proteins and other
molecular machines, an important goal of this project deals with chromosome
folding and function.