* 1614103
* EAPSI: Thickness Dependence of the Magnetic Properties of the Ferromagnetic Insulator Cr2Ge2Te6
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jacob Hudis, Hudis                   Jacob          B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The research and education activities supported by this award focus on studying
the evolution of magnetism as a function of thickness in Cr2Ge2Te6, a type of
material known as a ferromagnetic insulator (FMI). Cr2Ge2Te6 is interesting in
condensed matter physics because it is one of only a small number of materials
that is both ferromagnetic and an insulator. The first part of the project will
take crystals of Cr2Ge2Te6, , and exfoliate them down until we have a set of
samples with varying thicknesses of a few unit cells. Next, the magnetic
properties of the samples will be studied using a technique known as micro-Hall
magnetrometry. By studying the magnetic properties of the samples, one can
obtain information about how the strength of the permanent magnet evolves with
thickness. If time permits, small flakes of Cr2Ge2Te6 will be combined in a
sandwich with another material, a topological insulator, of similar crystal
structure. Measuring the properties of the sandwich structure can provide
information about how the electrons behave at the interface of the two
materials. Such an interface between a ferromagnetic insulator and a topological
insulator may host novel physical phenomena such as the quantum anomalous Hall
effect. This project will be conducted under the mentorship of Professor
Yongqing Li at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This projects involves a study of the magnetic properties of ultrathin layers of
the ferromagnetic insulator (FMI) Cr2Ge2Te6. Professor Yongqing Li at the
Institute of Physics has obtained high quality single crystals of this material,
which is a layered ferromagnetic insulator that can be exfoliated down to few
atomic layers in thickness. One near term goal is to study the evolution of the
magnetism as a function of thickness. Because of the small volumes of the
ultrathin specimens, the magnetic properties will be measured with micro-Hall
magnetometry and surface-sensitive micro-Kerr microscopy. After gaining good
understanding of the magnetic properties of the FMI, the team will explore
integrating the exfoliated ultrathin Cr2Ge2Te6 onto a topological insulator
(TI). The PI will also perform initial magnetotransport measurements on the
hybrid FMI/TI structure.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.