* 1614214
* EAPSI:Investigating the Use of Graphene and Other 2D Materials for Use in Infrared Photodetectors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jorge Torres, Torres                  Jorge
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Infrared (IR) sensors operate by absorbing incoming IR radiation and
transforming that energy into heat. This heat from the absorber is then diffused
through a thermoelectric material that converts the heat into electricity. The
electrical signal can then be used to determine the energy of the incoming IR
radiation. However, losses occurring at the junction between the absorber and
the thermoelectric material cause a reduction in sensitivity and response speed
which degrades performance. By using graphene or other two dimensional (2D)
materials, the junction can be eliminated. This is because, despite their lack
of thickness, these materials have good absorption properties and can also
transform heat into electricity, making them excellent candidates for improved
IR sensors. Understanding of the parameters that maximize both the absorption
and the thermoelectric conversion will be essential in creating better sensors.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Seong Chu Lim, a
noted expert on 2D nanomaterials, at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) in Suwon,
South Korea.

Thermoelectric materials such as ZnO and SbTe are widely used in thermal
applications but are transparent to incoming IR radiation due to a large band
gap energy. Graphene however is a good IR absorber. However, thermoelectric IR
sensors based on graphene or other 2D materials will require investigation of
the parameters that influence the thermoelectric effect and the IR responsivity.
To accomplish this, the researcher will focus on improving the understanding of
the underlying physical phenomena so that systematic improvements of the sensor
can be realized. The design of the sensor must consider both device physics and
structural parameters of the sensor. If a structure can be implemented that
transduces the photothermoelectric effect into an electrical output, the
detection of light over a wide optical range with a constant efficiency using
graphene as the absorbing material is possible.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.