* 1614320
* Collaborative Research: Extending Spectroscopy of Directly Imaged Planets into the Thermal Infrared
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrew Skemer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2020
* USD 331,928.00

New "integral field spectrographs" (IFS) allow astronomers to get spectra of
exoplanets, or planets found around other stars. Until now, these spectra have
covered wavelengths in the near infrared at 1 - 2 microns. Most gas-giant
exoplanets generate their own power that peaks in energy in the thermal infrared
at longer wavelengths. This research group has built the world's first thermal
infrared IFS. The Arizona Lenslets for Exoplanet Spectroscopy (ALES) is
installed on the 2x8.4m Large Binocular Telescope in Arizona. This project will
use the ALES to obtain 3 - 4 micron spectra of 10 gas-giant exoplanets. The
spectra will be combined with near-infrared spectra in order to compare and
contrast the properties of the gas-giant exoplanets, including temperature, the
properties of clouds, and different chemistry. This project serves the national
interest by significantly advancing our scientific knowledge of the properties
of gas-giant exoplanets. The investigators will teach two math classes each year
at the Santa Cruz County Jail, so that each year, nine students will get college
credit for a college algebra class. They will also talk about their science to
the public.

Adaptive optics integral field spectrographs (IFS) have enabled spectroscopic
characterization of directly-imaged exoplanets. These instruments have, however,
been limited to near-infrared wavelengths (1 - 2 microns), while the spectral
energy distributions of gas giant exoplanets that generate their own spectral
signal peak in the thermal infrared (>3 microns). As a result, most directly-
imaged exoplanets already have near-infrared spectra, but none has a thermal
infrared spectrum. Spectroscopic characterization over a broad wavelength range
is critical for determining the bulk properties of extrasolar planets. This
project will obtain 3 - 4 micron spectra of a large number of exoplanets, and,
in the process, develop a cohesive sample of exoplanet spectra that can be used
for comparative planetology. This research group has built the world's first
thermal infrared IFS. The Arizona Lenslets for Exoplanet Spectroscopy (ALES) is
installed on the 2x8.4m Large Binocular Telescope. It provides integral field
spectroscopy from 3 - 4 microns at the spectral resolution, sensitivity and
contrast levels required to characterize directly-imaged exoplanets. Using ALES,
the investigators will obtain 3 - 4 micron spectra of 10 exoplanets, which they
will analyze in combination with existing near-infrared data. The broad
wavelength coverage will allow them to refine exoplanet atmosphere models by
breaking degeneracies between temperature, cloud properties, and non-equilibrium
chemistry. The investigators will offer two math classes per year at the Santa
Cruz County Jail, resulting in ~9 students receiving college credit for a
college algebra class. They will also include public talks on their science.