* 1614094
* EAPSI: The Effect of Accessible Cultural Values on Meaning in Life Judgments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* David Newman, Newman                  David
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

People derive meaning in their lives from various life domains, such as family,
friends, religion and work. When these concepts are activated and easily
accessible, they can influence one?s judgment of meaning in life. The value that
one places on such life domains can also influence a subjective feeling of
meaning in life, and these values vary by culture. The goal of the present
research is to compare the effect of accessible values on meaning in life
judgments in the US and South Korea to understand more completely why Americans
find more meaning in life than Koreans and how accessible cultural values
influence meaning in life more broadly. To explore this area, important life
domains that vary by culture (e.g., academic achievement in South Korea and
social relationships in the US) will be brought to mind either before or after
participants rate how meaningful they find their lives. The research will be
conducted at Seoul National University in South Korea in collaboration with
Professor Incheol Choi, an expert in cross-cultural psychology and well-being.

Drawing from research in social cognition, the researcher?s hypotheses were
derived from a culture-as-situated-cognition perspective. According to this
theory, cultural cues can be primed to influence a subsequent judgment. One such
judgment that has not received much attention in this field is a measure of how
meaningful a particular individual finds his or her life. Meaning in life
judgments are influenced by contextual factors, such as the coherence of
environmental stimuli. Thus, the researcher hypothesized that cultural cues that
match a culture?s values would positively influence a meaning in life judgment.
The implications of this research could help researchers understand the
construct of meaning in life more fully. The findings could also influence the
way practitioners, counselors, and policy leaders interpret cross-cultural well-
being data. This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program
supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF
and the National Research Foundation of Korea.