* 1614388
* EAPSI: The Role of Behaviour and Predation in Maintaining Color Variation in an Introduced Population of Midas Cichlid in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Amelia Munson, Munson                  Amelia         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Animals can differ dramatically in terms of their appearance or behavior, even
among individuals of the same species. These differences are known as
polymorphisms. Color polymorphisms, in which animals of the same species come in
two or more distinct colors, can have important consequences for the life
history of the animal. How these differences are maintained in a population
remains largely a mystery to scientists. This is because we expect natural
selection will favor individuals with the trait that is best suited for current
environmental conditions and pass on genes for that trait. This should lead to
the maintenance of only one color morph. However, if different color morphs
excel at different tasks, multiple color morphs may be maintained in a
population. In partnership with Professor Bob Wong at Monash University in
Australia, the PI will conduct behavioural observations on Midas cichlid, a
neotropical fish, in order to understand how predator-prey dynamics may allow
for the maintenance of multiple color morphs.

Midas cichlids come in both black and gold color morphs. In their native range
in Central America they are predominantly black. They have been introduced to a
pond in Australia where they have lived for several generations in the absence
of predators. The population in Australia is predominantly gold. Barramundi, a
close relative of the cichlid?s major predator in its native range, have
recently been introduced to the Australian ponds by a sport fishing group. My
research will help to determine whether there are behavioral differences between
the color morphs in response to predator exposure that will help to explain
future demographic changes in the introduced population. This will provide
scientists with a clear understanding of how behaviour can help to maintain
multiple color morphs.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.