* 1614845
* Partnership to Provide Technology Experiences through Aerial Drones in High Schools of the Alabama Black Belt
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Hira Narang, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,192,593.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, based on the use of a
Project Based Learning (PBL) environment with high school students, is a
partnership between Tuskegee University, Auburn University, a rural and an urban
school district in the historic Black Belt region of the state of Alabama, and
the Alabama State Department of Education. The focus of the partnership is to
recruit annually a cohort of thirty ethnically and racially diverse high school
students from the partnering school districts for immersion in a STEM intensive
PBL four-week "STEM Summer Academy" hosted by Tuskegee University. The Academy
is designed to provide 30 rising 10th and 11th grade students annually (90 over
the life of the three-year grant) with far-reaching technological experiences
through the exciting exploration of aerial drones under a PBL framework.
Students in each cohort will form a diverse group in terms of race, gender,
ethnicity, socio-economic status, and residing in urban or rural areas. The key
questions being addressed are: (1) What coherent sets of experiences effectively
and efficiently support student competency (e.g., knowledge, skills), motivation
and persistence for productive participation in the STEM-related workforce of
today or in the future? (2) What roles might business and industry workforce
members play in motivating students to become aware of, interested in, and
prepared for careers in the STEM-related workforce? and (3) Given the shifting
demographics reflected in our current classrooms and in our country what are
effective and productive ways to ensure broadening participation by engaging
diverse underrepresented populations in STEM programs and
careers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project have been developed in
collaboration with officials from the partner school districts, faculty at
Tuskegee University and Auburn University and representatives from the Alabama
State Department of Education. They are formulated to determine the impact of
immersing students in technology experiences and special partnerships at the
STEM Summer Academy based on their STEM interest, STEM knowledge, and awareness
of the pathways needed to take for successful STEM careers. A mixed-method
design with both qualitative and quantitative data will be used to examine the
students' motivation and attitude towards science in a PBL environment.