* 1614362
* EAPSI: Evolutionary Biogeography of the White-browed Laughingthrush in and around China?s Sichuan Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Janine Antalffy, Antalffy                Janine         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

It is widely accepted that geographic characteristics, such as mountain ranges,
have influenced the modern distribution of species. The Sichuan Basin in
southern China is recognized globally as housing a diverse array of species.
Often referred to as a continental island, the Sichuan Basin is nearly
completely encircled by mountain ranges. Such characteristics are likely
responsible, in part, for present patterns of biodiversity in and around the
Sichuan Basin. While the landscape characteristics of neighboring regions have
been recognized and studied as factors shaping biodiversity, the Sichuan Basin
has received little attention regarding its role in influencing the distribution
of species in this region. The White-browed Laughingthrush (Garrulax sannio) is
both abundant and widely distributed throughout much of southern Asia, making
this species an appropriate model organism with which to conduct this project.
This research, which will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Longyin Wen and
LeShan Normal University, will use the analysis of DNA samples from various
populations throughout the range of G. sannio to assess the relatedness among
populations. In addition, environmental niche models will be generated to show
both the modern day distribution, as well as historic distribution of this
species. This research is important because, in a world facing challenges
related to climate change, it is necessary to understand how landscape features
may influence species? response. The results of this project will allow
researchers to anticipate species? response to future climate fluctuations and
guide researchers and managers through more efficient and influential management
practices and ultimately help conserve species diversity.

Geographic complexities have influenced the evolution of distinct lineages by
periodically isolating populations during historical climatic fluctuations. The
Sichuan Basin is a globally recognized biodiverse eco-region characterized as a
continental island isolated by mountainous topography. Such geo-physical
complexity creates a unique landscape feature that has likely facilitated the
present patterns of biodiversity in and around the Sichuan Basin. While the
topography of neighboring regions has been recognized as factors shaping
biodiversity, the Sichuan Basin has received little attention regarding its role
in influencing local biogeographic patterns. The White-browed Laughingthrush
(Garrulax sannio) is both abundant and widely distributed throughout much of
southern Asia, making this species an appropriate model organism to demonstrate
the role of the Sichuan Basin in influencing biogeographic patterns in this
region. Phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA will be used
investigate the genetic structure and estimate periods of historical isolation
among populations of G. sannio in and around the Sichuan Basin. Contemporary and
paleo-distribution models will be generated to estimate periods of range
expansion and contraction and demonstrate periods of historical isolation among
populations. This research is in collaboration with Dr. Longyin Wen and LeShan
Normal University, and will provide the scientific community with a better
understanding of the factors shaping contemporary biogeographic patterns while
allowing for predictions toward species? response to future climate fluctuations
providing us with the tools to maintain biodiversity in one of the world?s most
biologically rich regions.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.