* 1614317
* Conference "XXI Coloquio Latinoamericano de Algebra"
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Marcelo Aguiar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 03/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports U.S. participants in the XXI Coloquio Latinoamericano de
Algebra to be held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, from July 25 to 29, 2016. The
meeting is organized by leading algebraists from various universities in Latin
America and is open to participants from around the world. The conference will
contribute to the development of research by establishing and promoting
connections between researchers and universities in and outside Latin America;
introduce graduate and advanced undergraduate students to areas of active
current research in algebra; disseminate new problems and directions of
research; and help young researchers build a network of collaborations. In
addition, the meeting presents researchers from the U.S. with the opportunity to
interact with colleagues from all over the world and to meet with prospective
students from Latin America who may be considering continuing their careers in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebra is a fundamental building block
in the edifice of Mathematics. The 13 plenary speakers have been chosen from a
select pool of scientists at the forefront of the research in the various
disciplines within algebra. Four of them are women. Five are based at US
institutions, five are based in Europe and three in Latin America. They all have
confirmed their participation. The plenary lectures will be held in the mornings
followed by theme-centered parallel sessions in the afternoons, and a poster
session. In addition, 4 courses aimed at graduate students and young researchers
will be offered during a parallel school (Escuela Santalo). More details about
the conference can be found at
http://cms.dm.uba.ar/actividades/congresos/XXICLA/index_e_html