* 1614142
* EAPSI: A Better Understanding of Shallow, Subduction Zone Earthquakes Through Bayesian Analysis:  A Case Study of the 2015 Illapel, Chile Earthquake
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Amy Williamson, Williamson              Amy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

On September 16, 2015, a Mw 8.3 earthquake ruptured a portion of the Peru-Chile
trench. This event appears to have a temporally complex rupture and was well
recorded by instruments both in the near-field and at teleseismic distances. The
proposed project will apply an adaptive non-linear Bayesian inversion method to
solve for the fault rupture of the recent Chilean earthquake, using the
preponderance of collected data from both on-land measurements and ocean based
tide gauge and tsunami recordings. This approach results in a quantification of
the earthquake rupture through an explicit treatment of the data and model
resolvability along a source region. The benefit of this type of inversion
method compared to other conventional methods is that it gives a higher level of
focus to the uncertainties in measurements and their spatial and temporal
resolvability. This leads to an inversion result that has improved confidence
levels without introducing biases in grid placement or problem regularization.
This research will be conducted at the Australian National University School of
Earth Sciences under the mentorship of Professor Phil Cummins. The Cummins group
is noted for specialized expertise in seismology and tsunami wave propagation
from a mathematical and geophysical perspective.

On September 16, 2015, a large magnitude earthquake struck of the coast of
Central Chile in a region that has been prone to very large and destructive
earthquakes over the past decades. An Initial analysis of the spatial and
temporal components of the rupture suggests that this event was complex in
nature. In conjunction with research scientists at the Australian National
University, this project proposes to quantify the slip from the 2015 Chile
earthquake through use of a non-linear Bayesian adaptive inversion. This
approach gives a higher level of focus on the uncertainties of each measurement
used as well as their spatial and temporal resolvability. This results in a
better understanding of how the earthquake ruptured while minimizing the amount
of analyst led biases, which can greatly alter the model results. Ultimately,
the results of this project allows for a better understanding of the seismic
hazard of this region of the tectonically active Peru-Chile trench.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.