* 1614804
* Ion channels response in physiological conditions: toward a computational framework for nociception
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Michael Klein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2019
* USD 8,000.00

The extraordinary successes achieved in the last years by bioinformatics,
structural biology, and functional studies of proteins have produced an
unprecedented amount of data that holds promise to shed light on the workings of
these molecular machines. Paradoxically these successes highlighted the fact
that sequence, structure and function are linked together in a more subtle and
complex way than previously thought. Specifically, protein families with
recognizable sequence homology and strictly conserved architecture can show a
huge functional heterogeneity, as in the case of voltage-gated-like ion channels
(VGLCs). The project's goal is to define a coherent theoretical framework to
analyse both ensembles of structures and sequences and apply it to the study of
ion channel communications.

The project proposes to use the Blue Waters system to address this problem using
a combination of accurate free-energy MD calculations and statistical inference
analysis of both trajectories and large multiple sequence alignment. The
microscopic determinants of mechanical coupling will be identified with the set
of residue-residue interactions that are conserved along evolution and are
responsible for a specific, functionally oriented structural dynamics. The study
will focus on two specific ion channels families gated by different stimuli:
transient receptor potential channels and voltage gated cation channels.

The project, if successful, will bridge the gap in our understanding of
molecular processes and neuronal responses, with the potential of significantly
advancing large-scale initiatives like the BRAIN in the US and the HUMAN BRAIN
in EU. Additionally, the project provides opportunity to involve graduate and
undergraduate students in a research activity lying at the interface between the
fields of data analytics and bio-molecular physical chemistry. Given the
increased relevance of Big Data approaches to drug discovery and the emergence
of precision medicine, the skillset and expertise acquired are expected to match
the future needs of industry and academia. Furthermore, student recruitment in
the project will take advantage of two initiatives. The first is a Professional
Masters in Bioinformatics, where the PI is involved in all organizational
aspects, from the steering committee to the design of Structural Bioinformatics
classes. The second is the MARC U-STAR program designed to mentor
underrepresented groups in research, providing financial assistance to prepare
students for competitive graduate programs.