* 1614215
* EAPSI: Synthesis of Novel Magnetic Honeycomb Compounds to Explore New Physics and Emergent Phenomena
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Zachary Kelly, Kelly                   Zachary        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In nature often the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Whethera flock
of birds or a school of fish, one cannot accurately predict the behavior of
these large groups by examining a single bird or fish in isolation. Arising
group behaviors are examples of emergent phenomena, where increasing system
complexity gives rise to new properties. Atoms, the fundamental building blocks
of matter, can also display emergent behavior when part of larger groups. In
solid materials, these emergent behaviors can lead to electrical conductivity,
magnetism, and superconductivity. Superconductivity, which allows the flow of
electricity with no energy loss, has applications in electrical power generation
and distribution, medical instrumentation, and new technology. However, one of
the main issues with superconducting materials is they must be at extremely low
temperatures in order to work, making them difficult and expensive to operate.
Despite discovering superconductivity over a century ago, little is known about
its underlying cause. By discovering the mechanism of superconductivity, new,
cheaper, and more practical compounds can be designed to achieve
superconductivity at room temperature. It has been theorized that materials with
special atomic structures, such as magnetic honeycomb compounds, could hold the
key to understanding superconductivity. To synthesize these novel honeycomb
materials, the PI will work directly with Professor Hiroshi Kageyama at Kyoto
University in Japan. He is a world leader in the cutting-edge chemical
techniques needed to create these compounds.

Emergent phenomena can be discovered and understood by studying the structure-
property relationships in materials. One emergent state of extreme interest in
physics, the quantum spin liquid (QSL) state, has strongly interacting magnetic
spins, constrained by the lattice geometry, inhibiting the spins from ordering
in an energetically preferred antiferromagnetic arrangement. As a result, the
spins remain disordered even at absolute zero leading to this spin liquid state
theorized to be critical for high temperature superconductivity. Theoretical
models have predicted several potential QSL candidates; most notably the
distorted honeycomb lattice. The goal of this project is to prepare a novel
class of honeycomb material exhibiting strong spin orbit coupling satisfying the
theoretically Kitaev model to produce a unique type of quantum spin liquid.
While previous attempts have been made, no one has ever synthesized this type of
material. Therefore, a new approach utilizing innovative chimie douce (low
temperature chemistry) and high pressure methods will be developed to prepare
novel honeycomb iridates which should exhibit quantum spin liquid behavior
consistent with the Kitaev model. This material will advance the understanding
of how magnetism and magnetic interactions can be engineered to produce emergent
phenomena. I will perform this work in collaboration with Professor Kageyama at
Kyoto University, who is an expert in low temperature chemistry and has the
extensive facilities and equipment to enable the science.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.