* 1614348
* Investigation of Neutron-Induced Backgrounds on 134.136Xe for Large-Scale Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Mary Kidd, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 119,547.00

The process of radioactive decay of nuclei has been known for some time. The
usual process of decay is known as beta-decay, where the nucleus emits an
energetic electron, thereby turning a neutron into a proton and, at the same
time, emitting a ghostly particle called an antineutrino. This process has been
measured and theoretically modeled with excellent agreement. In rare cases, some
nuclei can emit two electrons simultaneously, along with two antineutrinos, in a
process called double beta-decay. This process is difficult to measure, because
it is so rare, and difficult to calculate because of uncertainties in the
nuclear structure. The goal of this research is to reduce the uncertainties in
nuclear structure by measuring nuclear reactions relevant to the double beta-
decay process. This will help in the understanding of experiments on
neutrinoless double beta-decay, a proposed beta-decay process in which no
neutrinos are observed. The search for this elusive decay mode has been
identified by the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee as one of the most
important questions facing nuclear science, since those experiments would
provide critical information on the fundamental properties of neutrinos and
antineutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One potential background contribution to
experiments of double beta-decay comes from neutrons hitting either the source
material or nearby shielding materials. These neutrons can create more neutrons,
or can create gamma rays to mimic the desired signal. Several current
experiments are studying the neutrinoless double-beta decay of isotope
xenon-136. A similar isotope, xenon-134, is also present as an impurity, which
was recently discovered to emit a potential background event when hit with
neutrons. The research conducted with this award will investigate this recently-
discovered background using a highly-enriched gaseous xenon target. The gaseous
xenon sample will be irradiated with neutrons at the Triangle Universities
Nuclear Laboratory, and then will be counted using a shielded high-purity
germanium detector in the Low Background Counting Facility. The research
performed under this award will extend our knowledge of potential double beta
decay backgrounds in xenon, which will assist in planning the future ton-scale
neutrinoless double beta decay experiments. Since observation of neutrinoless
double beta decay is a major component of the nuclear science long-range plan,
gaining information regarding backgrounds is essential.