* 1614471
* Collaborative Proposal: Comets and the History of Volatile Matter During Planetary System Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martin Cordiner, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 103,998.00

Comets are early Solar System objects, mostly unchanged from the time the Solar
System was created. The orbits of comets trace them to the locations in the
outer Solar System where they formed. The compositions of molecules released
from a comet can be measured by looking at their spectral signals. Combining
these compositions with the comet orbits allows scientists to learn what
materials were present at different locations in the early Solar System. The
investigators will measure the amounts of many molecules in comet spectra,
including H2O, HDO, CH4, C2H2, C2H6, H2S, SO2, OCS, CO, H2CO, CH3OH, HCOOH, HCN,
HNC, CH3CN, HC3N, NH2CHO, and NH3. They will use ground-based observatories such
as the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility, the W. M. Keck Observatory, and the
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array. The years of 2017-2019 provide an
excellent opportunity to study Jupiter Family Comets - comets with smaller
orbits for which little is known about their compositions. This research serves
the national interest by advancing our knowledge of the materials that served as
the building blocks of our Solar System. Shows at the Watson-King Planetarium,
Towson University, and the University of Missouri, Saint Louis' new planetarium
will feature this research. Students from St. Louis and Baltimore, including
many minority students, will have the chance to see them.

The Principal Investigators will use high-resolution molecular spectroscopy of
comets to measure the compositions of volatiles released from their nuclei, and
to test theories about the early formation of the Solar System. While the orbits
of observed comets link them to their dynamical reservoir (the distant Oort
cloud or closer Kuiper belt), the suite of detected molecules for an individual
comet provides a "snapshot" of the volatile inventory at their location in the
protoplanetary disk where these comets formed. The investigators will use
ground-based near-infrared and radio observatories, including the NASA Infrared
Telescope Facility, the W. M. Keck Observatory, and the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array. By combining the advantages of each wavelength
domain, the investigators' goal is to measure the relative abundances among
various molecular species, including H2O, HDO, CH4, C2H2, C2H6, H2S, SO2, OCS,
CO, H2CO, CH3OH, HCOOH, HCN, HNC, CH3CN, HC3N, NH2CHO, and NH3. New observations
are planned of Jupiter Family comets and Oort cloud comets. The 2017-2019 period
brings the best opportunity for many years to study Jupiter Family comets - a
dynamical class underrepresented in compositional studies of all parent
volatiles. These studies will be integrated into a planetarium program that will
be hosted at the Watson-King Planetarium, Towson University, and at the
University of Missouri, Saint Louis' new digital planetarium, reaching St. Louis
and Baltimore students, including many underrepresented minorities. One
investigator will also mentor graduate and undergraduate students.