* 1614107
* Developmentally Appropriate Strategies for Targeting Early Adolescents' Motivation in STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Braska Williams, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,011,821.00

This project will advance the efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote
practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers
in the fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by
developing specific strategies for teachers, STEM career professionals, and
caregivers of economically disadvantaged African American middle school
adolescents. The goal of this project is to provide a technology-rich computer
and electrical engineering afterschool learning environment that helps students
develop a sense of belonging or interpersonal connection while supporting their
development of mastery goals, a sense of autonomy and competence, and a of view
STEM learning as meaningful and worthwhile. Teachers will be prepared on how to
enact instructional strategies to meet the motivational needs of early
adolescents. Teacher training will include participating in STEM preparatory
academies and targeted professional development workshops, working
collaboratively with trained afterschool specialists, and participating in
monthly consultation meetings and follow-up activities. These steps will help
teachers recognize the nuances of motivating students while giving teachers an
added advantage in identifying and effectively responding to issues that may
facilitate or hinder student motivation. The project will also include special
provisions for ensuring that STEM career professionals and caregivers are
equipped with information that is essential for communicating with students in
ways that promote successful participation in STEM fields.

This project will employ both quantitative and qualitative approaches, with a
special emphasis on written reflections, observations, surveys, implicit
association tests, field notes and activity logs. These approaches will be used
to examine teacher and student motivation, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors.
Data analysis of stability and change in teacher instruction and student
motivation will involve multilevel modeling with full maximum likelihood
estimation, ordinary least squares regression, growth curve modeling, and the
constant comparative method. Outcomes and products from this project will
include (1) a conceptual model for guiding teachers in using motivation data to
improve their instructional effectiveness and (2) an array of theoretically
driven pedagogical techniques that will benefit teachers, STEM career
professionals, and caregivers seeking to support the motivation of students of
color during computer and electrical engineering activities. In addition to
disseminating formal research reports, conference presentations, and journal
articles, the project team will contextualize the findings of this project
during a convening designed to help community stakeholders overcome barriers to
implementing motivationally supportive practices during STEM activities.