* 1614277
* EAPSI:Seismic performance of vintage Japanese braced-frame buildings before and after retrofit
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Andrew Sen, Sen                     Andrew         D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Concentrically braced frames (CBFs) are commonly used in steel buildings in the
US and Japan to resist earthquake-induced forces. Many CBFs that remain in use
today were designed prior to the late 1980s, when design focused on strength and
stiffness. Seismic provisions at the time implied buildings could sustain
inelastic (permanent) deformations while maintaining strength, but this was not
necessarily ensured. Consequently, these vintage CBFs are expected to exhibit
unacceptable performance (e.g., collapse) in large earthquakes, and this has
been supported by observations from several earthquakes in Japan. The PI will
collaborate with Professor Masayoshi Nakashima of the Disaster Prevention
Research Institute at Kyoto University, a leading researcher in seismic steel
building design, to investigate the seismic performance of vintage CBFs in Japan
and the efficacy of several retrofit schemes intended to improve performance.
Numerical simulation techniques developed in an ongoing parallel study conducted
by the PI on vintage CBFs in the US will be utilized and modified to
characterize common Japanese construction. The research will advance the
understanding of the behavior and retrofit of vintage Japanese CBFs which can be
applied to their US counterparts.

CBFs in the US and Japan have similar lineage, and pre-capacity-design CBFs in
particular have drawn considerable concern from the engineering community due to
strength, detailing, geometric, and material deficiencies. Recent subassemblage
testing of existing and retrofitted US vintage CBFs by the PI and collaborators
has shown that these characteristics can severely limit inelastic deformation
capacity or significantly affect the sequence of component yielding and failure.
Leveraging the similarities between US and Japanese CBFs, this experimental data
will be used to calibrate brace and gusset-plate connection models that
numerically simulate vintage-CBF components common in Japan. Researchers and
engineers in Japan will help establish characteristics of study buildings and
determine potential retrofit alternatives, and nonlinear response history
analysis will be employed using ground motion suites representative of various
hazard levels.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.