* 1614521
* RUI: Arginine methylation of a lipin homologue and its function in phospholipid biosynthesis in Trypanosoma brucei
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Michel Pelletier, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 366,384.00

RUI: Arginine methylation of a lipin homologue and its function in phospholipid
biosynthesis in Trypanosoma brucei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research question
focuses on investigating modifications of a novel protein involved in essential
phospholipid biosynthesis in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei. T.
brucei spends part of its life cycle in the human bloodstream and part in the
African tsetse fly, thus presenting an interesting model system for studies of
parasitic adaptation to multiple eukaryotic hosts. This project will strengthen
the research environment in the Department of Biology at The College at
Brockport, SUNY, by providing opportunities for undergraduate and Master's level
graduate students to participate directly in hypothesis driven basic research
using an important protozoan model system. In addition, the independent
undergraduate research projects will expose participants to science in an
interactive, collaborative, constructive framework. Involvement in high impact
research activities will enhance the overall educational experience and increase
student ability to secure graduate positions, admission to professional school,
and employment in various biological disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of this project is to identify the function(s) of TbLpn, a recently
identified protein, and its importance in trypanosome metabolism using a dual
genetic/biochemical approach. The functions of TbLpn and the effect of arginine
methylation will be assessed in vivo by disrupting its expression by RNA
interference and determining the effect of the disruption on cellular growth,
cell morphology, cellular phospholipid content, phosphatidic acid phosphatase
activity, and expression of lipid biosynthetic genes. This research will address
important aspects of trypanosome biology and will constitute an area for growth
in the fields of both parasitology and protein modification. By using an
innovative approach, potential roles of a novel protein in phospholipid
biosynthesis and virulence will be unveiled. In addition, it will potentially
increase our understanding of protein arginine methylation in an evolutionarily
ancient parasite, and provide insight into the mechanisms and evolution of this
common posttranslational modification in higher organisms.