* 1614433
* EAPSI: Modeling the Patterns of Past Human Migration during the Middle Bronze Age in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Habeom Kim, Kim                     Habeom
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Human migration has long been considered one of the major sources of impact on
cultural expansion and changes in archaeology. Understanding of migrations
become increasingly critical in current sociopolitical and economic situations
where populations are migrating and interacting globally at an unprecedented
rate. Relatively constricted concepts of past migrations as disconnected,
passive events have come in for criticism. A new set of questions highlights the
special relevance of migration not only to archaeological studies that concern
how and why culture has changed, but also to social, ecological, and behavioral
sciences that seek explanations on human choices and behaviors. This project
will examine and model the patterns of human migration of the Songguk-ri (SGR)
culture, a prehistoric Bronze Age culture, occurring between approx. 800 ? 400
BCE in Korea. By applying spatial landscape analysis using high-performance
computation and simulation systems on SGR settlement patterns over time, the
project will explore complex social and environmental factors, processes, and
impacts behind long-term human migration. This project will be conducted at the
Korean Institute of Archaeology and Environment (KIAE) at Korea University in
collaboration with Dr. Lee, Hongjong and his research associates, noted scholars
and pioneers in Environmental and Landscape Archaeological Science and its
application in Korea.

This project will examine and model the patterns of human migration of the
Songguk-ri (SGR) culture occurring during the Korean Middle Bronze Age (2800 ?
2400 cal. BP) in Korea through a spatial analytic perspective using Geographical
Information System (GIS) and Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS) on SGR
settlement distribution. Since the SGR culture shows evidence of rapid and
sustained human migration across various geographical and cultural barriers
within the relatively short 400 years after its emergence, this case study on
SGR expansion will contribute valuable insight to current understandings on
complex social and environmental factors, processes, and impacts behind long-
term human migration across preferred landscapes. This project will be conducted
at the Korean Institute of Archaeology and Environment (KIAE) at Korea
University in collaboration with Dr. Lee, Hongjong and his research associates,
noted scholars and pioneers in Environmental and Landscape Archaeological
Science and its application in Korea.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.