* 1614206
* EAPSI:EAPSI: Integrating English and Chinese-Language Literature on the India-Asia Collision to Better Understand the Formation and Evolution of Subduction Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kathryn Metcalf, Metcalf                 Kathryn        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Before India and Asia collided, forming the Himalayas, the oceanic plate between
the continents was subducted beneath Asia. The material scraped off from the
oceanic plate during subduction, called a subduction complex, is one of the few
records of the material that entered the subduction zone. Most of the material
is subducted into the mantle and lost to the geologic record. Integrating data
from Chinese-language and English-language sources will provide a holistic
understanding of the subduction complex in southern Tibet. This project will
analyze and compile maps and data available only in China with those from
English-language publications and new data generated in the United States and
China. This research will be conducted at the Institute of Tibetan Plateau
Research in collaboration with Professor Ding Lin and his students, who have
worked extensively on the subduction complex in southern Tibet. The
collaboration could lead to the discovery of new continental fragments that were
subducted and a new model for how subduction complexes develop.

This project will integrate the extent, deformation style, and provenance of the
subduction complex in southern Tibet. Primary data will be maps, unit
descriptions, U-Pb detrital zircon geochronology, and sedimentary provenance.
The subduction complex in southern Tibet is a complicated, little-studied unit
that records the source and deformation of materials entering the subduction
zone and that is composed almost entirely of block-in-matrix m√©lange, far
thicker and more mixed than any other documented subduction complex. This block-
in-matrix style of deformation over kilometers width in a few millions of years
is unexplained by current subduction zone models.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.