* 1614717
* CSR: Small: Enabling Deep Neural Networks for Mobile-Cloud Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2020
* USD 427,037.00

Over the past three years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become the dominant
approach to solving a variety of important problems in computing. This includes
problems in speech recognition, machine translation, handwriting recognition and
many computer vision problems like face, object, and scene recognition. Although
they are renowned for their excellent recognition performance, DNNs are also
known to be computationally intensive: networks commonly used for speech, visual
and language understanding tasks routinely consume hundreds of MB of memory and
Gflops of computing power, typically the province of server-class computers.
However, the relevance of the above applications to the mobile setting and the
potential for developing new applications provides a strong case for executing
DNNs on mobile devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to build an
execution framework for deep-neural networks on mobile-cloud platforms so as to
enable a broad class of emerging applications such as continuous mobile vision.
In particular, this work will look at enabling a large suite of DNN-based face,
scene and object processing algorithms based on applying DNNs to video streams
from wearable devices. This framework, given an arbitrary DNN, will compile it
down to a resource-efficient variant at modest loss in accuracy. The project
plans include developing novel techniques to specialize DNNs to contexts and to
share resources across multiple simultaneously executing DNNs. Finally, it will
create a run-time system for managing the optimized models generated. Using the
challenging continuous mobile vision domain as a case-study, the plan is to
demonstrate that these techniques yield very significant reductions in DNN
resource usage, including orders of magnitude reduction in memory use and
instructions executed, in common mobile settings.