* 1614382
* EAPSI: Development of an Improved Visualization Method for Accelerated Quantitative Measurement of High Speed Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jonathan Gross, Gross                   Jonathan       R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Many real world environments, such as mines, bunkers, and tunnels, are at risk
of being damaged by shock waves either accidentally or as the result of
terrorism. This award supports research motivated by the potential benefits from
developing better ways to protect people and property from shock waves using
improved flow visualization techniques. An experimental setup will be
constructed to apply a variation of the Background Oriented Schlieren (BOS) flow
visualization method, known as Simplified Background Oriented Schlieren (S-BOS)
to high speed flows. Traditional schlieren visualization uses optics to increase
the visibility of density gradients in a flow. BOS is a variation on this which
enables quantitative measurement of flow properties by placing a pattern behind
the flow and using image processing algorithms to determine the density field
based on the distortion of the image. This has the drawback of being
computationally demanding. S-BOS is a recently developed method which uses
periodic bands for the background pattern in order to enable much faster
processing for selected cases. This method will now be extended to flows
featuring shock waves. The work will be performed in the lab of Professor
Tsutomu Saito, an expert in the visualization of supersonic flows, at the
Muroran Institute of Technology.

An experimental setup will be constructed to apply a variation of the background
oriented schlieren method known as Simplified Background Oriented Schlieren
(S-BOS) to high speed flows. S-BOS dramatically accelerates the speed of the
image processing by using a background pattern that produces periodic bands of
illumination with intensity varying sinusoidally. The displacement of each pixel
can then be found using the shift in phase of the brightness profile. This has
been shown to be much less computationally demanding than using digital image
correlation on a pattern of random dots. While S-BOS has proven effective for
measuring low speed flows, this work will extend the method to supersonic flows
featuring shock waves. By working to apply the method to flow over a model in a
supersonic wind tunnel, the presence of discontinuities in flow properties and
their effect on image processing will be addressed. The effectiveness of this
method will be determined, both in terms of its accuracy at quantifying the
density profile in the flow, and its ability to produce these results more
quickly than with current algorithms applied to patterns of random dots.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.