* 1614182
* Skills21STEMStarter: An Incubator and Launch Pad to STEM Entrepreneurship and Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,199,994.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education Connection's Center for
21st Century Skills, in collaboration with a consortium of education and
industry partners, will develop an online open source platform with an
integrated incubator curriculum that engages high school students, teachers, and
mentors in synergistic collaborations to advance students' competencies and
skills via the design and launching of STEM-related products and services. The
project will be tested, iterated, and implemented in 25 diverse in-school
settings and 2 afterschool settings to assess its effectiveness. The project
will be implemented as a high school Capstone course and engage over 1,100
predominantly underrepresented students in the development, iteration, and
launching of challenge project solutions. The focus of the project is on
development of entrepreneurship skills in high school students and teaching them
how to persist in the STEM marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding
research questions of the project are: (1) What coherent sets of experiences
effectively and efficiently support student competency, motivation, and
persistence for productive participation in the STEM-related workforce of today
or in the future? (2) What instructional and curricular models can effectively
engage teachers to utilize and integrate technologies to enhance student
understanding of STEM-related occupations? (3) What roles might business and
industry workforce members play in motivating students to become aware of,
interested in, and prepared for careers in the STEM-related workforce? and (4)
What are effective and productive ways to ensure broadening participation by
engaging underrepresented populations in STEM programs and careers? Using a
quasi-experimental design, the EDC research team will compare 12th grade
students enrolled in STEM Starter Capstone courses with their peers enrolled in
traditional Capstone courses. Participating schools will serve as sites or
blocks, each offering two STEM Starter Capstone courses and two traditional
Capstone courses.