* 1614200
* EAPSI: A Cross-Cultural Exploration and Evaluation of Group-Centric Authentication
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Sauvik Das, Das                     Sauvik
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Authentication is a process by which computer systems regulate access to
protected data. However, authentication is often designed ignorant of the social
context in which those systems are embedded. Accordingly, the case of a child
accessing her father's tablet is treated the same as that of a stranger trying
to access the father's bank account: It is an equally fundamental violation of
the security of the system if either is granted access. As digital devices and
services touch more of our lives, there is a growing and underserved need for
group-centric authentication: authentication designed for shared access to
group-owned digital resources. In these cases, requiring strict security for
individual accounts along with traditional access control policies is socially
inappropriate. To address this need, the PI will work with Dr. Koji Yatani at
the University of Tokyo, an expert in creating novel interactive systems, to
develop and evaluate a number of group-centric authenticators. This research
will strengthen understanding how social factors affect security behaviors and
how they can be leveraged to improve security
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust authentication is essential for secure
systems. However, recent work highlights a need to uncover and meet the
authentication needs of small groups who collectively share resources and
largely trust each other (e.g., families and small work groups). Moreover, this
work should consider cultural influences on group norms and risk perception as
these factors should affect group authentication practices and needs. In this
work, I will bridge these gaps in theory and practice by exploring and
evaluating group-centric authentication in a cross-cultural setting. I will
develop and deploy one or more prototype group-centric authenticators with small
groups in Japan who share space or resources. These small groups will use my
prototypes in realistic scenarios for several days and report on their
experiences. Through these efforts, I intend to better understand local group
authentication needs and how cultural influences directly or indirectly affect
those needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.