* 1614020
* EAPSI:Evaluating intracellular and extracellular lipid metabolic networks at the level of individual cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Liza Alexander, Alexander               Liza           E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The project is focused on understanding the molecular genetics and metabolic
relationships between the intracellular and extracellular cuticular lipid
networks. The latter network is restricted to a single cell layer, the epidermis
of plant aerial organs. The project will build on the PI's PhD research, using
sophisticated mass-spectrometric lipidomics profiling expertise developed by Dr.
Kazuki Saito's research group at the RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource
Science, Kanagawa, Japan. Plant epidermal cells express unique molecular
machinery that juxtaposes the assembly of intracellular lipid components and the
unique extracellular lipids that are unidirectionally secreted to the surface of
the plant. Physiologically this lipid-trafficking process is genetically
programmed, but can change in response to environmental pressures (e.g.,
drought, temperature, pathogens), making them important to agricultural crop
productivity. Additionally, these lipids are chemically most akin to petroleum
hydrocarbons making this research insightful towards the development of
biorenewable fuels and chemicals.

Several genes have been characterized that affect the deposition of
extracellular cuticular lipids in maize and Arabidopsis. To understand how these
genes affect extracellular cuticular lipid assembly, the PI has developed
genetic stocks of maize and Arabidopsis designed to reveal the biochemical
function of several of these genes. Comprehensive intracellular lipid profiles
will be analyzed via liquid chromatography/quadrupole time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (LC/Q-TOF/MS) under the guidance of Dr. Yozo Okazaki, Research
Scientist in the Saito group. Integrating these new intracellular lipid data
with the already generated extracellular lipid data will provide invaluable
insights on the interrelationship between intracellular and extracellular lipids
as disrupted by genetic permutations, and therefore provide models on the
physiological functions of these genes.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.