* 1614318
* EAPSI: Extending the Scope of Mathematical Operations used as Tools to Study Rings
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Daniel McGregor, McGregor                Daniel         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

A ring is a collection of elements that can be added, subtracted, or multiplied
together, but not necessarily divided by one another. Rings appear in a wide
range of areas within math and physics. The integers, the rational numbers, and
polynomials are all commonly used examples of rings. A star operation is a
useful tool for studying certain types of rings, particularly the properties of
their multiplication. This project will extend the use of star operations to a
larger category of rings than they are currently used for. This research will be
conducted at Pohang University of Science and Technology in collaboration with
Dr. Byung Gyun Kang, an expert in the field of commutative ring theory.

Star operations are a closure operation on the ideals of a commutative ring
satisfying certain axioms related to principal ideals. Commonly studied star
operations are the b, t, and v operations, and they are an active area of
research in multiplicative ideal theory. Star operations can also be used to
construct Kronecker function rings, which are invaluable for studying valuation
overrings and the topology of Zariski-Riemann spaces. They are mainly studied in
the context of integral domains, and comparatively little work has been done in
the case of rings with zero divisors. This project will expand the use of star
operations to commutative rings with zero divisors, with an emphasis on
generalizing Kronecker function rings and Zariski-Riemann spaces to that
setting.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.