* 1614025
* EAPSI: Biogeography of Invasive Tree Islands and their Ectomycorrhizal Mutualists
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Briana Boaz, Boaz                    Briana
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Invasive species are a global concern, causing substantial environmental and
economic losses worldwide, and international partnerships are critical for the
research and effective management of invaders. Mycorrhizae are a ubiquitous
symbiotic relationship between plant roots and fungus that is mutually
beneficial to both organisms. Mycorrhizal fungi are likely critical in
determining the potential range of an invasive species. The geographic
distribution patterns of mycorrhizae, while poorly understood, could be
important in determining the mechanisms of invasive success. Lodgepole pine, an
obligately mycorrhizal and economically important timber crop, is native to
western North America and a significant invasive species in much of the southern
hemisphere. This project will implement parallel analyses between the western
North America native and New Zealand invaded ranges to provide insight into the
origin, dispersal, and distribution patterns of invasive lodgepole pines and
their fungal mutualists. This research will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Ian Dickie, a noted expert in invasion ecology, at Lincoln University and
its partner the Bio-Protection Research Center, which have been influential in
the research and implementation of New Zealand?s invasion management programs.

The absence of compatible mycorrhizae is thought to be a substantial barrier to
invasion for lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), an obligately ectomycorrhizal
(ECM) invasive in much of the southern hemisphere. The dispersal and
distribution patterns of lodgepole pine-associated ECM communities are likely
important in determining the potential range of this invader, and may be
predicted by Island Biogeography Theory. The research objectives are to (1)
compare ECM communities associated with lodgepole pine in the western North
America native and New Zealand invaded ranges; (2) determine whether Island
Biogeography Theory can describe ECM dispersal and distribution patterns; (3)
determine the spatiotemporal and environmental gradients structuring these ECM
communities; and (4) predict the consequences for future plant invasions.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.