* 1614875
* Imaging Vertical Earthquake Cycle Crustal Deformation of the San Andreas Fault System Utilizing the GAGE Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Bridget Smith-Konter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2021
* USD 267,408.00

Major earthquakes along the San Andreas Fault system in southern California
threaten millions of people and billions of dollars in property and
infrastructure, which makes understanding the physics of earthquakes key in
addressing a critical societal need for improved seismic hazard estimates. This
project is using state-of-the-art geodetic data provided by the GAGE (Geodesy
Advancing Geosciences and EarthScope) Facility and EarthScope to understand how
Earth's crust deforms in response to plate tectonics and other processes. The
project is focused particularly on understanding vertical motions, which may be
related to groundwater withdrawal and snow loading and the migration,
extraction, and injection of crustal fluids in addition to faulting and
earthquake processes. Detection of anomalous vertical motions in these data will
not only improve the quality of earthquake cycle strain rate estimates, but is
also a valuable resource for climate, hydrologic, oceanographic, and earthquake
engineering communities.

The team is focusing on studying vertical deformation using a synthesis of GAGE
Facility (Global Positioning System and InSAR) and coastal tide gauge data
spanning the Pacific-North American plate boundary. The project is developing
well-constrained time-series model products of 3D earthquake cycle deformation
using integrated high accuracy GPS point measurements, high spatial resolution
InSAR measurements, and long-period tide gauge vertical time series
observations. This research project has four main objectives: (1) preparing a
contemporary high-resolution GPS-constrained 4D model of vertical and horizontal
crustal deformation of the SAFS; (2) using these models to correct inherent
errors in InSAR data from new satellites through integrated analysis of GPS and
InSAR; (3) construction of a refined 4D time series of crustal deformation
derived GPS, InSAR, and tide gauge time-series data; and (4) detecting and
understanding non-tectonic deformation common in both InSAR and GPS data. In
addition, the team is developing outreach materials describing how InSAR
observations are made and used in modeling crustal deformation and distributing
those via the Active Earth kiosks supported by NSF, and is releasing software
tools to enable geodetic data analyses by the broad Earth science community.