* 1614238
* EAPSI: Reduction of Harmful Pollutants from Combustion Processes using High Temperature Ceramic Membranes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Ryan Falkenstein-Smith, Falkenstein-Smith       Ryan           L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Currently the planet is facing an energy crisis that threatens the integrity of
our atmosphere. This creates increasing pressure on the primary energy sector
(fossil fuel combustion) to meet energy demand while significantly reducing
harmful emissions. Recently, a novel idea that incorporates ceramic membranes
into combustion processes, has emerged as an ideal solution that would transform
the entire energy sector. This process uses advantageous material properties,
including the ability to filtrate oxygen from the air at high temperatures, at
existing operating conditions. The oxygen transport membrane provides a pure
oxygen source to combust with fuel while acting as a reactor to capture harmful
pollutant products. This idea transcends any current utilized practice that aims
to contain carbon emissions at the expense of power output. This award supports
research to develop simulations of oxygen transport membrane performance under
harsh boundary conditions, when membrane structural integrity is potentially
jeopardized. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Takashi Tokumasu of Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan.

In order to investigate oxygen transport membrane utilization for the combustion
of natural gas and carbon capture, a simulation model, co-developed under the
guidance of Professor Tokumasu, is used to investigate membrane performance
under varying surrounding conditions (CO2 concentrations) and membrane
composition. More recently, mixed ionic-electronic conducting (MIEC) combined
with CO2 resistant and highly ionic conductive materials, known as dual-phase
membranes, have become promising candidates for practical combustion reactors.
Through the introduction of a stable material, oxygen transport membranes
chances of degradation under harsh conditions are reduced, providing more
chemical stability. Additionally, introducing highly ionic conductive materials
doesn?t necessarily limit the performance of oxygen permeability, but must be
investigated to identify key trends for incorporating membrane reactors in
fossil fuel combustion processes. Membrane technology has the potential to
reduce global emissions while meeting increasing energy demand.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).