* 1614138
* EAPSI:Investigation of the Unconventional Superconducting Mechanism in Li0.9Mo6O17
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Benjamin Lawson, Lawson                  Benjamin       J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

The discovery and understanding of new materials has driven technology
development in the computer age. Research on the properties of semiconductors
has laid the foundation for modern computer electronics. Better understanding of
metals and insulators has enabled micro-fabrication and energy efficient
technology. The discovery of the superconductor has lead to the hope of power
transfer without energy loss. This project investigates an exotic
superconducting material, Li0.9Mo6O17, under one of the leading scientists in
the field of unconventional superconductors, Professor Yuji Matsuda from Kyoto
University. This material shows some unusual low-dimensional properties that are
not well understood. This project will clarify those unusual properties by
probing the material with a sharp needle, which has a tip consisting of only a
few atoms. By running electricity through the needle in a very cold environment,
the nature of superconductivity in Li0.9Mo6O17 can be revealed. Better
understanding of this material's properties will lead to an advancement of the
field of unconventional superconductors and has promise to impact the future of
electronics and computing.

The objective of the proposed research is to determine the superconducting
mechanism of the quasi-1D crystal Li0.9Mo6O17. This crystal has been proposed to
be a Luttinger Liquid, an exotic state of matter where the electrons separate
into independent charge and spin waves. Many studies have been done on
Li0.9Mo6O17 in the normal state revealing exciting new physics. However, there
is still much to be learned about the superconducting state of Li0.9Mo6O17.
There is some evidence suggesting that Li0.9Mo6O17 is an unconventional spin-
triplet superconductor, but a detailed study of the superconducting gap, which
would elucidate the superconducting mechanism, has not been done. The PI, under
the mentorship of Professor Yuji Matsuda, will grow high quality single crystal
Li0.9Mo6O17 and perform Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) in the
superconducting state. To perform the first STM measurements of Li0.9Mo6O17 in
the superconducting state, the PI will employ STM with 3He refrigeration. An STM
study of the superconducting gap will reveal if Li0.9Mo6O17 behaves according to
unconventional spin-triplet superconductivity or some other mechanism.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.