* 1614149
* EAPSI: Detection and Manipulation of the Exotic Magnetic Structures known as Skyrmions in Nanowires for Next Generation Information Storage Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Matthew Stolt, Stolt                   Matthew        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Improvement of high density information storage systems, such as magnetic hard
drives, is imperative for the continued success of computers and the internet.
Unlike computer processing units (CPUs) which still have a fair amount of room
for traditional improvement, information storage systems, like magnetic hard
drives, are approaching their limits and will need new materials to break
through these limits. One new approach that has garnered much attention in the
physics community is the use of exotic magnetic domains known as skyrmions which
are analogous to magnetic bubbles in which information can be written and
stored. These ?magnetic bubbles? can be smaller than the magnetic domains used
currently in magnetic hard drives which can allow for more information to be
stored in a smaller area. The PI will collaborate with Professor Minglian Tian
at the Chinese Academy of Sciences who is a known expert in the field of
nanoscale magnetism for electronics applications which includes skyrmions. Along
with Tian's expertise, his lab has a number of instruments that allow for the
study of skyrmions and their electronic applications in single nanowire device
prototypes.

Novel nanowires of FeGe and Mn1-xFexSi which are known to host skyrmions have
been synthesized via a chemical vapor deposition route. Single nanowire devices
of each type of nanowire will be made in Prof. Tian?s lab using their state of
the art Focus Ion beam (FIB). The FIB will write Pt electrical leads to an
isolated wire picked by a micromanipulator. The stability of the skyrmion phase
in the nanowires will then be mapped using magnetoresistance and Hall effect
measurements carried out in the group?s own physical properties measurement
system (PPMS). The stability of the skyrmions is expected to be increased
compared to large single crystals due the spatial confinement of the skyrmions
in the nanowire host. Once the skyrmion phase diagram has been mapped for each
system, new electrical detection methods will be studied. If the project is
successful, two new nanowire systems will have had their skyrmion properties
thoroughly studied, and more importantly a novel and facile way to detect single
skyrmions will be developed. Being able to detect single skyrmions would be a
large step toward utilizing skyrmions in next generation electronic information
storage systems.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.