* 1614861
* Opportunities to Learn:  Creative Science Through Inquiry, a Middle Grades Teaming Framework
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Dana Franz, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 05/31/2021
* USD 883,179.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing
opportunities for students to learn creatively in science through inquiry. The
project will prepare 72 middle school teachers to work with approximately 1800
students from economically disadvantaged schools who have had few opportunities
to participate in technology-rich, inquiry-based learning environments. It will
examine coherent sets of experiences through curricular models across
mathematics, science, technology and English/language arts so that STEM is
collaboratively infused in meaningful, relevant ways into the curriculum
throughout the school year. Using a team design, the project will engage
university and community college faculty members and industry partners with
middle school teachers. Through this effort, teams of educators and experts will
develop, test, refine, and infuse STEM principles into regular classroom
activities so that students can experience the interconnectedness of STEM
through mathematics and science enhanced by technology and technical writing.
This project will help address the nations' need to increase the diversity of
students entering high school who are better prepared to make course selections
that will potentially lead to future STEM careers.

The project will use a mixed methods design to capture data through
questionnaires, focus groups, observations, interviews, videotapes and pre-post
tests. Student increases in science achievement and dispositions towards STEM
careers will be analyzed using a quasi-experimental design. A propensity score
matching process will be used to equate group with sub-group propensity score
matching analysis to examine treatment effects by gender, ethnicity, and SES.
Repeated measures will be used to examine increases in teacher self-efficacy for
teaching science through inquiry and qualitative methods to identify successes
and challenges to implementing the collaborative, cross-disciplinary experiences
for students. This project will provide a model framework to guide teachers into
creating and implementing collaborative STEM lesson units that will engage
industry/community college/STEM professionals in the planning, teaching, and
evaluating process. Student experiences developed through the framework will
expose students to exciting, relevant STEM curriculum that demonstrates the
interconnectedness of their academic courses. The enacted model will enhance the
teacher teams while building the self-efficacy of the teachers to deliver STEM
lessons across the disciplines. Dissemination efforts are two-fold: feedback and
community sharing. Feedback on this model will be garnered through academic
presentations from professionals across the STEM disciplines. The project
website will also provide access to the framework and sample activities as well
as opportunities to react to the model.