* 1614539
* Molecular Diversification of Plant Hormone Modification by Acyl Acid Amido Synthetases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Joseph Jez, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 812,490.00

Plants need to respond to their surroundings and changes in their environment.
To do that, plants use various hormones to control how they grow under normal
and stress conditions, such as drought, nutrient starvation, sunlight changes,
and attack by pests and pathogens. These small molecules also influence crop
productivity. The intricate systems that link small molecule hormones to
developmental changes in plants are just beginning to be understood. One way of
controlling responses to plant hormones is to alter the chemical structure of
the hormone; this provides a molecular on/off switch. This project focuses on a
family of plant proteins that modify plant hormones to turn them on and off and
will use newly identified route for altering levels of the major plant hormone
auxin. Understanding how plants control their growth and development, especially
to improve their ability to survive under stress conditions, is essential for
improving crop yields and for meeting the potential of a bio-based economy in
the future. This project will also provide an interdisciplinary training
environment for scientists at all levels from postdoctoral researchers to high
school students that combines experimental approaches from structural biology,
biochemistry, and plant biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of pre-
and post-receptor metabolic and signaling pathways controls hormone responses
for plant growth and development. Metabolism and localization of auxin during
plant development is critical for establishing active hormone responses and
biological effects. As part of the system that regulates plant hormones, GH3
acyl acid amido synthetases control levels of major plant hormones, including
jasmonic acid and auxin, and modulate pathways responsible for plant growth and
development, seed development, light signaling, drought response, and pathogen
resistance. Biochemically, the GH3 proteins catalyze the conjugation of amino
acids to acyl acids to regulate levels of active and inactive forms of
jasmonates and auxins. Diversification of acyl acid substrate specificity in
this enzyme family allows for alteration of metabolites in biosynthetic pathways
beyond jasmonate and indole acetic acid, such as the endogenous auxin
indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), and for the modification of synthetic auxins, which
suggests possible uses in herbicide tolerance mechanisms. This project will
determine the role of an IBA-specific Gretchen Hagen (GH3) protein in plant
seedling growth, investigate the molecular basis of GH3 protein specificity for
different auxins and evaluate the modification of phenoxyalkanoic acids by GH3
proteins as an herbicide tolerance mechanism. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.