* 1614259
* EAPSI: Epidemiological Study and Analysis of Moyamoya Disease in Taiwan Population
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Tina Gui, Gui                     Tina
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Moyamoya syndrome is a rare disease first described in 1957. To the best of our
knowledge, this disease tends to run in families and primarily affects children.
Previous studies have proven regional and temporal distinctions in
epidemiological features of Moyamoya disease, but population-based studies in
regions other than Japan are limited. Although there are a variety of available
Moyamoya disease database in Asia, there is no tool that can help researchers
analyze the gene-disease correlations and predict the most effective genetic
components accurately. This research will design and develop a gene-disease
predicting tool to enable efficient processing of large-scale biological
databases efficiently. Collaboration with Professor Eric Y. Chuang, an expert in
cancer biology, and specialists from the Institute of Epidemiology and
Preventive Medicine at the National Taiwan University will benefit researchers
to study inherited genetic conditions and solidify a professional network in the
field of rare genetic disease between the United States and Taiwan.

Moyamoya disease (MMD) can be passed through generations in families; up to 15
percent of patients with MMD have one or more family members with the condition.
In previous genome-wide association study, RNF213 and ACTA2 are the first
identified susceptibility genes for MMD. However, the cause and inherent pattern
remain unknown. This project will design and develop a standalone gene-disease
predicting tool that allows general scientists to process large-scale biological
data efficiently, and provide high level biclustering methods for discovering
groups of correlated genes potentially associated to disease and condition under
investigation. During this project we will better understand the relationships
among affected genes with MMD and associated diseases as well as the process of
designing large-scale information technology and to create a framework to help
Taiwanese researchers facilitate this kind of work. This project is not just
limited to MMD but also covers other types of genetic disease for future study.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.