* 1614526
* Collaborative Research: Unifying Mathematical and Statistical Approaches for Modeling Animal Movement and Resource Selection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Thomas Edwards, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2020
* USD 179,991.00

Understanding how individuals move in space, what habitats they prefer, and how
the environmental features channel or resist movement is central to landscape
ecology and wildlife management. Dramatic improvements in the acquisition,
resolution, and extent of two relevant types of data have recently occurred:
remotely sensed environmental data and high-resolution animal location
(telemetry) data. These data drive a statistical industry serving wildlife
management agencies, private companies, and academia. Improvements in tracking
technology are likely to cause a revolution in movement ecology analogous to the
impact of gene sequencing on molecular genetics. This project synthesizes
theoretical advances (statistical techniques for estimating movement probability
between sites and how environmental resources are selected), existing results
(mathematical techniques for rapidly predicting the envelope of future animal
positions using mechanistic assumptions) and untapped data (remotely sensed
habitat maps and high resolution individual telemetry) to rigorously
characterize how landscape features condition population movement and habitat
choice. The research will encompass case studies investigating the movement of
mule deer and elk in Utah, harbor seals off southeastern Alaska, and Canada
lynx, which have recently been reintroduced in Colorado and are dispersing
throughout the Rocky Mountains. Research students will be cross-trained in
mathematics, statistics, and movement ecology; undergraduates will be included
in the research process by developing individual-based models to test estimation
technologies. A teaching lab in mathematical biology, illustrating movement
models using real biological systems, will also be developed and
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical point process models provide well-
understood statistical approaches for obtaining inference from individual-based
telemetry data, with resource selection functions describing individual habitat
preferences and availability functions describing dispersal probability between
locations. However, point process models require numerical quadrature for proper
normalization, making them slow for large data sets. Classical availability
functions are not constructed to handle major issues like movement constraints,
autocorrelation, and landscape resistance, affecting quality of resource
selection inference and computational feasibility. However, a parallel and
untapped literature of partial differential equations predicts dispersal
likelihood based on mechanistic assumptions about individual movement.
Ecological diffusion and ecological telegrapher's equations provide natural
scalings from Lagrangian to Eulerian perspectives. They are fully mechanistic
and allow for population-level dynamics, but are not inherently statistical nor
automatically suited to handling individual-based telemetry data. This project
will reconcile point process modeling with mechanistic dispersal equations to
arrive at a unified method for analyzing telemetry data. Homogenization
techniques, which are well-accepted in physical sciences but not often applied
in mathematical biology or statistics, will be used to speed up solutions in
heterogeneous environments. Coupled point process models and homogenized partial
differential equations will accelerate model fitting, provide resource selection
inference and naturally accommodate environmental heterogeneity and
barriers/constraints to movement. The ecological movement equations will be
homogenized and simplified using asymptotic approximations suitable for point
process models, addressing correlation among position observations and velocity
constraints. Rapid numerical techniques for movement models will be developed to
allow facile representation of movement barriers (e.g., shorelines, major rivers
or roads) as boundary conditions. To develop efficient computational techniques
for resource selection functions and landscape resistance inference, the
homogenized ecological movement equations will be dovetailed with point process
models in a hierarchical framework. The integrated approach will be applied to
telemetry data from foraging ungulates in Utah, harbor seals in the Gulf of
Alaska, and Canada lynx in Colorado.