* 1614511
* Kids as Urban Scientists: Mapping the Biodiversity of the Philadelphia Promise Zone
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Nancy Songer, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,174,804.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by providing
immersive field experiences for inner-city students from groups underrepresented
in STEM fields. Upper elementary students will use digital data collection tools
to map biodiversity in local neighborhoods, and the project will interweave the
biodiversity activities with career awareness and mentoring opportunities.
Digital badging will be used to certify learning accomplishments and provide
recognition for students and teachers engaged in the project. The project
consists of three components: a) Development of a curriculum module focusing on
biodiversity for use in school or in out-of-school learning environments; b)
Integration of career awareness and mentoring activities by college science
faculty or students who will work with students during the biodiversity mapping
activities; and c) Professional development opportunities for schoolteachers and
out-of-school educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage 400 inner-
city students in grades 4-6 along with 80 teachers and out-of-school-time (OST)
educators from the Philadelphia Promise Zone, one of the highest poverty areas
in the country. The curriculum modules for each grade will be designed for use
in either a school classroom or an OST setting, and the disciplinary content
will be aligned with relevant disciplinary core ideas and science practices of
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The curriculum modules at each
grade level will include classroom learning activities, a field component for
data collection, and a final sessions where teams of students present their
findings through development of a poster, a video, or some other visual
representation. A mixed-methods research approach will be used to seek findings
related to three research questions: a) What coherent set of experiences
effectively support fourth, fifth and sixth grade students? knowledge
development (e.g., biodiversity content knowledge blended with science
practices), motivation and career awareness about STEM-related work and jobs of
today and the future? b) What professional development models and recognition
systems can effectively engage teachers and OST providers in demonstrating Next
Generation Science knowledge, pedagogy, and career awareness for fourth through
sixth grade students? and c) How effective is the activity of Promise Zone
fourth-sixth grade students as information providers and Urban Scientists
interacting with scientist mentors towards increasing career awareness and
understanding characteristics of STEM work?