* 1614227
* EAPSI: Investigating Catalytic Reactions for the Production of High-value Chemicals from Biomass
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kevin Barnett, Barnett                 Kevin          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Biomass represents a promising alternative to non-renewable, carbon-emitting
petroleum resources and is the only known renewable resource that can replace
liquid fuels and chemicals in a carbon-neutral manner. Both the United States
and China have made replacing petroleum with biomass feedstocks a part of their
energy strategy, which has been reflected in increased research in developing
biomass conversion technologies in both countries. This research project is
focused on the production of high-value chemicals from biomass, fulfilling the
goals of i) developing sustainable processes for chemical production and ii)
improving the overall economics of biomass conversion technologies. Research
will be carried out under the supervision of Dr. Tao Zhang: a leader in the
field of catalytic conversion of biomass in China and the Director of the Dalian
Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the
state-of-the-art equipment and vast technical experience of Dr. Zhang and other
DICP researchers, this project will focus on the development of novel catalysts
and catalytic pathways for the production of high-value chemicals such as alpha-
omega diols from biomass. More specifically, this research is centered on the
application of catalysis and reaction engineering to reduce catalyst cost and
improve catalyst stability for liquid-phase biomass conversion reactions, such
as the ring-opening of cyclic ethers to alpha-omega diols. While much research
has been performed on these reactions, there has been limited success in
replacing costly noble metal catalysts with the inexpensive base metal catalysts
necessary for commercialization of these processes. By applying novel catalyst
characterization techniques, developing fundamental reaction kinetic parameters,
and studying thermodynamic relationships between reaction intermediates,
progress will be made in utilizing base metal catalysts and in improving
upgrading pathways to alpha-omega diols. This will facilitate the promotion of
biomass conversion technologies and thus in helping pave a path to a sustainable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.