* 1614949
* Transformative Petascale Particle-In-Cell Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Warren Mori, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2017
* USD 12,320.00

This project will use Blue Waters to enable transformative simulations that will
answer several compelling science questions in plasma physics. These questions
include: &lt;br/&gt;1. Can laser plasma instabilities be controlled or even
harnessed in inertial fusion plasmas? &lt;br/&gt;2. What are the collective
processes responsible for the formation of shocks in collisionless plasmas,
&lt;br/&gt;3.Can plasma-based acceleration be the basis of new compact
accelerators for use at the energy frontier, in medicine, in probing materials,
and in novel light sources?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a suite of
fully kinetic plasma simulation tools developed by the team to answer these
questions. In particular, the plasma simulation tools are based on particle-in-
cell (PIC) methods which have been successful in exploring a wide range of
frontier topics. Four distinct parallel PIC codes, with varying degrees of
physics approximations, will be used in the project. All the codes are highly
optimized on a single processor and have very high parallel
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader impact of the project,
the PIC codes developed by the project could potentially be used to make
scientific discoveries that impact diverse fields beyond the current
investigation with significant societal impact such as high-energy physics,
fusion energy, and reliability of communication satellites. Additionally, the
programming abstractions developed for porting scientific codes to future
massively parallel architectures will impact many others areas of scientific
computing and identifying these abstractions are the first steps for possibly
automating the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the proposed research
will synergize with the new NSF funded Particle-in-Cell and Kinetic Simulation
Software Center (PICKSC) at UCLA and the Institute for Digital Research and
Education (IDRE). This will allow results to broadly impact research and
education within the plasma particle-in-cell community and the computational
science community at UCLA. The PI is currently the director of both PICKSC and
IDRE.