* 1614953
* Collaborative Research: Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Synthetic Biology for Lignin Utilization
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Keith Tyo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 570,814.00

One of the major challenges in biology is to discover ways to convert renewable
plant-based material into commodity chemicals and fuels. For this process to be
economically feasible, valuable products must be made from lignin, a portion of
plant material that now remains mostly unused. Lignin is abundant and its
chemical composition holds great potential for bioenergy production and
biotechnology. This project seeks to use newly developed tools in computational
and experimental biology to manipulate bacterial pathways for improved lignin
degradation with the ultimate goal of developing effective methods of generating
energy in a renewable fashion. A soil bacterium, Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, that
already degrades a vast array of plant derived compounds will be used in these
studies. The degradation capability of this bacterium will be expanded by
introducing new genes into the chromosome and by optimizing the expression of
the catabolic genes for the desired applications. This integrative project will
be accomplished via a multi-disciplinary collaboration, including an
international component. Training opportunities will enable students to visit
and conduct some of the research in the laboratories of different collaborators.
All collaborators have a strong commitment to training students at the
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. This project will be used to
enhance diversity and inclusiveness in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the conceptual framework of
synthetic biology, this project will develop A. baylyi as the recipient cell
(the chassis) to incorporate genetic modules (devices) to expand bacterial
pathways for aromatic compound catabolism. To overcome obstacles that may arise
from differences between idealized concepts and biological realities, a novel
method of experimental evolution that relies on gene amplification will help
optimize metabolic functions. This method exploits the exceptionally high
efficiency of natural transformation and homologous recombination in A. baylyi.
This bacterium is an ideal chassis for lignin biodegradation because of its
powerful genetic system and ability to degrade many aromatic compounds,
including those that are toxic to Escherichia coli. Experimental flux analysis
and kinetic studies will be used to build dynamical models for the design,
optimization, and synthetic expansion of aromatic compound catabolic abilities.
Advanced computational tools, developed by a member of this research team, in
collaboration with others, will also be applied: Biochemical Network Integrated
Computational Explorer (BNICE). To complement these approaches, biochemical,
biophysical, and structural studies will examine how the spatial orientation of
enzymes can be used to improve catalytic efficiency, target metabolite flow, and
prevent toxic intermediates from accumulating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation
and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.