* 1614249
* Fly High Your Math and Science Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Mohammad Khan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2022
* USD 569,907.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Tuskegee University ITEST
project will use flight simulation as an active learning tool to motivate and
engage 75 students in grades 7-8 in learning and reinforcing various math and
science concepts. The project also involves training 15 middle school teachers
to incorporate innovative, active, and experiential learning techniques while
teaching STEM concepts. The project uses commercial-off-the-shelf flight
simulation software that is low cost and has excellent fidelity of the physics
of the phenomenon. The objectives of this project are: (a) to motivate and train
middle school teachers to incorporate innovative, active, and experiential
learning techniques while teaching STEM concepts; (b) to improve the overall
ability of students in solving STEM problems; and, (c) to improve the attitudes
of teachers and students towards teaching and learning STEM
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team, consisting of faculty from
mathematics, aerospace engineering, mathematics education and an instructional
designer (consultant), will develop learning modules for 7th and 8th grade
students based on the Alabama Course of Study and Next Generation Science
Standards using a flight simulation environment. They will design and implement
intervention strategies for increasing student engagement and subsequently their
understanding of selected math and science concepts through three components:
(1) a one-week professional development workshop for the math and science
teachers; (2) a one-week summer camp for grade 7-8 students; and (3) the
implementation of the approach by the teachers in their classrooms. The overall
goal is to determine if an innovative learning approach supported by popular
technology impact the learning of mathematics and science concepts. The research
questions are: (a) Does a hands-on activity that is a physics-based simulation
and not a "twitch video game" engage middle school students in learning math and
science concepts? (b) Does a summer program such as proposed in this project
enhance the self-efficacy of middle school students in math and science? (c) Are
female students as engaged as male students in a flight simulator based learning
environment and (d) Do math and science teachers of a rural school district
accept and implement a technology mediated pedagogy such as the flight
simulation-based approach? The evaluation plan will use a logic model to assess
project activities. The intervention will be evaluated through several pre-post
instruments that will include the assessment of math and science content
knowledge during the summer program, their attitudes towards math and science,
and self-efficacy.