* 1614983
* High-precision Optical Long-baseline Interferometry and Physics of Active Massive Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Christopher Tycner, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,573.00

This project will study B-type stars, which are much more massive than the Sun,
live for relatively short time, and have disk-like features around them. These
stars expel a great deal of mass to interstellar space. Thus, they are important
to understanding how our Galaxy has changed over time. The researchers will use
the Navy Precision Optical Interferometer (NPOI) in Arizona, which combines data
from six telescopes to create highly detailed images. They will produce
spatially resolved stellar surfaces and search for gaps and ring-like structures
in the disks. The team will also use the nearby John Hall telescope to measure
the chemical composition and physical processing occurring in the disks.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the research. The PI
will work with Central Michigan University?s Center for Excellence in STEM
Education to conduct a teacher workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NPOI facility
is sensitive to the light of the hydrogen-alpha line, which is among the most
prominent emission lines produced by the high temperatures associated with these
disks. These data will make it possible to place strong constraints on
temperature, density, total mass, and angular momentum of 35 of these stars. The
time-resolved data will also make it possible to investigate the effects of any
binary companions on the circumstellar disks. The PI&lt;br/&gt;Will teach
students data reduction techniques in an Observational Astronomy course for
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; graduate students.