* 1614777
* Collaborative Research: Efficient mathematical and computational framework for biological 3D image data retrieval
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Daisuke Kihara, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 542,383.00

Advances in imaging technology have led to a proliferation of three dimensional
biological and medical image data from many imaging modalities, which include
magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography scans in medical imaging,
neuroimaging using light-field microscopy in neuroscience, tomography for
imaging cells and tissues, and cryo-electron microscopy for biomolecular
structures. Images of three dimensional, volumetric, structures provide
indispensable spatial information about organs, tissues, and molecules that
cannot be captured using two dimensions. The development of tools for efficient
and effective analysis of such volumetric data sets is, therefore, urgently
required. This project will develop generally applicable mathematical and
computational frameworks to effectively and accurately represent, compare, and
retrieve biological and medical data in three dimensions. The methods to be
developed will provide a general foundation for the analysis of volumetric
images obtained using multiple imaging modalities and for multiple data types,
not only from the biological domain. For example, the techniques have broader
impact in areas such as human face recognition, analysis of geographical and
climate data, and computer-aided design. This project, therefore, contributes to
general promotion of the progress of science and technology in many domains in
which imaging analysis is crucial and is of significant societal impact.

In this project, two complementary and synergistic methods will be developed and
integrated. The first method to be developed is a mathematical moment-based
approach that provides a compact representation of volumetric data and is very
suitable for localized three dimensional image data comparison. A two
dimensional image comparison method that is based on a moment-based invariant
will be expanded to handle volumetric data. The second method is a machine
learning approach that will be powerful in classifying volumetric data. These
two approaches will be integrated to take advantage of both methods and
validated using three dimensional protein structural data. Analyzing global and
local similarities between protein shapes is critical for understanding protein
function but challenging because proteins with substantially different shapes
may perform the same function. Further, proteins are appropriate for this
validation step not only because many structures are available in well-
established public databases but also because they lack intrinsic orientation,
unlike previously studied datasets of man-made objects such as cars, cups, and
tables. As the proposed methods are defined for a general voxel representation
of a given volume, they will be generally applicable for any data set yielding a
voxel representation, including biomedical data collected using electron
microscopy, magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography. Along side the
scientific impact of the project, it also leverages efforts in the
interdisciplinary computational life sciences and engineering departments at
Purdue University and Eastern Kentucky University by recruiting and training
students through interdisciplinary coursework and direct involvement with the
project.