* 1614082
* EAPSI: Designing Microfluidic Tools with Applications in the Development of Small Molecule Detection Sensors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Andrew Acevedo, Acevedo                 Andrew         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The detection and quantification of small molecules is of great importance to
fundamental biological and environmental research, pharmaceutical development,
and clinical practice. Oligonucleotide-based sensors provide a robust and
powerful option for the detection of small molecules, but the development of
these sensors has been hindered by the difficulty of separating potential sensor
molecules from inert species. Droplet-based microfluidic technologies are
uniquely situated to address these issues; these technologies allow for the
separation and handling of individual sensor molecules and small molecule
targets. This project will focus on the design and characterization of a
droplet-generating microfluidic device with improved efficiencies and
functionality over existing devices. This research is being done in
collaboration with Dr. Saif Khan, an expert in droplet-based microfluidics, at
the National University of Singapore.

Aptamers, short oligonucleotides that bind targets with high affinity and
specificity, are promising new tools for small molecule detection that overcome
problems with current antibody based sensors, namely high production costs and
low thermal and biochemical stability. However, the development of aptamers for
small molecule targets has not been fully scaled up due to issues with
partitioning aptamer candidates from large starting libraries of
oligonucleotides. Droplet-based microfluidics can be utilized to overcome the
partitioning issues as water-in-oil droplets provide a platform for the
separation and handling of single oligonucleotides at both the amplification and
selection stages during the aptamer development process. In order for
microfluidic devices to be a viable tool for the aptamer development process,
the devices require very high rates of droplet generation. The project aims to
improve the rate of droplet generation of the 3D microfluidic droplet generators
developed in the Khan lab. The project will also explore how channel dimensions,
continuous phase composition, and the flowrate ratio between continuous phase
and dispersed phase affect droplet diameter and thermal stability.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.