* 1614167
* Collaborative Digital Bioscience Career Awareness Curriculum and Teacher Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Karina Meiri, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,406,260.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a novel technology-rich high school bioscience curriculum and teacher
professional development model. The new curriculum and associated online tools
will promote development of critical competencies among students in the context
of bioscience career-related investigations. The project will also develop a
web-based application that will enable remotely located classrooms to
participate in the new curriculum, develop new professional development
approaches for high school teachers to support implementation of the new
curriculum, and produce research data that will expand the knowledge base on
factors influencing career selection and persistence among students with respect
to bioscience careers. The curriculum will engage students in simulations that
involve designing experiments, predicting results, and interpreting data. Video
vignettes of bioscience professionals will be embedded in the curriculum to
raise awareness of the wide range of careers related to the bioscience
simulations. The associated teacher professional development will engage
teachers in co-designing learning activities, piloting activities with students
during summer activities, and an ongoing mentoring process with both in-person
and virtual components.

This project is a collaborative effort involving scientists, educational
researchers, and computer programmers from the Center for Translational Science
Education at the Tufts University School of Medicine and teachers and biotech
researchers in the Boston metropolitan area. The curricular approach being
implemented and tested combines four strategies that have been shown to increase
active learning, self-efficacy, and career awareness among students, and to
effectively support teacher implementation of new curricula: a) Collaborative
problem-based learning strategies that build career awareness by modeling how
workforce teams collaborate in inquiry to solve authentic problems; b) Use of
collaborative learning technologies that engage students and teachers in
modeling, social persuasion, and problem-solving activities to foster teamwork
and shared decision-making; c) A collaborative curriculum design process that
engages teacher in developing curricula; and d) A teacher professional
development approach that progresses through a series of in-person and virtual
experiences that support teacher learning before, during, and after
implementation of the new curriculum. A mixed methods research approach will be
used to examine student outcomes related to disciplinary content knowledge and
practices, student self-efficacy and outcome expectations, interests, and career
goals. Pretest data and posttest data from innovation and comparison groups will
be analyzed using multivariate techniques to examine relationships among outcome
measures.