* 1614303
* EAPSI: Experimental Study of an Atomically-Thin, Semiconducting/Metallic Material to Develop Next-Generation Nanotechnology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Michael Lodge, Lodge                   Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 8,900.00

The recent explosion in progress towards realizing atomically thin electronics
has resulted from the search for newer fabrication methods, materials, and
device operation principles that will advance beyond the physical limits of
conventional silicon-based semiconductor technology. Transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been shown to undergo a structural transformation to
produce a metallic state upon transfer of electrons into the pristine
semiconducting material. This gives a route towards atomically sharp metal-
semiconductor junctions and could enable a new class of efficient, fully 2D
integrated circuit technologies. This project will study the structural change
mechanism, and manipulation thereof, in atomically thin TMDs using a scanning
tunneling microscope (STM). This instrument features an atomically sharp tip
that can directly transfer electrons into the material as well as provide
structural and electronic information with atomic-scale precision. Stability as
a function of temperature will also be studied in order to inform about suitable
operating temperatures for devices. The results of this research will deepen our
understanding of control over these materials for nano-device fabrication. This
work will be done in collaboration with Professor Michael Fuhrer, a leader in
experimental physics research of two-dimensional materials, at Monash University
in Melbourne, Australia.

This project aims to correlate atomic structures with local electronic
properties at the metallic-semiconducting interface using scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS). STM and STS will be
done at low temperature in the vicinity of a phase boundary to provide
topographical characterization of the local electronic density of states. Then,
the effect of controllably injecting electrons into the pristine material or
into a phase boundary, with attention being paid to phase boundary migration,
phase creation, and changes in electronic state can be studied. Phase boundary
migration will also be studied as a function of temperature.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.