* 1614409
* EAPSI:A Biometric Data Recording and Interface Platform using Augmented Reality and Wearable Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Kyle Bond, Bond                    Kyle           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Chemotherapy-induced baldness has a very serious mental and emotional impact on
cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy treatment, and is especially difficult
for women, whose hair is a part of their identity. Chemotherapy patients often
have severe side effects from the chemotherapy medication, including nausea,
fainting, anemia, low blood pressure, and interrupted sleep patterns. This
project will investigate assistive devices to improve the self-image and quality
of life for cancer patients. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Professor Jun Dong Cho, Director of the Human ICT Convergence Research Lab
(H-Lab) at Sungkyunkwan University. The H-Lab currently works with medical staff
at Kangbuk Samsung Medical Center (KSMC) on several research projects, including
interacting with cancer patients at KSMC to determine how they react to
assistive devices. The PI will explore ways to improve assistive devices in
light of feedback from the patient and clinician perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project seeks to build and evaluate a
Smart Wig that not only covers the scalp of the patient, returning a sense of
normalcy and psychological well-being to the patient, but also contains a suite
of onboard sensors to monitor the patients? vital signs and alert their
physician when something is amiss. The Smart Wig will also interface to a Smart
Mirror, which will be designed as an augmented reality display to allow the
patient to stand in front of the mirror and, based upon their body type and
surrounding environment, choose a wig to wear for the day, as well as a history
of the current and previously recorded biometric data. This project will prove
especially beneficial for chemotherapy-induced alopecia patients, as very few
research teams are actively researching assistive technology to help improve the
self-image of these patients, in addition to improving their quality of
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the National Science Foundation of Korea.