* 1614456
* Studies of the Structure of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Ronald Ransome, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2019
* USD 810,000.00

Advances in the physics goal of understanding the universe at its most
fundamental level have shown that matter is composed of a set of fundamental
particles that combine to form other particles that group together to generate
the structures that we recognize around us. For example, the nucleus of an atom
is formed from a mixture of protons and neutrons. These protons and neutrons are
made from constituents, called quarks and gluons, which give substructure to
these particles. The goal of this project is to determine aspects of the
structure of the proton and neutron, and how this structure is affected when
placed in the nucleus. The experiments focus on how the quarks are distributed
in space and in momentum. An on-going puzzle is whether the proton size is not
the same when measured with atomic hydrogen and its counterpart, muonic-
hydrogen, where the electron in the hydrogen atom has been replaced by its
heavier cousin, the muon. The project includes measurement of electron and muon
scattering from protons to provide an independent measurement of the proton
radius. In addition to the direct scientific goals of the project, the
experiments provide students and young scientists experience and training in
working in the international collaborations of modern scientific experiments,
with state of the art technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
proposal is study the structure of the nucleon. The ongoing Fermilab SEAQUEST
experiment uses Drell-Yan cross sections to determine the ratio of anti-d to
anti-u quarks in the nucleon as a function of quark momentum, to study
transverse momentum distributions, to investigate the EMC effect, to study quark
energy loss in cold nuclear matter, and to investigate the possible existence of
dark photons in a parameter region of higher mass but lower coupling constant to
ordinary matter. The Fermilab MINERvA experiment provides a complementary view
of nucleon and nuclear structure by scattering few GeV neutrinos from protons
and from nuclei. At Jefferson Lab, experiments on tritium targets will be run in
2017. The MARATHON experiment, through a comparison of deep inelastic scattering
of electrons on 3H to 3He, provides information on the ratio of the proton and
neutron F2 structure functions at high x, testing decades old perturbative
quantum chromodynamics model calculations. The preliminary phases of creating a
new experiment to elastically scatter muons and electrons from the proton, the
MUSE experiment at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland, are in progress,
with the goal of measuring the distribution of charge in the proton.