* 1614609
* Improving Back-Projection Imaging with a Novel Physics-Based Aftershock Calibration Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Lingsen Meng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 12/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Large earthquakes involve complex patterns of slip along fault surfaces that
themselves are complex. These complexities have significant impacts on
predicting expected ground motions from major earthquakes, and thus on the
estimated hazard from such events. Understanding these complexities is key, but
progress towards this goal has been slowed by the limited resolution of current
imaging methods. This project is improving the resolution and accuracy of such
images through a novel method that uses the relative motions recorded by dense
clusters of seismometers to resolve the rupture process of large earthquakes.
The technique is analogous to procedures used to locate and track moving sources
with antennas. The enhanced resolution of the proposed method allows testing of
improved physics-based earthquake rupture models, and is improving our capacity
to model earthquake hazards. The project takes full advantage of the increasing
availability of global dense seismic networks including the Earthscope USArray,
and supports the PhD work of a female graduate student. The research results are
being shared via conferences and journals, as well as via outreach to public
schools and in undergraduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic array
processing, also known as back-projection (BP) imaging, is an emerging technique
that utilizes high-frequency (HF) seismic waveforms to provide detailed
information about source processes of earthquakes. Even though the technique
offers unique, high-resolution observations, it has been shown to have
shortcomings. While BP images from each array located on various continents are
capable of revealing fine details of the earthquake rupture processes, the exact
locations of HF sources do not align, leading to discrepancies regarding such
properties as rupture length and speed. The team has developed a novel
aftershock calibration to mitigate the source location uncertainties of the
arrays and tested it on the 2015 M7.8 Nepal-Gorkha earthquake. The team is now
applying their method to data from the 2004 M9.2 Sumatra, 2010 M8.8 Chile, and
2011 M9.1 Japan earthquakes, and developing BP images that are mutually
consistent across multiple arrays and reveal additional fine detail about the
earthquake processes. This work is narrowing the gap between seismic
observations and earthquake simulations, and providing key information to
improve predictions of ground motions from large earthquakes and thus reduce
seismic risk.