* 1614344
* EAPSI: Light Mediated Synthesis of Amino Acid Analogues: A Methodology for Photochemical Asymmetric Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Anthony Clay, Clay                    Anthony        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Access to life?s fundamental building blocks is an increasing challenge due to
variability in substitution and limits in methodology. Molecules of biological
interest often exist with specific special orientation, chirality. Methods of
synthesis to access innumerable molecules needs to be selective and variable in
order to access the plethora of desired molecules. Chemical methodology
continues to improve however chemical waste and lack of scope and breadth
continue to be an issue. This project will focus on synthesis of amino acid
analogues utilizing light. This research will be conducted in collaboration with
Professor Yasuharu Yoshimi of Fukui University. Prof. Yoshimi has developed a
methodology wherein light is used as a reagent to synthesize amino acid
derivatives. However, loss of chirality in the product was noticed. Combining
the methodology developed in the Sivagroup viz., atropselective photoreactions,
we aim to control chirality of the amino acid analogs and obtain the desired
product with high selectivity.

Access to life?s fundamental building blocks is an increasing challenge due to
variability in substitution and limits in methodology. Molecules of biological
interest are inherently chiral. Synthetic methods need to be selective and
variable in order to access the plethora of desired molecules. The field of
asymmetric synthesis continues to improve. However, chemical waste and lack of
overall generality continue to be an issue. This project will focus on
photochemical asymmetric synthesis of amino acid analogues. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Professor Yasuharu Yoshimi of Fukui
University. Prof. Yoshimi has developed a methodology wherein light is used as a
reagent to synthesize amino acid derivatives. However, loss of chirality in the
product was noticed. Combining the methodology developed in the Sivagroup viz.,
atropselective photoreactions, we aim to control chirality of the amino acid
analogs and obtain the desired product with high selectivity.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.