* 1614312
* EAPSI: Modeling of Interactions Between Single Photons and Quantum Systems for On-Chip Quantum Information Transfer
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Maira Amezcua, Amezcua                 Maira
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Quantum information networks rely on light pulses comprised of single photons to
transmit information and on quantum systems, such as electron spins, to process
this information. This new technology opens the door to highly secure quantum
communication networks and increased computational effi;ciency. Achieving these
goals requires precise control of interactions between light and quantum
systems. This award will investigate a unique system by combining control of
individual electrons spins in a crystal and photons in a cavity, thus realizing
an optical switch that can operate on single bits of information. Optical
switches are an important component in quantum networks that can extend the
range of communication. The researcher will work closely with Dr. Yun-Feng Xiao,
a noted expert in micro-cavity photonics, at Peking University in Beijing,
China. The collaboration provides access to theoretical work and training
opportunities in nano fabrication as well as quantum science and technology.

This project highlights a special cavity QED system that couples negatively
charged nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond to the evanescent field of am
optical mode in a microresonator via a resonant Raman Transition. This system
can feature unique properties of strong coherent coupling between a photon and
an electron spin, which are necessary to create photonic switches that can
control the quantum state of single photons. These switches can enable the
generation and distribution of quantum entanglement. The goal is to build a full
quantum model for the proposed cavity QED system, which can then be scaled up to
a general solution for multiple NV centers. The experimental component will
fabricate and characterize asymmetric toroidal microresonators for use in future
experiments. A solid-state platform can broadly impact the development of
quantum networks and on-chip quantum information processing.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.