* 1614629
* CHLOROPLAST SOLUBLE PROTEASES AND THEIR PHYSIOLOGICAL SUBSTRATES: An integrated genetic and targeted systems analysis of chloroplast proteolysis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Klaas van Wijk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2019
* USD 997,363.00

Proteolysis, the breakdown of proteins or peptides to amino acids, is critical
for removal of unwanted or damaged proteins and regulation of cellular processes
such as metabolism. Chloroplasts are essential organelles in plant productivity
and agriculture, but determinants of chloroplast protein life-time and
degradation are poorly understood. Cells and organelles contain hundreds of
proteolytic systems; these must complement each other, by acting in sequence, in
parallel and/or by sharing protein substrates. This research will provide
insight into the network of chloroplast protease and serve as an example for
protease network discovery in other subcellular compartments. The research
findings can also be implemented in molecular farming and synthetic biology,
since cellular compartments such as chloroplasts are favored for overexpression
of products with nutritional or pharmaceutical value. The outcome of this
research will allow more rational protein design for stable accumulation of
chloroplast proteins, thus directly impacting these applications. This project
will provide training in proteomics, mass spectrometry, molecular genetics,
biochemistry and bioinformatics at the undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
levels. Summer internships will be offered through our NSF-sponsored REU program
and to high school students through the Cornell 4H extension program. To help to
train the next generation scientists, a plant proteolysis workshop with invited
experts on proteases and degradomics technology will be organized in year
2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is built upon investments in Arabidopsis
protease single and higher order mutants, previously identified protease
substrates, specific biochemical tools and mass spectrometry-based workflows for
detection of protein degradation events (e.g. TAILS). In AIM 1, investigators
will study how key enzymes of major chloroplast metabolic pathways (e.g.
tetrapyrroles and shikimate) are recognized and degraded by the Clp protease
system in vivo. This essential Clp system is the most complex and abundant
soluble chloroplast oligomeric protease consisting of 16 different gene
products, including substrate selectors and chaperones. In AIM 2, additional Clp
candidate substrates and perhaps adaptors will be identified, using affinity and
trapping approaches, followed by in vivo physiological and in vitro interaction
studies. AIM 3. Based on in vitro analysis, two additional chloroplast
peptidases, PREP and OOP were proposed to degrade smaller proteins and protein
fragments, including cleaved chloroplast transit peptides. Preliminary molecular
genetics data indicate functional interactions between Clp, PREP and OOP. The in
vivo physiological role of these peptidases will be determined by untargeted and
targeted approaches and investigate if and how they form a functional protease
network.