* 1614031
* EAPSI:Aquifer System Storage Response to Canterbury Earthquake Sequence using Satellite Radar and Observation Well Time Series Data
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Megan Miller, Miller                  Megan          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The 2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand earthquake sequence prompted a significant
hydrologic response in the form of groundwater level variations due to ground
shaking. It is important to understand the extent to which the storage capacity
of aquifers is affected, given the reliance of local populations on groundwater
for drinking water supply. This award funds research to investigate the spatial
extent and amplitude of the change in aquifer storativity due to the seismic
activity. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Simon Cox,
Principal Scientist at GNS Science and renowned expert in structural and
hydrogeology. By analyzing seasonal patterns in ground uplift and well head
levels, the fellow will estimate and compare elastic aquifer storativity before,
during, and after the seismic sequence. This project will use the abundant
satellite radar and well data available for the region, which acts as a natural
laboratory to study aquifer-earthquake interactions. The findings will impact
other earthquake prone regions with active groundwater usage, including Southern
California and Tennessee, to enhance water management plans following major
seismic events.

Understanding the spatiotemporal extent of the interaction between aquifer
systems and seismic faults is a key factor for mitigating hazards associated
with liquefaction and enhancing water management plans. To this end imaging
surface deformation with sufficient precision, spatiotemporal resolution, and
spatial accuracy is integral to this effort. The fellow will use Interferometric
Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) datasets from two SAR satellites, ENVISAT and
TerraSAR-X, in both ascending and descending acquisition geometries. The
overlapping areas allow for calculating the vertical and horizontal displacement
time series, capturing pre-, co-, and post-seismic deformation in two dimensions
including both tectonic and hydrological signals. In addition, observation wells
with dense temporal measurements are abundant in the Canterbury and Christchurch
region. The elastic storage coefficient is estimated by comparing the isolated
seasonal component of the vertical displacement and the observation well time
series. To isolate these seasonal components in the signals, wavelet power
spectra analysis is applied, and the desired seasonal time series is identified,
isolated and reconstructed. To determine if any increase or decrease in
storativity occurred during the earthquake sequence, a best-fit linear value
relating the inputs is chosen within a 95% confidence interval. This study will
use Christchurch and the Canterbury Plains as a case study that will ultimately
help other regions prone to seismic hazards that rely on groundwater resources.
This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.