* 1614697
* STEM Learning and Research (STELAR) Center: A Resource Center to Support Research and Development on STEM Careers
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sarita Nair-Pillai, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,092,466.00

This Learning and Research Center will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM) by providing technical support to all ITEST projects,
facilitating national dissemination of ITEST project outcomes, and further
developing the ITEST research and development community. The primary goals of
the Center are to: a) increase the capacity of ITEST project teams and
evaluators to effectively synthesize and disseminate project findings; b)
increase national awareness and use of ITEST project findings; c) strengthen and
expand the ITEST community of practice; d) further engage individuals and
institutions currently underrepresented in the ITEST community of practice; and
e) strengthen collaborative activities across resource networks to leverage NSF
cross-program initiatives. The Center's highly targeted outreach and
dissemination activities will promote widespread implementation and examination
of new, evidence-based innovations in formal and informal education for youth in
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with the National Association of State
Directors of Career Technical Education Consortium, Education Development Center
will host the ITEST Learning and Resource Center and work with nationally
recognized career development researchers to increase the capacity of ITEST
projects to integrate sound career theory, research findings, and best practices
into their planned activities. In response to documented national needs in the
STEM workforce, the Center will promote increased attention to "middle-level"
STEM careers and education pathways to those careers. The Center will also
establish a Broadening Participation Advisory Council to assist the Center with
outreach and engagement of minority serving organizations and communities. These
efforts will be supported and enhanced through a variety of activities intended
to strengthen and expand the Center's Innovation Network, including the
provision of mini-grants to selected Principal Investigator's to promote
dissemination of innovative practices, implementation of a Fellows and mentoring
program for ongoing development of expertise among ITEST researchers,
development and publication of research syntheses associated with the ITEST
guiding questions for research, and production of a variety of Webinars, videos,
data briefs, and social media activities to inform the ITEST community of
practice and promote active collaboration across active ITEST projects.