* 1614663
* Data Modeling with Young Learners and Their Families
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,075,488.00

There is a growing need for citizens to be able to work with data and consider
how data is represented. This work employs a design, make, play framework to
create data modeling learning experiences for young children and their
caregivers in an informal setting. The project will develop and test a
curriculum for a workshop series for 5-8 year old children to engage them in
playful exploration of data modelling. Children will engage in data collection,
data representation and data analysis drawing their own experiences of the
world. The curriculum will support developing children's interest and engagement
with data, a foundational concept for a range of STEM careers and disciplines.
This work will provide a model for similar learning experiences in data modeling
and representation. This project will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is grounded in a
theoretical framework for young children's learning that focus on playful
exploration, design, and building on children's own experiences and questions.
The research questions examine how the curriculum needs to be designed to
support multi-age groups of children in data modeling, engagement in data
modeling by younger (ages 5-6) and older (ages 7-8) children, and evidence of
increased in active approaches to learning about STEM. The design and
development project will test and investigate the materials using a design-based
research framework. The children should increase their confidence in solve
problems, in taking initiative and in drawing on available resources to pursue
their own questions and respond to novel challenges. Data to be collected
include interviews with participants, artifacts of children's work during the
activity, and an observational instrument to document problem solving,
persistence, and engagement.