* 1614068
* EAPSI: Exploring Agro-Tourism and Urban-Rural Connections in Rural Beijing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Nicholas Weller, Weller                  Nicholas       A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Studying city growth using satellite images or city-wide economic data neglects
the connections among urban and rural areas, how people make a living, and how
people interact with each other. For example, agro-tourism enterprises use farms
and orchards for tourism-related activities, such as picnicking and 'you-pick'
fruit, and not for growing and selling crops. From satellite images, agro-
tourism enterprises look like farms and in city-wide economic data, they look
like hotels or other attractions. These approaches mask agro-tourism's complex
socio-economic and ecological roles. As part of a larger collaboration with
urban ecology expert Dr. Weiqi Zhou of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Services, this award will support interviews with
agro-tourism enterprise owners in the Yanqi Valley of North Beijing about how
they use the Yanqi River, why they started their enterprise, and their use of
the internet to market to urban residents. This study will inform policy related
to tourism and internet access and their role as development tools by studying
the connections between urban and rural landscapes, residents, and enterprises
and the use of the internet by rural enterprises. It will also improve
understanding of urban-rural transition dynamics in one of the most rapidly
changing urbanizing areas of the world.

This study utilizes the 'Continuum of Urbanity' a framework proposed by Boone et
al. in 2013. It consists of four components: livelihoods, lifestyles, place, and
connectivity. An area's 'urban-ness' varies based on these four components. Two
hypotheses will be tested. The first is that internet access allowed tourism-
based enterprises in the Yanqi Valley to attract customers from urban Beijing
and allowed for interactions between urban Beijing and Yanqi Valley residents
via social media. This change in connectivity led to growth of tourism-based
livelihoods and ultimately to changes in place. The second hypothesis is that 1)
agro-tourism in the Yanqi Valley developed via both top-down pressures, such as
agricultural policy, and bottom-up pressures, such as demand from urban
residents; and 2) agro-tourism development has uniquely impacted livelihoods,
lifestyles, connectivity, and place in the Yanqi Valley.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.