* 1614333
* Uncovering the Origin and Evolution of Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* John Wise, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 473,330.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
the history of our Universe and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. Many research projects are centered on unraveling these mysteries.
Observations of nearby dwarf galaxies and of very distant galaxies hold clues
about the nature of galaxy formation during the first billion years of the
Universe, and these first galaxies are being detected by the Hubble Space
Telescope and will be further elucidated with the commissioning of the James
Webb Space Telescope in 2018. To accurately interpret and connect these nearby
and very distant galaxy observations, precise computer simulations that consider
the entire star formation history are essential. The purpose of this project is
to make detailed computer simulations of the formation process of nearby dwarf
and distant ultra-diffuse galaxies. These simulations will track the complete
star formation history of dwarf galaxies including their earliest stellar and
galactic ancestors. This project meets the national need to develop US
scientific leadership in astrophysics. This project will also strengthen the US
science workforce by directly training students in computational astrophysics,
high performance computing, and software engineering, which will enable these
students to excel in a competitive job market. In addition, the investigators'
research activities will be integrated into the teaching of astrophysics in K--
12 schools and other public venues, such as planetariums, television shows, and
online learning environments, where the audience can digest the latest advances
in computational astrophysics in a visual and intuitive
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project has the following
goals: (1) to explore formation scenarios for ultra-diffuse galaxies in cluster
environments and to determine whether they are related to the formation sequence
of dwarf spheroidal galaxies; (2) to construct novel, efficient, and accurate
methods for radiation transport; (3) to correlate the high-redshift environment
of dwarf galaxy formation and evolution to present-day characteristics---star
formation histories, metallicity distribution functions, stellar kinematics, and
[alpha/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] evolution; and (4) to determine the chemical connection
between the first stars and metal-poor stars in dwarf galaxies. This project
will support the development of a hybrid radiation transport solver that
incorporates the advantages of both ray tracing methods and moment methods. This
method will be utilized in a suite of radiation hydrodynamics simulations of
isolated dwarf galaxies, following their complete star formation, starting with
individual massive metal-free stars. The simulation data produced during the
course of this project, as well as various data products, will be made publicly
available through the nascent National Data Service. These data will be usable
by the astrophysical research community and will enable researchers to address a
much broader range of questions than this project alone.