* 1614304
* EAPSI: Model Analysis of Water Exchange Between the Land and Atmosphere Over Grassland and Cropland Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Hayden Mahan, Mahan                   Hayden         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

This project will investigate the relationship between land surface and
atmospheric water transport over grassland and cropland regions such as the
United States Southern Great Plains and Chinese grasslands. The PI will
collaborate with Dr. Youngryel Ryu and his laboratory students at Seoul National
University in Seoul, South Korea. Dr. Ryu is the developer of the Breathing
Earth System Simulator (BESS) model that estimates how much water is exchanged
between the land and atmosphere. This model provides global estimates of water
exchange from 2000-2015. The PI will be analyzing the modeled results to see how
well it can estimate the amount of water that is exchanged over grassland and
cropland regions. Understanding the water cycle over agricultural regions, such
as the Southern Great Plains, is important for water budgeting, weather
prediction, crop and livestock management, and many other applications.

The project focuses on the Evapotranspiration (ET) aspect of the water cycle
over grassland and cropland regions. The region of interest for the project is
over the United States Southern Great Plains that includes Kansas, Oklahoma, and
northern portions of Texas as well as grassland regions in China. The BESS model
developed by Dr. Ryu produces 1 to 5 km spatial and 8-day temporal resolution of
modeled ET over the entire globe from 2000-2015. A validation of BESS will be
constructed by comparing the modeled ET with observed ET at various observing
sites in the regions. The PI will assess the spatial and temporal variations of
ET over the regions of interest using the modeled output. This information can
then be used to determine how agricultural practices and weather patterns
influence ET in these regions and how ET in these areas may respond to climate
change.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.