* 1614835
* Relativistic Heavy Ion Collision Studies at the LHC and RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Thomas Humanic, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,379,161.00

It is a well-established fact that protons and neutrons are made up of smaller
constituents called quarks and gluons. In collisions using two beams of heavy
nuclei, a new state of matter is formed, called the quark-gluon plasma (QGP).
This project will answer fundamental questions about the QGP, such as how matter
is transformed from a collection of protons and neutrons to a free state where
quarks and gluons can travel through space unhindered, much like they did in the
primordial soup of matter following the Big Bang. Experiments will be carried
out at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), located at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, and at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), located in Geneva,
Switzerland. In order to look for signatures of how the transition to the QGP
phase has occurred for a given beam energy, the Ohio State group will study the
numbers of particles produced in the collisions along with the distribution and
correlations of particle momenta.

The goals for the high-energy program are three-fold. Firstly, to study the
space-time properties of this extremely dense matter created in collisions
between heavy nuclei at the highest achievable energies. The second is to study
the bulk phase structure of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), believed to be the
correct theory of the Strong interaction between quarks and gluons. This will be
achieved by varying the conditions of the collision to lower energies, to probe
the transition(s) between confined and deconfined matter. In particular, the
group will perform a novel analysis as a function of the collision energy,
measuring coordinate-space anisotropies and dynamics. Thirdly, they will take
the tools developed to study bulk physics in heavy ion collisions, and apply
them to proton- proton collisions at similar energies. They will look
particularly for collective behavior (flow) in these collisions. If the initial
reports of such flow in high-energy p+p collisions are confirmed at higher
energies, this raises important issues about the nature of flow, and the nature
of the initial self-interacting state, itself. In addition, there are broader
impacts to society of this proposal in the areas of education, technology and
computing.