* 1614978
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Spatial Interactions in Determining the Distribution of Savanna and Forest
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Richard Durrett, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 107,190.00

Ecologists have long emphasized climate as primary factor determining ecosystem
dynamics at large scales, but the relationship between climate and vegetation is
not always deterministic. Where vegetation-environment feedbacks are significant
(e.g.,in savannas), predicting responses to climate can be especially difficult.
Recent work suggests that feedbacks with fire may make savannas much more common
than they would be were their distributions solely determined by climate; as a
result, savanna and forest responses to global change may thus be drastic,
sudden, and difficult to foresee. However, existing work does not explain why
savanna is spatially aggregated with savanna and forest with forest -- a pattern
that indicates that spatial processes may also play a role in determining
ecosystem responses to climate. Here the investigators will consider the impacts
of those spatial interactions between savanna and forest on their distributions
and on their potential responses to climate and land-use change, both in the
past and into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have identified
three hypotheses to explain the spatial aggregation of savanna and forest: H1)
that savanna and forest are bistable, and that spatial structure in initial
conditions (as a result of past climate) determines their distributions, H2)
that savanna and forest are bistable, but that spatial processes within savanna
(e.g., fire spread) result in spatially structured distributions, and/or H3)
that nearest neighbor interactions between savanna and forest change their
distributions on long time scales, impacting their long-term stability. These
hypotheses are variously supported in the empirical literature, and existing
work has not attempted to disentangle these processes. Results will allow the
research team to generate informed theoretical and empirical predictions about
the past and future distribution of savanna and forest globally. The proposed
work will also generate novel mathematical results. Possible outcomes of
theoretical, spatial-stochastic models include a) savanna and forest coexistence
in landscapes, b) forest exclusion by savanna, c) savanna exclusion by forest,
or d) alternative stable states in biome savanna/forest dominance. The last
outcome would be unlikely in a homogeneous spatial stochastic model, where the
winning biome is decided by the direction of movement of the biome boundary
(i.e., the front), but most closely resembles real biome distributions. Spatial
stochastic model results will be reconciled with observations using theoretical
and simulation modeling.