* 1614134
* Vital Voices: Linking Language and Wellbeing at the International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 11/30/2018
* USD 67,591.00

"Wellbeing" is a state of the body and mind that encompasses the presence of
positive moods and emotions, life satisfaction, fulfillment and positive
functioning, and the absence of negative emotions like anxiety. Public health
experts, policymakers and economists are coming to recognize the implications of
wellbeing for society as a whole, as well as individuals, thanks to a growing
set of results from cross-sectional, longitudinal and experimental studies,
including those noted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Increasingly, researchers in several fields have noted a positive correlation
between language maintenance and wellbeing in endangered language communities.
While the nature of the connection between language and wellbeing remains the
subject of much debate, the existence of a connection is not entirely
unexpected, given the range of outcomes associated with wellbeing. In addition,
languages encode knowledge systems, so language loss represents not only the
loss of a communicative system, but also the loss of traditional knowledge
systems. Importantly, traditional knowledge systems encode cultural practices
related to well-being. Understanding the connections between language and
wellbeing will potentially have implications for public health and policy and
beyond, but also for language researchers, since traditional knowledge systems
are among the most threatened domains of endangered language. Knowledge of
esoteric domains such botanical classification and traditional medicines is
forgotten well before basic vocabulary and language structure. Hence, these
areas of traditional knowledge are precisely the areas which need to be
prioritized by language documenters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
bring together leading scholars from across the world to explore connections
between language and wellbeing as part of the 2017 International Conference on
Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC). Since its inception in 2009,
ICLDC has become the flagship venue driving scholarship in the documentation,
maintenance and revitalization of endangered and other languages. Participants
include undergraduate students, graduate students and faculty from linguistics,
anthropology, biology and other academic disciplines. ICLDC has also included a
large number of citizen scientists from historically underrepresented groups in
the sciences, such as Native Americans, Native Alaskans, Native Hawaiians and
other Pacific Islanders, offering opportunities for broadening participation in
the language sciences as one of the broader impacts of this conference.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ICLDC offers its highly diverse audience opportunities
for informal science education and training that includes new methodologies and
best practices in cutting edge language documentation and that crosses
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In addition, this conference serves as one
of the foremost venues for the dissemination of research findings in language
documentation and conservation and related disciplines.