* 1614474
* Differential Measures of Parton Energy Loss in the Quark Gluon Plasma Using Photon Jet Correlations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Rosi Reed, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

It is a well-established fact that protons and neutrons are made up of smaller
constituents called quarks and gluons. In collisions using two beams of heavy
nuclei, a new state of matter is formed, called the quark-gluon plasma (QGP).
This project will answer fundamental questions about the QGP, such as how matter
is transformed from a collection of protons and neutrons to a free state where
quarks and gluons can travel through space unhindered, much like they did in the
primordial soup of matter following the Big Bang. The goal of the project is to
probe the inner workings of the QGP by resolving its properties at much shorter
length scales by using hard collisions of quarks to probe this hot nuclear
medium. This research will be performed at the Solenoidal Tracker at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (STAR), which is located at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle jets are formed in the very initial
stages of the heavy ion collision, when two quarks or gluons have a hard
scattering in which they are kicked in opposite directions from one another and
roughly perpendicular to beam of heavy ion particles. The quarks and gluons that
are kicked out in such an interaction will travel through the medium,
interacting and losing energy to it. They then fragment and hadronize into a
spray of particles that can be measured by the detectors at STAR. Specifically,
the effort will concentrate on observables related to prompt photon-jet
correlations at the top energies at RHIC. This has the advantage over other
observables that the transverse momentum of the jet is explicitly known due to
both conservation of momentum, and the fact that the photon does not interact
with the Quark Gluon Plasma. These measures will be necessary to understand the
temperature and energy dependence of key features of theoretical models of the
quark-gluon interactions.