* 1614100
* EAPSI: Population Dynamics of a Semi-Terrestrial Fishes Across the South and East China Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Joel Corush, Corush                  Joel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Most fishes are limited to aquatic environments, but about 70 of 32,000 ray-
finned fishes, including mudskippers, are amphibious, or able to survive in
terrestrial environments, often for the purposes of reproduction. This behavior
is important because many coastal areas are subject to habitat destruction via
sea walls, light and noise pollution, urbanization and destruction of
mudflats/coastal land, making coastal habitats uninhabitable for periods of
time. Over time, the inability to colonize coastal areas over a large geographic
area can compromise a species' survival. While amphibious life history limits
opportunities for dispersal ability to a specific life stage, many amphibious
species have geographic distributions, which span multiple oceans. To address
these issues, this research aims to understand the effects of variations in life
history on the flow of genes across mudskipper populations. This study will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhang Chunguang, a researcher with
significant experience researching the adaptations of pertaining to mudskippers.
Dr. Zhang is a research professor at the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An amphibious mudskipper species samples
(Periophthalmus modestus) from along the cost of mainland China will be studied,
in addition to previously collected sample from Taiwan and Japan. Genomic DNA
sequencing will be done to understand the population structure of the species
across the East and South China Sea. Variation in DNA sequences will be compared
to understand patterns of movement between coastal areas of China and the
surrounding islands. To understand the importance of amphibious life history,
population structure will be examined against ocean currents and coastal land
use to determine if land use plays a role in movement of mudskippers. This
project will help bridge the lingering gap between the ecological importance of
variation in life history and evolutionary significance of gene flow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.