* 1614221
* EAPSI: Innovative Molecular Methods for Low Cost DNA Barcoding of Tropical Arthropods
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Sarah Meierotto, Meierotto               Sarah          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Preservation of biodiversity is essential to an ecosystem?s ability to withstand
disturbances like climate change and to provide services to human society.
Traditional methods of measuring insect and other arthropod diversity are time
consuming and expensive which impedes creation of effective conservation
policies. In collaboration with Dr. Rudolf Meier at the National University of
Singapore, this project will improve and share the knowledge of new techniques
developed in the Meier lab for generating DNA barcodes for insect
identification. DNA barcodes are a specific short sequence of DNA which can be
used to identify an organism, much like how the barcode on the back of a cereal
box is scanned at a grocery store. Paired with the researcher?s larger thesis
project, this work will improve biodiversity evaluation and monitoring methods
while uncovering relationships in arthropod forest communities.

This project will use new direct PCR protocols and next-generation sequencing
methods to DNA barcode thousands of insect specimens. A biodiversity assessment
and comparison between the forests of Kentucky (United States) and French Guiana
using metabarcoding is underway. Groups of interest, including parasitoids and
caterpillars, as well as representatives of all arthropod orders present will be
removed from the metabarcoded samples for use as voucher specimens. To evaluate
the metabarcoding process and discover parasitoid-host relationships, DNA
barcodes linked to these specimens will be generated using a low cost method
developed by Rudolf Meier's lab. The proportion of voucher specimen sequences
found within the metabarcoding sequence datasets will allow for the adjustment
of diversity estimates to account for biases in the sequencing process. Direct
PCR and next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods can produce barcodes at less
than $1 per specimen but require training and experience to perform successfully
and consistently. Dr. Meier?s protocols were designed for use with Diptera and
will be optimized for use with hymenopteran parasitoids. The data generated
during this project will be used to compare tropical and temperate arthropod
biodiversity, to compare morphological and molecular identification techniques,
and discover new parasitoid-host relationships.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.