* 1614990
* Studies of translation initiation in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2020
* USD 645,000.00

This project will reveal the distinct way in which proteins are made in the
Bacteroidetes, a family of bacteria that are found in the healthy human
intestine as well as in many natural habitats. Bacteroidetes lacks the Shine-
Dalgarno sequence, a well-known control elelment that is required for
translation of RNA into proteins in most other bacteria, and this research is
aimed at determining what takes its place in this bacterial lineage. This
project will also provide (1) research training for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students, (2) summer research opportunities for local high school
students (Columbus Public Schools), and (3) faculty mentorship for students of
the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program, which aims
to boost the success rate of underrepresented minority students in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initiation of translation involves assembly of
a ribosome complex in which the initiator tRNA is paired to the start codon of
mRNA. The fidelity of translation depends on recognition of the correct start
codon among all AUG and similar trinucleotide sequences in the mRNA. In E. coli
and many bacteria, recognition of the start codon is facilitated in part by base
pairing between the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence of the mRNA (which lies just
upstream from the start codon), and the anti-Shine-Dalgarno (ASD) sequence of
the 30S subunit (contained near the 3? end of the 16S rRNA). Recent genome
sequencing studies have revealed that whole taxonomic groups of bacteria
completely lack SD sequences, despite that the ASD sequence remains intact and
conserved in these organisms. These include the phyla Bacteroidetes and a subset
of Cyanobacteria. The primary goals of this project are to uncover the sequence
determinants of the translation initiation regions (TIRs) in the Bacteroidetes
and understand how these TIR sequences govern the rate of initiation. Modern
techniques such as ribosome profiling will be used in conjunction with
biochemical approaches to achieve these goals. Features of the TIR aside from
the SD, such as secondary structure and S1 binding sites, are also thought to
impact initiation rate in bacteria. By studying the Bacteriodetes system, the
roles of these features may be clarified, as the complication of SD-ASD pairing
is effectively removed.