* 1614440
* EAPSI: Analysis of Soil Deformation during Loading of a Plant Root-Inspired Foundation using X-ray Computed Tomography
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Seth Mallett, Mallett                 Seth           D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

The overarching goal of the proposed research is to gain insight for the
development of a bio-inspired plant root foundation. This will require the
researcher to investigate how the roots of plants anchor the plant in the soil
and how they resist external loads such as pullout from herbivores, compression
from self-weight and rain or bending from high winds. Consequently, if a
conventional building foundation can be enhanced to improve their efficiency in
terms of volume of material used, the structure will not only cost less, but
will require less concrete and steel, which has many environmental implications.
This project will be conducted at the Port and Airport Research Institute in
Yokosuka, Japan under the guidance of Dr. Satoshi Matsumura.

In particular, the research seeks to analyze the soil displacement field when a
root analog, fabricated using 3D printing, is loaded under tension or
compression. The disturbed soil zone will be characterized by using a particle
tracking image analysis scheme, where 3D images will be acquired at set
increments during the loading process. Additionally, knowledge of the surface
failure during tensile loading and the region contributing to the bearing
capacity of the soil during root compression will serve to inform analytical
models to predict the capacity of the root foundations under the two loading
conditions. Furthermore, this project seeks to develop a fundamental
understanding of the mechanical behavior of buried plant root-type systems at
the particle level, which can then be easily expanded to field-scale
applications.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is funded jointly by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.