* 1614162
* EAPSI:Determining the characteristics of deformation and role of fluids along deep faults associated with mountain belt formation in South Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Sarah Austin, Austin                  Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

During the formation of a mountain belt (orogeny), two tectonic plates collide
and the compression and shortening associated with this collision result in
slices of rocks stacking up on one another. This forms a series of faults and
folds, known as a fold-thrust belt. The lowest fault (basal detachment), which
allows everything above it to move, plays an important role in the evolution of
the fold-thrust belt but is seldom found exposed at the surface. The Okcheon
Belt in South Korea formed during a tectonic collision ~250 million years ago.
It has a well-exposed basal detachment providing a rare opportunity to directly
study it. Field data and rock samples will be gathered, in addition to field
mapping, to look at the large scale and small scale deformation and flow of
fluids occurring along the basal detachment. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Sanghoon Kwon at Yonsei University, a noted expert on the
structural geology of the Permo-Triassic Collision. This collaboration will
provide the first direct evidence of the processes occurring along basal
detachments associated with the formation of mountain belts and will give
further understanding of the processes by which mountains form.

A fold-thrust belt (FTB) is an important component of any orogenic belt. In
existing models, the basal decollement plays a key role in the evolution of the
FTB, but it is rarely exposed at the surface. The structurally lowest fault of
the Okcheon Belt in South Korea is the well-exposed basal decollement of the
collisional Permo-Triassic orogeny, which brought together the Gyeonggi and
Yeongnam Massifs .This project will examine this decollement in collaboration
with Dr. Sanghoon Kwon at Yonsei University in Seoul, South Korea. To record
observations and collect data, a series of structural transects will be studied
both along and across the decollement zone. Hand samples will be taken along the
transects to be used for microstructural analysis of deformation structures in
the fault rocks (e.g. mylonites, cataclasites). To determine the role of fluids
along the decollement samples of veins will be collected along the transects to
conduct stable isotope and fluid inclusion analyses. In addition to these
microscopic and chemical analyses, mesoscopic analysis of deformation structures
will be conducted to determine the kinematics, mechanics, and role of fluids in
a basal decollement deformation zone. This will lead to a more complete
understanding of the effects of decollement rheology on the geometry and
evolution of fold-thrust belts.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.