* 1614849
* Understanding the Role of Gender in Engaging the Interest of Girls in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Vicki Allan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 804,090.00

The project will research the effects of single-gender computer science (CS)
camps and gender aligned role models within that context. During the past 30
years, there has been a decrease of women earning computer science degrees and
entering the CS workforce. To reverse this trend, there has been a surge of
girls only programs for recruiting and mentoring girls in CS. Despite their
popularity, however, there exists only minimal research on the efficacy of these
programs to grow the population of women in CS and little is known about the
most effective ways to implement these programs. The project will research the
main effects and interactions between female-only and balanced gender CS camps
and role models for middle school students. More specifically, the project will
examine how gender influences girls' self-efficacy, interest, perceived social
support, and skill development in CS. The findings can increase the
effectiveness of such efforts and contribute to the diversification of this key
workforce sector. The project will directly impact over 400 middle school
participants from low income and rural backgrounds by introducing them to
concepts of computing and providing experiences to develop skill and confidence
that can set them on a path toward a CS career. The project will directly impact
54 high school age mentors as they learn and teach computing skills. Project
research findings and learning resources will be widely disseminated to
educational researchers and practitioners through research publications,
educational conferences, publications oriented towards educators, social media,
and a project website including research and curriculum materials. This project
is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of best
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to engaging
students in learning and developing interest in STEM, information and
communications technology (ICT), computer science, and related STEM content and
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to contribute to the
evidence about strategies and models that enhance girls interest in and
capabilities to pursue CS programs and occupations. Building on a foundation of
social cognitive theory, this study can identify empirically grounded principles
to inform practice in this critical area. To research the influence of gender in
these programs, the project will use a 2X2 quasi-experimental design guided by
two research questions: (1) What are the main and interaction effects of gender-
specific social competency modeling and single gender vs. balanced gender
groupings on girls' interest, self-efficacy, perceived social support, and skill
in CS in a summer camp context? and (2)How (if at all) do gender-specific social
competency modeling and single gender vs. balanced gender groupings affect
girls' interest, self-efficacy, perceived social support, and skill in CS camps?
The research will directly inform best practice for recruiting girls into
computing using evidence from a controlled study. Girls only programs are
designed to create more empowering opportunities free from possible negative
social pressures based on stereotypes of computing as a male activity. To date,
no study has examined program outcomes in such a way that the differential
influences of single vs. balanced gender environments and role models can be
independently and jointly assessed.