* 1614855
* Collaborative Research:  Quantifying Explosive Volcanism in Alaska Using Seismo-acoustic Wavefields Recorded by USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Robin Matoza, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 05/31/2022
* USD 261,778.00

Collaborative Research: Quantifying explosive volcanism in Alaska using seismo-
acoustic wavefields recorded by USArray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaska is home to
130 potentially active volcanoes, of which more than 50 have been active in
historical times. On average 2 volcanoes are in a state of eruption every year.
Volcanoes in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska Peninsula, and Cook Inlet are capable
of sudden, explosive, ash-cloud forming eruptions, which are potentially
hazardous to passenger and freight aircraft along this heavily travelled air
corridor. Many of Alaska?s volcanoes are in remote locations with harsh
environments. Monitoring these volcanoes represents a formidable challenge and
many of the volcanoes are not instrumented. Infrasound (acoustic waves with
frequencies below the 20 Hz hearing threshold of the human ear) is a rapidly
developing technology to understand and monitor explosive volcanic eruptions.
Modest-sized explosive eruptions produce powerful infrasound signals that
propagate efficiently over thousands of kilometers in the atmosphere. However,
to date, these signals have been recorded by sparse infrasound sensor networks,
limiting our understanding of their source generation and propagation through
the atmosphere. The EarthScope Transportable Array (TA) is currently being
deployed in Alaska, bringing the densest ever combined seismic and infrasonic
network to one of the world?s most active volcanic regions. Exploiting this
novel dataset, this project will advance the capability of acoustic early
warning systems of volcanic eruptions for aviation safety and will assess the
potential contribution of large sensor networks such as the TA to volcano
monitoring. At the end of the project, an operational volcano-acoustic
monitoring system resulting from this work will be implemented at the Alaska
Volcano Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will capitalize on the
unprecedented seismo-acoustic dataset starting to become available as the TA
records Alaska?s routine explosive volcanism with dense spatial wavefield
sampling. Volcano seismo-acoustics is a rapidly advancing research field, where
basic questions remain on the source mechanisms, source directionality,
atmospheric propagation, and seismo-acoustic coupling from explosive volcanic
eruptions. This project will focus on detection, discrimination, and location of
the signals using novel methods; quantifying the seismo-acoustic wavefield;
investigating the source mechanisms; quantifying seismo-acoustic wave coupling;
and understanding infrasound propagation in the spatio-temporally varying
atmosphere. Through a combination of data analysis and modeling, we will
characterize and quantify diverse seismic and infrasonic signals recorded at a
range of distances and directions from the explosive eruption source. We will
address the following questions: (1) How do observed acoustic and seismic
signals from explosive volcanic eruptions vary with distance and azimuth to the
source? (2) How does acoustic propagation differ for various types of explosive
eruptions? (3) What kind of volcanic source information can be determined from
long-range seismo-acoustic data? (4) What are the wavefield sampling limitations
in previous volcano infrasound studies? (5) What other infrasound sources are
present in Alaska? Our team will work with the EarthScope National Office at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks to help highlight this research and its impacts.
Multi-media products illustrating seismo-acoustic wavefields from volcanic
eruptions in Alaska will be distributed via the web for use in public
information packets and education and outreach. Event catalogs and related data
products will be publically available, with notable infrasound events uploaded
to the IRIS TA Infrasound Reference Event Database (TAIRED).&lt;br/&gt;