* 1614548
* Collaborative Research: WAVES - A STEM-Powered Youth News Network for the Nation
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Harold Abelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,115,000.00

As a part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds research and
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings. This media and technology
project will scale up Youth Radio's proven model of STEM education through
youth-driven multimedia journalism and related app development using the MIT App
Inventor. A new Youth News Network (YNN) will implement a nationwide feeder
system of youth reporters and educators using the previously developed and
proven STEM curriculum. Previous research and evaluation has demonstrated that
this model can engage underserved youth and put them in leadership positions in
technological innovation. Key deliverables include the YNN STEM Desk that will
produce 15-20 STEM-related stories each year; bootcamps (1-3 day workshops)
training youth around the country focusing on app development and media links;
and new toolkits providing resources to help with app development, data analysis
and other STEM-specific skills. Project partners include MIT Media Lab, National
Public Radio, Best Buy's Teen Tech Centers, National Writing Project, Computer
Clubhouses, and PBS Learning Media among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
previous eight years, research and evaluation findings had been used to refine
the project. These data served as the foundation for this scale-up project. The
research conducted by the investigator and the Scholar-in-Residence in this
scale-up uses an embedded ethnographic approach that combines field notes,
recorded meetings and discussions, media artifacts, etc.--data that is
transcribed and coded for indicators of STEM learning and critical computational
literacy. The external summative evaluation will build on prior evidence
regarding how this unique model engages youth and impacts their skills in STEM
related media and technology.