* 1614396
* EAPSI: Quantifying Pore Characteristics and Leaf Water Transport Conduits in Three Australian Evergreen Tree Species
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Megan Riley, Riley                   Megan          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

In plants, water is transported from the soil through a complex network of
conduits from roots to trunks, branches and leaves. As soils dry, water columns
in the plant can break, resulting in a reduced water transport capacity and
eventual death if the dry conditions persist, as with drought. We know that the
physical characteristics of the pores, which link adjacent water transport
conduits in trees, relate to drought tolerance in roots, trunks and branches,
but little research has focused on these pores in leaves, despite their being
the gateway to plant photosynthesis and therefore overall growth and survival.
In this project, the Fellow will work with Dr. Brendan Choat ? an expert in
plant water transport at the Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment at Western
Sydney University, Australia ? to measure these interconnecting pores in leaves
of three economically vital evergreen tree species using laser-based and
electron-based high resolution imaging systems. Analyzing the anatomical
structure of the pores will increase foundational knowledge and help to enhance
accuracy of drought-induced forest dieback predictions.

Although leaves are the gateways of overall plant growth and productivity, their
hydraulic function has been studied much less than other plant organs. Research
has shown that there is a correlation between bordered pit/torus-margo
morphology and drought resistance in roots, stems and branches, but these
structures remain largely unquantified in leaf xylem. In this project, the
Fellow will work with Dr. Brendan Choat ? an expert in plant hydraulics at the
Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment at Western Sydney University, Australia
? to image and quantify numerous aspects of pit and torus-margo morphology in
leaf tracheids and transfusion tracheids in three economically vital conifer
species using confocal laser scanning microscopy and electron scanning
microscopy. Anatomical characteristics are necessary components of leaf and
soil-plant-atmosphere models; understanding bordered pit morphology may
contribute to enhanced predictions of altered plant function and species
distributions under changing climate regimes.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australia Academy of Science.