* 1614785
* Existence, Stability, and Dynamics of Nonlinear Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Mathew Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,996.00

This research project focuses on stability and behavior of special classes of
solutions of mathematical equations modeling a variety of physical phenomena
including optical communication, shallow or stratified fluid flow, and inclined
thin film flow. Emphasis is placed on the stability of nonlinear waves
exhibiting a spatially periodic structure, which form fundamental building
blocks for more complicated solutions in many applications. The stability of
such structures (i.e. their ability to retain their form when disturbed) is of
great practical importance, as waves that are not stable do not naturally
manifest themselves in physical applications, except possibly for transient
phenomena. The aim of this project is to provide researchers a mathematically
rigorous theory by which they may distinguish between mathematical solutions
that are stable, and hence have a possibility of being manifested in reality,
and those that are not. This project will also include undergraduate and
graduate students in research projects. The methodologies and techniques
developed through this work will be incorporated into seminars, reading courses,
and special topics courses appropriate for students from a variety of scientific
disciplines.

This project focuses on the existence, stability, and dynamics of special
classes of traveling wave solutions in models arising naturally in mathematical
physics and fluid mechanics. The aim is to systematically develop a linear and
nonlinear stability analysis of spatially periodic standing or traveling
structures in both Hamiltonian dispersive partial differential equations, in
which energy is conserved, as well as hyperbolic-parabolic systems of
conservation and balance laws, where energy is partially dissipated due to, for
example, viscous effects. In the dispersive context, the research project will
consider a variety of model equations with nonlocal descriptions of dispersion
and will develop techniques and methodologies capable of treating not only low-
frequency phenomena, which is in the realm of many classical theories, but also
high-frequency behaviors of solutions, which are beyond the regime of validity
of classical results. In the dissipative context, the research project will
develop a systematic investigation of roll-waves, which are commonly-observed
hydrodynamic instabilities arising naturally in many applications, such as fluid
flow in conduits. Particular attention will be placed on understanding
connections between the recently-developed viscous theories of such waves and
more well-known inviscid theories.