* 1614240
* EAPSI: Development of a Vitamin C Sensor: Anchoring Aqueous Polymers to Glass Substrates
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Casey Grenier, Grenier                 Casey          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,400.00

Measuring the amount of vitamin C present in blood is difficult because of the
complex nature of blood, overall cost, amount of time, and instrumentation
involved. The award supports research to synthesize a polymer sensing network
and anchor it to the surface of a gold coated glass slide, forming a viable
chemical sensor for testing levels of vitamin C in bodily fluids. This sensor
array will be a reproducible and universally stable analytical tool that is
capable of numerous other measurements: the analysis of bodily fluids, testing
the cleanliness of water, and instantaneous monitoring of drug levels within the
body. The development of these types of proposed sensors could enable point of
care measurements for the medical community and the developing world. The
research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Wei-Ssu Liao of
National Taiwan University in Taipei, Taiwan.

The polymer sensor is formed by an aqueous molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP)
network. Unlike most MIPs, which form polymer particles due to the high levels
of rigid covalent bonds, our MIP is in liquid form because it utilizes less
rigid non-covalent bonds to form its sensing network. In addition to being able
to bind to the desired molecule (vitamin C), this MIP has a fluorescence
response monomer unit within the network. This allows for a visual ?on/off?
sensing of the desired molecule. This network is synthesized using a living
polymerization technique, thus allowing the polymer solution to have
functionalized end groups that can be reduced to bind to any gold surface. The
MIP sensor is capable of rapid binding and high selectivity, and when anchored
onto a substrate it will create a sensor array for easy and accurate detection
of vitamin C.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.