* 1614863
* Collaborative Proposal: Theoretical, computational, and experimental investigations on the interaction between a lipid bilayer membrane and a solid substrate or particle
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Yuan-Nan Young, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 208,561.00

This grant supports an interdisciplinary team of three investigators using
mathematical modeling, computer simulations, and experiments to develop improved
predictive models for the behavior of cell membranes in certain contexts. This
research project concerns the mathematical modeling of the interaction between a
cell membrane and a solid particle, a physical process that is essential to cell
adhesion to a solid surface and cellular uptake (endo/exocytosis) of colloidal
nanoparticles (e.g., drug carriers). Advances in nano- and biomedical
engineering have made it possible to design smart materials for more effective
medical treatments (e.g., targeted drug delivery). These technical developments
are based on understanding how a cell membrane interacts with colloidal
particles in a fluid environment filled with ions and macromolecules. It is
imperative to better understand the physical processes that underpin such
ubiquitous membrane-solid interactions in a complex fluid
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new mathematical
models and numerical algorithms to describe quantitatively the particle-membrane
interactions by considering random thermal fluctuations, electrokinetic effects,
and nanoscale phenomena (e.g., molecular layering) that are commonly ignored in
conventional continuum-based approaches. Microfluidic experiments will be
developed in parallel to guide the mathematical and computational modeling of a
membrane interacting with solid surfaces with curvature and/or localized
features. This project will advance the mathematical modeling of a lipid bilayer
membrane (LBM) interacting with solid surfaces and particles by considering the
presence of the thin liquid film filling the gap between the LBM and other solid
surfaces. It is hypothesized that, through physically consistent effective
interaction potentials, a continuum-based thin film equation can capture the
macroscopic spreading dynamics of LBMs on surfaces with variable wetting
properties and zeta potentials, under different ionic strengths. One of the main
results from the mathematical modeling will be the stochastic nonlinear
lubrication equation for the height of the thin liquid film between the LBM and
a solid surface. Theoretical predictions, such as LBM adhesion and spreading
time, will be compared against experimental results for validation and model
refinement. The developed model will be employed to investigate the adhesion of
a LBM (1) under different ionic concentrations in the liquid and (2) on solid
surfaces with curvature and localized features.