* 1614840
* Observations, Theory, and Simulations of the Sun-Earth System International Symposium; Golden Sands, Varna, Bulgaria; September 12-16, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Vania Jordanova, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 04/30/2017
* USD 29,060.00

This award provide support for an international workshop, the International
Symposium on Recent Observations and Simulations of the Sun-Earth System III
(ISROSES-III). This activity is intended to be a forum for scientists from all
heliophysics communities to present and discuss recent advances in theory,
modeling and observations of the Sun-Earth System (SES) and to form research
collaborations. This workshop would be the third one following similarly-focused
workshops held in 2006 and in 2011. The budget covers travel expenses and
registration expenses for three people (PI and two Co-PI). Registration expenses
for 20 invited speakers would be supported from this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniqueness of this Symposium is in that it will bring
together cross-disciplinary scientists from around the globe to have focused
discussions on fundamental problems related to the Sun-Earth System and space
weather. The main emphasis will be put on the integration of these studies -
ranging from observations to related interpretation, theory and numerical
modeling across different temporal and spatial scales of this system. It will
thus provide training for new researchers in geospace system science. Young
postdoctoral and early career researchers are expected to come away from the
Symposium with a better appreciation of the benefits of interdisciplinary
approaches to understanding the dynamic near-Earth space environment.