* 1614242
* Probability Questions in Phylogenetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sebastien Roch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 194,000.00

Assembling the Tree of Life is a fundamental problem in biology that is
providing insights into evolution, adaptation, and speciation. Much information
about past evolutionary events can be inferred from the analysis of DNA sequence
data collected from existing species. A notable feature of the evolution of
molecular sequences is the significant role played by chance. In recent years,
probability theory, the mathematical study of randomness, has provided key new
insights in analyzing the power of statistical methods to reconstruct
evolutionary processes in large-scale phylogenetics. The overall goal of this
research project is to further investigate these connections. Through the
development, analysis, implementation, and dissemination of algorithms for the
alignment of molecular sequences and the reconstruction of evolutionary trees,
this research will help advance the state of knowledge in evolutionary biology.
The project aims to contribute to the numerous benefits to society of
phylogenetic research such as the protection of ecosystems from invasive
species, the identification of emerging diseases, and the prediction of disease
outbreaks. Integration of research and education is a major component of this
project. In addition to providing research training for graduate students,
course materials will be developed in conjunction with the activities and made
widely available.

In evolutionary biology, the speciation history of a group of organisms is
represented graphically by a phylogeny, that is, a rooted tree whose leaves
represent current species and whose branchings indicate past speciation events.
Phylogenies are commonly estimated from molecular sequences collected from the
species of interest. Despite breathtaking advances in sequencing technologies
and the development of increasingly more powerful methods, phylogenetic
reconstruction remains a challenging problem, and many evolutionary
relationships continue to be the source of controversy. Most traditional
phylogenetic reconstruction methods involve two steps: multiple sequence
alignment and tree estimation. This two-step approach introduces systematic
biases that can adversely affect the final tree estimate and other downstream
analyses. The general objective of this project is to provide new mathematical
insights on alignment methods and their effects on phylogenetic analyses as well
as to develop new tools to analyze methodologies that go beyond the traditional
two-step approach to phylogenetic reconstruction. This objective will be
achieved by further developing the fruitful interface between probability theory
and mathematical phylogenetics.