* 1615719
* GOALI:   Predicting performance and fouling of membrane filters
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Lou Kondic, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 311,022.00

Membrane filters -- essentially, thin sheets of porous medium that act to remove
certain particles suspended in a fluid feed that passes through the medium --
are in widespread industrial use, and represent a multi-billion dollar industry
in the US alone. Major multinational companies, such as W.L. Gore &amp;
Associates and Pall Corporation, manufacture a huge range of membrane-based
filtration products and have a keen interest in improving and optimizing their
filters. Membrane filtration is used in applications as diverse as water
purification; treatment of radioactive sludge; various purification processes in
the biotech industry; the cleaning of air or other gases; and beer
clarification. While the underlying applications may vary dramatically (gas
versus liquid filtration; small versus large particle removal; slow versus fast
throughput; rigid versus deformable particles), the broad engineering challenge
is the same: to achieve finely-controlled separation at low power consumption.
But membrane characteristics (and hence the filter's behavior and performance)
are far from constant over the filter lifetime: the particles removed from the
feed are deposited within and on the filter, fouling it and degrading its
performance. The processes by which this fouling occurs are complex and depend
strongly on several factors, including the internal structure of the membrane,
the flow dynamics of the feed solution, and the type of particles in the feed
(their shape, size, and chemistry affect how they are removed by the membrane).
In this project new mathematical models are developed to simulate membrane
filtration and fouling, allowing membrane design parameters to be tuned for
optimal performance. Particular attention is paid to the role played by the
details of the internal membrane morphology, so that detailed design guidelines
can be formulated. Collaboration with an industrial partner (Dr. Anil Kumar of
Pall Corporation) maximizes the chances that our theoretical results translate
into industrial practice. Graduate students are involved in the work of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project studies flow and fouling in membrane
filters, which are of significant interest for industrial applications. Working
with a PhD student, the PI and her collaborator formulate new predictive
mathematical models that describe two situations of practical importance: (i)
Flow and fouling within pleated filter cartridges, and (ii) Membrane fouling
models for internally heterogeneous membranes. In each scenario the team builds
models that account for an arbitrary particle size distribution within the feed
solution, and also for a distribution of membrane pore sizes. First-principles
theoretical studies of these scenarios are of interest to others carrying out
fundamental theoretical and experimental research on such systems, as well as to
those seeking to extend the scope of current applications and improve
manufacturing processes. An industrial colleague, Dr. Anil Kumar of Pall
Corporation, collaborates on the project. An experimentalist, he shares his
existing data with the team, generates new data as needed to test the models,
and acts as industrial advisor. This interaction ensures that the project
remains focused and that questions relevant to applications are identified and
addressed. The experimental data help to determine appropriate ranges for
unknown parameters in the models, and to test uncertain modeling assumptions.