* 1615847
* A Coordinated Laboratory and Astronomical Study of the Seeds of Dust Formation in Giant and Supergiant Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Carl Gottlieb, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,872.00

Astronomers identify molecules in space by matching observed radio signals with
measurements made on Earth. By this method, nearly 200 simple molecules (such as
water and ammonia) have been identified in our Milky Way galaxy. In this
research, scientists will make careful laboratory measurements of new molecules
that could be detected by radio telescopes. They will make very precise
measurements of the molecules' signature, then go to telescopes to search for
these signals in space. The scientists will search for these molecules by
observing clouds of gas surrounding stars which blow carbon, oxygen and other
elements off their outer layers. Molecules form as the gas from stars cool, and
some of these molecules subsequently accumulate and form clumps called 'dust'.
These scientists will learn what types of molecules are formed in space around
these stars. They are particularly interested in molecules familiar on Earth but
which are unknown in space, like silicon oxides (e.g. sand), aluminum oxide (the
white film on unpainted aluminum) and titanium oxide (the white color in paint
and active component in sunscreen). Some of these oxides of silicon, aluminum,
and titanium are thought to be the building blocks of the dust that ultimately
forms planets outside our own Solar System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
begins with laboratory measurements of rotational spectra of new complex
molecules containing either two or three silicon, aluminum, or titanium atoms.
These molecules are more complex than those previously measured. Next radio
astronomers will unravel the chemistry in the inner envelopes of late-type
carbon- and oxygen-rich evolved stars, which are a major source of planet
forming dust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to many uncertainties in the chemical
models of these sources, it is only through an empirical approach, which entails
an integrated program of laboratory measurements and astronomical observations
at high angular resolution and sensitivity, that astronomers may understand
these complex regions. The molecules will be produced in widely used laboratory
sources (either glow discharge, discharge nozzle, or laser ablation); their
rotational spectra will be measured in the centimeter, millimeter, and sub-
millimeter bands either with a Fabry-Perot cavity, broadband chirped pulse
spectrometer, or non-resonant absorption cell; and the spectra will be analyzed
with standard Hamiltonians and computer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
search for the new molecular species in the laboratory will be guided by high
level quantum chemical calculations of the structures which will be done by our
expert collaborators, and will draw on 30 years of work on reactive molecules of
astrophysical interest by our group. In addition to the contribution of this
work to astronomy, direct detection of elusive titanium oxides, aluminum oxides,
and silicon-bearing molecules in the laboratory will provide detailed
information about their structures, which in turn will help applied physicists
address vexing questions about the elementary reactions that govern the growth
and their wide range of photo-catalytic and photovoltaic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines chemistry,
electronics, physics and astronomy and is as an excellent topic for teaching,
training, and learning. The outreach plan is two-pronged: (1) Provide mentorship
and research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students through
programs at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) and Harvard; and (2)
Create a spectral line molecular radio astronomy module for an innovative
learning tool, called 'Spectral Explorer'. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spectral
Explorer is a browser-based spectra visualization and analysis tool. The
Spectral Explorer will be used in both high school classroom and public outreach
learning settings. The SAO Science Education Department (SED) is developing
these events. As part of this effort, the SAO spectroscopy laboratory will be
actively engaged in the planning and execution of specific tutorials, videos,
spectral datasets, and case study resources which will be centered on the
research described in this proposal. The Spectral Explorer lab will be
disseminated via partnerships with the NSF, NASA and Smithsonian Affiliations
networks to the ten thousand educators currently using SED resources and to the
more than 50,000 public/citizen science users.