* 1615045
* Mathematics of Noise and Disorder in Classical and Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jan Wehr, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 384,999.00

This research contains several projects that are united by the common theme:
interaction of a physical system with the environment. While a system of
interest is often relatively simple, the environment it interacts with is often
complicated and requires a judicious choice of a mathematical model. A model
must be rich enough to capture essential features of the underlying phenomena;
at the same time, the model needs to be mathematically tractable. In some of the
models under investigation, the environment manifests itself as static disorder.
This is in particular the case in models of activated carbon. One of the
challenges in this particular investigation is to understand appearance of
graphene sheets in activated carbon production. Graphene, a material that
consists of just one layer of carbon atoms forming two-dimensional sheets,
demonstrates a plethora of remarkable properties just beginning to be employed
in engineering. This work, which has both theoretical and strong applied
potential, will be done in collaboration with scientists working in industry.
The long-term goal is to understand statistical mechanics in the presence of
noise and disorder, which will enable study of more complicated systems relevant
for applications in life sciences. The project will involve training of students
through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the majority of
systems under study in this project, interaction with the environment takes the
form of noise, modeled as a random perturbation, varying in time. Both classical
and quantum systems will be modeled this way. In the case of classical systems,
the project studies the qualitative impact of noise in systems with magnetic and
time-dependent forces and, more generally, bifurcations resulting from the
presence of noise. Of particular interest are also systems of large number of
interacting particles. Previous work on one such system has possible
applications for design of systems of task-performing micro-robots; that
research will be continued in the present project. The theory of open quantum
systems is much less developed; in this context the project investigates simple
quantum optical systems, as well as the basic phenomenon of quantum Brownian
motion. Particularly interesting physically is the case in which the strength of
the interaction of the Brownian particle with the environment depends on its
position. Mathematical models of this situation are not well understood and the
project aims to improve the existing theory. More involved systems will also be
studied, especially in the limit of small particle masses. The research on
diffusive and open systems will be done in close collaboration with physics
groups, both experimental and theoretical.