* 1615820
* Remodeling of Pulmonary Cardiovascular Networks in the Presence of Hypertension
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Mansoor Haider, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 430,000.00

The research team will develop mathematical and computational models for the
study of pulmonary hypertension. This is a rare but rapidly progressing
cardiovascular disease with a high mortality rate. Pulmonary hypertension
involves both elevated blood pressure and changes in vessel wall stiffness, and
thickness within the pulmonary circulation. These issues worsen with the
severity of the disease. Diagnostic disease categories are associated with
different parts of the pulmonary circulation network, yet pinpointing locations
where the disease initiates is challenging. Models will be developed in
conjunction with the use of experimental data provided by collaborators. This
data will be obtained from non-invasive imaging of vascular blood flow and
vessel network structure, and from invasive measurements of blood pressure in
pulmonary vessels in mice and humans obtained via catheterization. Effects of
the heart chambers, large vessels, small vessel networks and their interactions
will be captured based on modeling and methodological approaches from fluid
mechanics, solid mechanics, network analysis, inverse problems and parameter
estimation. The proposed pulmonary cardiovascular model has potential to be
incorporated into diagnostic protocols predicting pressure using non-invasive
measurements to reduce the number of the invasive follow-up procedures, and to
serve as a vital component for identifying signatures associated with disease
diagnostic categories and the degree of disease progression. The overall project
also provides a variety of opportunities for integrated training of a postdoc,
and graduate and undergraduate students, in data-driven biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;System-level, one-dimensional mathematical and
computational fluid dynamics models of the pulmonary circulation will be
developed. These models will include the right ventricle, left atrium, the large
and small pulmonary arteries and veins, and account for alterations in the
system components due to pulmonary hypertension. A physiologically based
arterial and venous wall model that accounts for collagen and elastin content
and that can also capture remodeling of wall constituents in response to
pulmonary hypertension will be designed. This model will be rooted in nonlinear
elasticity theory and will yield a more robust pressure-area relation that can
be integrated within the fluid dynamics model, and linearized to facilitate the
transition from large to small vessels. A second physiologically based right
ventricle model combining ideas from simple elastance functions and single-fiber
models will also be provided. This model will enable prediction of elastance as
a function of right ventricle thickness. The analysis will focus on the
pulmonary circulation, but impacts on modeling systemic circulation in a
comprehensive closed loop model will also be considered. The models developed in
these two aims will be used to simulate and identify flow and pressure waveforms
that predict features associated with disease progression and, via sensitivity
analysis and parameter estimation, to render the model patient-specific. With
these innovations it will be possible to use the one dimensional system level
model combined with pulmonary arterial blood pressure from non-invasive
measurements of flow to assess disease progression associated with pulmonary
hypertension while also reducing the number of invasive measurements.