* 1615100
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Theoretical Study of Cosmic Magnetic Fields, their Origin, Evolution, and Signatures
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Axel Brandenburg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,030.00

People use a compass to learn their direction of travel. Such a compass works
because its tiny magnetic needle aligns with the magnetic field of Earth and
indicates the direction of North. On scales much larger than Earth, our own
Milky Way Galaxy also has its own magnetic field. In fact, all galaxies in the
Universe appear to have magnetic fields, and these magnetic fields can have
profound effects on a galaxy's development throughout its lifetime. Through a
series of sophisticated computer simulations, this project aims to unlock the
puzzling origin of the magnetic fields found in galaxies. Upon completion this
project might point to an origin of these magnetic fields that coincides with
the birth of the Universe itself. Such a result could have a profound influence
on our current understanding of fundamental physics, and its pursuit serves the
national interest of developing US scientific leadership in astrophysics. This
project will also strengthen the US science workforce by directly training
undergraduate and graduate students in general and computational astrophysics.
Project plans also include a vigorous education and public outreach program.

More technically, observations show that galaxies have magnetic fields with a
component that is coherent over a large fraction of the galaxy with field
strengths of order microgauss. These fields are assumed to be from the
amplification of initial weak seed magnetic fields of unknown nature. The two
scenarios of their origin are (1) a bottom-up astrophysical one, where the
needed seed field is generated on smaller scales and (2) a top-down cosmological
scenario where the seed field is generated prior to galaxy formation in the
early Universe on scales that are large now. Based on current observations, this
project aims to distinguish between these two scenarios. To achieve this goal,
the evolution and observational signatures of cosmic magnetic fields will be
studied in different astrophysical environments such as clusters, galaxies, and
interstellar medium. Numerical simulations will model the evolution of cosmic
magnetic fields in the expanding Universe with time varying dissipative
properties when initial conditions correspond to the different scenarios of the
magnetogenesis. This project is divided into the following related parts: (i)
theoretical studies of magnetogenesis mechanisms including the cosmological and
astrophysical scenarios; (ii) numerical simulations of large-scale magnetic
fields evolution to analyze whether astrophysical mechanisms can lead to
extragalactic magnetic field strengths comparable with the lower bounds; and
(iii) determining potentially observable signatures of cosmic magnetic fields
coherent at large scales---including cosmic structure formation, microwave
background fluctuations, or ultra high energy gamma-ray propagation. The project
will search for signatures of primordial cosmic magnetic fields that distinguish
cosmological seeds from astrophysical sources.