* 1615563
* SHF: Small: Automatically Localizing Functional Faults In Deployed Software Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,896.00

Even though most software applications are tested before they are released to
customers, these applications still contain production (or field) functional
faults that result in field failures, which have costly consequences and are
expensive to fix. Due to their limitations, existing automatic debugging
approaches do not adequately isolate and identify production faults for field
failures. Prior interviews of test managers and studies of bug repositories
revealed that programmers spent close to 50% of their time on average to
localize production faults, which is a major factor in software system and
software project failures. The educational innovation of this project is in
developing an integrated approach to teaching by applying probabilistic
graphical models to software engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposal is to create a novel theoretical foundation that allows
stakeholders to predict and localize functional faults for field failures
automatically with a high degree of precision using symptoms only (e.g., the
sign of the output value is incorrect) and without instrumenting deployed
applications to collect runtime data, thus avoiding the deployment runtime
overhead, and without having any tests with oracles to uncover the fault,
without performing contrasting successful and failed runs, and without
collecting runtime data from field failures. With this theoretical foundation,
researchers can collaborate more closely in planning the future of fault
localization by expanding each other's results based on probabilistic graphical
models as common abstractions. Based only on failure symptoms occurring during
deployment of a given application, the location of faults in the source code
will be determined, as well as navigation paths from likely faults to the code
that can fix these faults. The project will create, evaluate and deploy: (1) new
theories, algorithms and techniques for automatically obtaining probabilistic
graphical models that approximate specific fault models for software
applications; (2) a novel way in which model-based differential diagnoses are
used to perform abductive reasoning to localize production faults given symptoms
for field failures, and (3) a comprehensive experimentation framework for
evaluating the effectiveness of the algorithms for localizing production faults.
In addition to localizing production functional faults, the implementation can
be used as a broad experimental platform for creating and testing hypotheses for
various software debugging and testing ideas, e.g., for guiding test selection
and prioritization.