* 1615209
* Chief Science Officers: A Strategy for Student Awareness and Industry Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* John Falk, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,295,537.00

This Innovative Technology Experience for Teachers and Students project provides
an innovative new model for increasing student interest in STEM careers and
active engagement of business and industry partners with grade 6-12 aged youth
in Arizona. The Chief Science Officers (CSO) program expands on the student
government model to select one or several youth at each participating middle or
high school who would champion campus-wide interest, engagement and
communication in STEM. On campus, CSOs would identify opportunities for
speakers, field trips, and science nights. Off campus, CSOs would participate in
community forums and function as the point person for community initiatives in
STEM. Key deliverables include CSO training, on-going mentoring, media
materials/guides, and on-going community programming. Approximately 100 schools
and 200 CSOs will be involved each year of the 3-year project. Numerous
businesses will participate in mentoring and community events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research would provide insights into how
the investment in a small and select group of youth can achieve measurable
results for a much larger population of students and communities. Key research
questions are: Does the presence of a CSO within a school significantly raise
interest in STEM among the general student body? Does the active cohort of CSOs
within a community increase participation of businesses and industries? Outcomes
will be measured using a quasi-experimental, pre-post design with a treatment
group of 4000 participants and a control group of 1000.