* 1615991
* NSF-MCB/BSF Exploring Kinesin-5 Evolutionary Adaptations for Mitotic Spindle Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jawdat Al-Bassam, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2021
* USD 805,999.00

Cell division is a feature of all life by which each cell duplicates into two
daughter cells. Eukaryotic cells (such as yeast and humans) divide by forming a
mitotic spindle, which is a bipolar structure composed of microtubules. The
dynamic elongation and antiparallel organization of microtubules segregates each
duplicated chromosome towards opposite sides of the cell, eventually leading to
the creation of new daughter cells. Across eukaryotic life, there are variations
in how mitotic spindles are assembled. In yeast, the mitotic spindle assembles
inside the nucleus, while in humans and fruit flies, the nucleus is
disassembled. The assembly and organization processes are driven by motor
molecules, which are essential for cell division, and are highly similar in
eukaryotes. Among them, Kinesin-5 motors possess a unique dumbbell shape, with
two sets of motile regions located at opposite ends, which simultaneously move
along two filaments emanating from opposite poles of the mitotic spindle.
Through this activity, the Kinesin-5 motors promote the sliding-apart of
microtubules during cell division, leading to elongation of spindles and
chromosome segregation. When Kinesin-5 function is impaired, dividing cells
stall and eventually die, because cells cannot segregate duplicated chromosomes.
We will investigate the unique mechanisms and adaptations that have evolved in
different versions of Kinesin-5 found in eukaryotes and their role in organizing
mitotic spindles. We hypothesize that such unique adaptations specify features
of the observed differences in mitotic spindle assembly found among
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful collaboration between US and
Israeli research groups revealed the remarkable evolution of Kinesin-5 molecules
from organisms with unique forms of cell division. In lower eukaryotes,
Kinesin-5 motors move towards the opposite end of mitotic spindles compared to
those found in higher eukaryotes such as fruit fly kinesin-5 motors. Yet the
lower eukaryotic kinesin-5 motors reverse direction as they cluster in a unique
way near the ends of filaments, once capturing second filaments; while in
animals the kinesin-5 molecules do not possess these features. Here, we apply an
interdisciplinary approach including biochemical analyses, yeast genetics and
single motor fluorescence imaging, to elucidate how these unique adaptations
evolved in Kinesin-5 motors to influence the diverse assembly and organization
states of mitotic spindles observed in different organisms. First, we will
determine the origin of clustering among kinesin-5 molecules found in both yeast
humans and fruit fly versions and how that leads molecules persist at different
ends of spindle filaments. Second, we will determine the features that lead one
motor to direction switch (in yeast, but not in the humans and fruit flies).
Third, we will determine how the physical organization of the dumbbell-shaped
kinesin-5 molecules specifies microtubule sliding. These studies will provide a
deep understanding of kinesin-5 generated motility in relation to the evolution
of eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was funded by a joint Israeli
and United State program in which the NSF provides funding for the US
laboratory, located at UC Davis, while the Israeli BSF provides funds for the
Israeli lab located at Ben-Gurion University in Negev.