* 1615126
* Biological Invasions, Range Pinning, and Adaptive Evolution of Quantitative Traits
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Judith Miller, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,841.00

This research focuses on the development and analysis of mathematical models of
adaptive evolution in populations distributed over a territory. The main focus
is on quantitative traits (characteristics like body size affected by many
genes), which have been studied less in this context than traits determined by a
single gene. A combination of rigorous pencil-and-paper analysis and computer
simulation is used to provide insight into how evolution affects the speed,
success and ultimate extent of biological invasions. The results can inform
thinking on environmental management issues, such as deciding how to allocate
conservation measures among marginal or central populations. By elucidating
general principles that can guide the construction and interpretation of more
specific models for management of natural populations, this research helps to
address the economically important environmental challenges of management of
invasive species and response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, this project will result in the
development of new methods for proving existence and stability of localized
solutions (representing populations whose territory is not expanding) and
traveling waves (representing invasive species), for a class of differential
equations and similar systems that do not admit analysis via commonly employed
methods. Specifically, this analysis will result in the development of new
methods for proving existence and stability of localized solutions and traveling
waves, for a class of biologically meaningful systems that do not admit analysis
via phase plane or comparison principle methods. Since those techniques cannot
readily be extended to many systems or equations, progress in devising
alternative approaches will help to fill a significant gap. Biologically, the
resulting analysis of general range dynamics models involving quantitative
traits will contribute to understanding of the interplay between gene flow and
numerous other demographic, genetic and environmental factors that help shape a
population's distribution in space and time. It will highlight factors, such as
long-distance dispersal and habitat patchiness, that are not yet integrated into
the relevant theory. This work will help show how incorporating adaptive genetic
change into invasion models alters the predictions of such models.