* 1615557
* Collaborative Research: Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Regulation of plant stomatal aperture by SAUR (Small Auxin Up RNA) proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Michael Blatt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2020
* USD 652,309.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Regulation
of plant stomatal aperture by SAUR (Small Auxin Up RNA) proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;Senior personnel: Jason Reed (PI, U. North Carolina), Punita Nagpal
(co-PI, U. North Carolina), William Gray (PI, U. Minnesota), Michael Blatt (co-
PI, U. Glasgow)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ultimate goal of the project is to
understand how leaf physiology can be controlled to improve plant yield during
drought. Stomata are pores on plant leaves whose regulation balances the demand
for carbon dioxide uptake for photosynthesis against excessive water loss
through transpiration. A deeper understanding of the molecular and cellular
mechanisms regulating stomatal aperture could result in enhanced function,
potentially leading to improved crop yields under drought and other
environmental stresses. Research under this collaborative project will provide
training for postdoctoral researchers and undergraduate students in diverse
experimental and computational techniques and approaches at the University of
North Carolina and University of Minnesota in the U.S. and the University of
Glasgow in the U.K. Together with high school teachers, the researchers will
also design and implement lesson plans for high school students on stomatal
aperture and its relationship to plant water use and drought tolerance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Stomatal movements are critical for optimizing plant
growth, and for adapting to changing environmental conditions including water
availability, temperature, light, and CO2 levels. Stomatal opening and closing
occur through changes in the turgor and shape of guard cells that flank each
stomatal pore, which requires regulated movement of solutes and water across the
plasma membrane and the tonoplast (vacuolar membrane). Mechanisms by which
transporter activities are coordinated over the diurnal cycle and in variable
environments are incompletely understood. The project will exploit two recent
advances to elucidate stomatal aperture control. First, SAUR (Small Auxin Up
RNA) proteins can promote stomatal opening, in part by regulating PP2C.D
phosphatases that target membrane transporters. Second, computational models
developed by the researchers enable simulations of guard cell physiology that
can predict and explain effects of altered SAUR or PP2C.D regulation. A
multidisciplinary approach including genetics, biochemistry, electrophysiology,
and computational modeling will be used to determine mechanisms by which SAUR
and PP2C.D proteins regulate stomatal aperture, whether different members of
these families have different activities, and at what times and under what
physiological conditions they act. The combined experimental and modeling
approach will lead to understanding of novel mechanisms that regulate stomatal
movements and integrate them into existing models of guard cell regulation. Such
insights may suggest synthetic biology approaches to modify stomatal aperture or
the kinetics of stomatal responses in crop plants, and enhance predictive models
for the effects of environmental change on plant productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US
National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council.