* 1615612
* III: Small: Robust Algorithms for Multi-Task Learning of Spatio-Temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Pang-Ning Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,891.00

Recent years have witnessed an explosive growth of data collected from different
geographical locations at different time points, known as spatio-temporal data.
Spatio-temporal data are generated from a wide array of sensing technology and
through scientific simulations. Analysis of the big spatio-temporal data is
crucial as it supports key applications of national importance such as
environmental sustainability, healthcare, and national security. However, in
order to realize its full benefits, there are major analytical and computational
challenges that must be overcome. This interdisciplinary research seeks to
overcome some of the challenges by developing innovative prediction algorithms.
As proof of concept, the algorithms will be incorporated into an ensemble
prediction system developed by one of the principal investigators to enhance the
nation's seasonal drought forecast capability. Benchmark data sets will be
created and made available to other researchers for evaluating their algorithms.
The project web page (http://www.cse.msu.edu/~ptan/project/mtl) will be used to
disseminate experimental results, published papers, and software developed in
this project. The graduate students who participate in the project will be
trained to conduct cutting edge multidisciplinary research as next-generation
data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many spatio-temporal prediction
tasks that involve solving multiple related sub-problems. Rather than designing
the prediction model for each sub-problem independently, it would be desirable
to solve the prediction tasks jointly by exploiting their spatio-temporal
autocorrelations, thus making it a natural fit for applying a multi-task
learning paradigm. This proposal centers around the following four key
contributions to address the challenges of applying multi-task learning to
large-scale spatio-temporal data. First, a space-efficient online multi-task
learning algorithm, with theoretically proven convergence rates, will be
developed to handle the massive volume of data. Second, a deep learning
framework will be developed to extract salient spatio-temporal features for
multi-task predictions. Third, novel multi-task learning algorithms will be
developed to deal with multi-scale variables, which are becoming increasingly
prevalent with the proliferation of high-resolution sensors and simulation data
generated at increasingly finer resolutions. Finally, the proposed algorithms
will be applied to various spatio-temporal domains, including climate and
environmental sciences. Overall the proposed research will advance current
state-of-the-art by developing innovative prediction algorithms that consider
the inherent spatial and temporal variability of the data and provide solutions
with high predictive accuracy and learning efficiency.