* 1615851
* Specific Interactions of the Ribosome with the Nascent Peptide
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Nora Vazquez-Laslop, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 900,000.00

Regulation of gene expression is critical for cell survival. How gene expression
is affected by the functioning of the ribosome machinery that translates genes
into proteins remains poorly understood. The goals of the current proposal are
to understand how genetically programmed translation effects control gene
expression in bacteria. The findings are anticipated to significantly expand
knowledge of the role of the ribosome in controlling gene expression and its
functions as a small molecule sensor, and provide insights into cellular
responses to changing environments. This knowledge will improve our
understanding of fundamental principles of gene regulation and protein
synthesis, and potentially open new avenues for controlling gene expression. The
project will also help enrich the curriculum for Pharmacy professional and
graduate students taught by PI and Co-PI, provide opportunities to expand
training of high school students and increasing their interest in STEM
disciplines. Additionally, the project will enable involvement of graduate
students in outreach activities such as helping organize science fairs in inner-
city schools with large minority student populations, participating in the
Science Club of the True Value Boys and Girls Club in the Pilsen neighborhood of
Chicago, which has a largely Hispanic population, or running workshops within
the Expanding Your Horizons (EYH) network that helps to expose middle school
girls to STEM activities and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing
appreciation of the potential of the ribosome and its interactions with the
nascent polypeptide to play a critical role in gene expression. However, the
molecular mechanisms of nascent peptide recognition by the ribosome, the
spectrum of translation events that may be tuned by the nascent protein, and the
extent of gene regulation by nascent peptides remain poorly understood. One goal
of the proposal is to understand, at the molecular level, the operation of
programmed frameshifting that controls expression of a bacterial copper ion
transporter gene, with special emphasis on the role of stimulatory elements
encoded in the messenger RNA and, most importantly, in the nascent peptide. The
second goal is to gain fundamental insights into the phenomenon of slow
termination, which is prevalent in the bacterial genomes but affects only a
specific subset of genes. Genome scale and biochemical approaches, especially
involving the recently developed innovative Ribo-T system, will be used to
advance these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the
Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems, Directorate for Engineering.