* 1615119
* Geodetic Characterization of the Easternmost Alaska Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Julie Elliott, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 09/30/2021
* USD 226,401.00

Non-Technical Summary

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate descends beneath another, produce
great earthquakes and thus pose significant seismic hazards. Understanding the
characteristics of the plates, such as the geometry of the descending plate (or
slab), and the processes by which they slip past each other is key to assessing
the extent of the seismic risk. Parts or all of the two plates may be stuck
together, accumulating strain that may be released in a large earthquake, or
they may slide past each other more quietly, including in "slow slip events",
where energy is released over days or years instead of seconds.

South central Alaska is an excellent laboratory for investigating links between
slab and upper plate characteristics and slip behavior in subduction zones. The
region generated the second-largest earthquake ever recorded (a magnitude 9.2 in
1964), but major questions remain about processes along this margin. Earthquake
activity shows that the Alaska-Aleutian slab is subducting beneath part of
southern Alaska. This earthquake activity stops abruptly to the east of where
the magnitude 9.2 earthquake occurred, leading to speculation that the slab may
not be continuous throughout the area. Recent GPS studies have suggested that
the slab is present and locked with the upper plate across much of the area and
seismic investigations have found evidence that transient behavior may also
occur, but sparse data has limited further work.

The project team, from Purdue University, is installing four new continuous GPS
sites and five temporary GPS sites. The team is combining data from these sites
with data from existing sites to investigate subduction processes in the area,
including understanding the geometries of the slab and upper plate and
determining where, and to what degree, the plates are locked. The team is also
searching for subtle evidence of transient events; if found, those events can be
related to plate geometries and plate locking.

The project is also providing local K-12 teachers the opportunity to participate
in fieldwork and learn about how GPS data is used in tectonic studies. Lesson
plans developed with these teachers incorporate this project's research into a
larger scale view of the region's tectonics and give students experience working
with scientific data. The team is spreading its research results to a larger
audience through interactions with National Park Service staff and public
lectures. Overall, this project is generating and communicating a more complete
understanding of processes in the easternmost Alaska subduction zone, which will
improve seismic hazard estimates.

Technical Description

This proposal seeks to improve understanding of the relationship between
complicated slab geometries (e.g. flat slab subduction, edges or kinks in slabs)
and subduction-related processes such as upper plate deformation, coupling along
the subduction interface, and transient events (e.g. slow-slip). Data from 4 new
continuous GPS sites, 5 new campaign sites, and existing continuous and campaign
sites in the region are being used to examine strain patterns, the geometry of
the subducting slab, coupling along the subduction interface, upper plate
motion, and transient processes along the easternmost Alaska subduction zone.
The project is addressing the following questions: 1) What is the geometry of
the subduction interface? Where is the eastern edge of the active subduction
interface? How does this relate to the Wrangell Volcanic field and observed
seismicity? 2) How does coupling vary within the easternmost Alaska subduction
zone? Where does the transition from locked to creeping occur? How does this
relate to the observed tremor, upper plate deformation, and seismicity? 3) Are
there transient events resembling slow-slip events on the subduction interface?
How do these transient events relate to the interface geometry and coupling
distribution? The new data are allowing an assessment of plate boundary
characteristics on a much more spatially and temporally dense scale than
currently possible, leading to more detailed and realistic models of the
behavior of the Yakutat slab interface and its influence of the region's
tectonics.