* 1615037
* RUI: Strongly Nonlinear Dynamics of Lattice Networks: From Analysis to Application
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Christopher Chong, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 98,600.00

This project aims to develop analytical, computational, and experimental tools
for the study of a particular class of lattice networks. Of particular interest
in this research are the dynamics of localization and time-periodicity, which
can be exploited for a variety of applications including vibration energy
harvesting. Through the geometry of the network and the nonlinear nature of the
connecting elements, extremely rich dynamics can be observed and verified by
experimental data provided by collaborations with engineering laboratories. The
results could be used to develop broadband resonators that are powered through
ambient vibrations, with the goal of significantly reducing battery usage.

The models under study in this project have the form of a two-dimensional
nonlinear coupled oscillator, where the coupling is described by a power-law.
Closed-form analytical expressions for solutions of these equations are not
available, and thus the theoretical study of the system will concern analytical
approximations and numerical computation. Multiscale methods will be used to
derive modulation equations to describe spatially localized and time-periodic
solutions, and error bounds for these approximations will be explored. In
parametric regions where the derived analytical approximations are not valid,
numerical computations will be employed. Three case examples are considered for
experimental realizations: granular crystals, repelling magnets, and origami
unit cells. An energy harvesting concept based on a magnetic lattice network
will be designed, optimized, implemented, and benchmarked.