* 1615309
* SBIR Phase I:  A scale-out data transfer solution for data-intensive enterprises
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Chin Fang, Zettar Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to enable data-intensive engineering and
science organizations to enhance their data transfer speeds without having to
administer premature, costly, and disruptive network upgrades. In addition, the
findings and results from this project shed a much needed light to the members
of data-intensive communities (both commercial and research) regarding the
importance of treating data movement as the 4th critical IT dimension, besides
the traditional three: storage, compute, and networking. Furthermore, the
project's outcome will show that the 4th-dimension must be defined by balanced
interactions of the first three to achieve a desired data transfer speed - an
important and elusive concept to grasp, but critical in using high-speed digital
communications cost-effectively. Compared to the current state-of-the-art, the
product resulting from this project will be far more scalable, space and energy
efficient, cost-effective, and easy to deploy and use. Finally, the product will
demonstrate that it can meet the data transfer needs of major scientific and
commercial endeavors of this decade. This should foster accelerated progress in
science and engineering, and thus also the overall national economic
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the need in modern distributed data-intensive
engineering and science operations for a 4th IT dimension - data movement -
besides storage, compute, and networking. To match the exponential data-growth
trend, the product resulting from this project will provide high-performance
data transfer and encryption. The design balances and scales in: IOPS,
computation power, and network interfaces. It has a cluster-oriented
architecture, using peer-to-peer technologies to ease deployment, operation, and
usage. Two patent-pending algorithms help tackle data sets containing a mix of
small files and very large files, and provide insensitivity to network latency.
Its unique optimizations enable effective use of flash storage. The project will
develop a simple, effective, and scale-out capable storage tiering software, a
scale-out high-speed data encryption approach, and a scale-out approach for
implementing more efficient storage I/O intensive applications. It is
anticipated that data rates between two existing Data Transfer Nodes (DTNs)
front ending parallel data file systems will be comparable with those from two
commonly used high performance data transfer applications. With two four-node
clusters, the product is anticipated to achieve 155Gbps memory-to-memory over a
16x10Gbps aggregated link and 70Gbps file-to-file with encryption over a 5000
mile 100Gbps link.