* 1615489
* CIF: Small: Low-Dimensional Structure Learning for Tensor Data with Applications to Neuroimaging
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Mark Iwen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Advances in information technology are making it possible to collect
increasingly massive amounts of multidimensional, multi-modal data across a
diverse range of disciplines including bioinformatics, neuroscience, and the
social sciences. One particular area where such multidimensional, multi-modal,
and often nonlinear data is collected is neuroscience, in particular human brain
connectomics. Connectomics aims to offer a comprehensive framework to describe
neuronal connectivity by constructing networks from multi-modal and multi-
subject, as well as both temporal and spatial, data. These high dimensional
datasets pose a challenge to the signal processing community to develop data
reduction methods that can exploit their rich structure in order to extract
meaningful summarizations. Over the past several decades a tremendous amount of
work has focused on the analysis and compression of high dimensional point-cloud
datasets via low-dimensional manifold and subspace techniques. Although the
research on low-dimensional structure learning from vector-type data is well
developed, the direct application of these methods to higher order data poses
significant challenges, including both increased computational complexity, and
their inability to capture the couplings across different modes. This research
addresses these problems through a tensor-based framework for data reduction and
low-dimensional structure learning with a particular focus on reducing dynamic
functional connectivity networks (dFCNs) into physiologically meaningful network
components.

The investigators develop two complementary approaches to address this high
order data reduction problem: 1) Robust low-rank+sparse linear structure
learning algorithms for tensors; 2) Multi-scale, locally linear adaptive tensor
decomposition algorithms for compressing and learning structure from tensor
data. Finally, this tensor based framework is applied to dFCNs constructed from
electroencephalogram (EEG) data to assess well-known salience and control
functional networks associated with affective regulation and cognitive control.