* 1615837
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Personalized Internet Services to Combat Online Trolling
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,234.00

Today, almost every browsing click that users make is collected by numerous
trackers associated with a variety of online services (e.g., advertising
networks, online social networks, e-commerce platforms). Users have often
expressed concern about the lack of privacy and control over their personal
data. Nonetheless, despite a substantial effort to expose and control this
prevalent behavior, the reality is that users keep accepting updated online
privacy policies, which in turn grant the gathering of more personal data. This
project explores re-using this extensive tracking infrastructure for the
benefits of both the users themselves and web services, with a goal of
preventing online trolling (scenarios in which various groups deploy tactics to
influence public opinion on the Internet, by leaving biased, false, misleading,
and inauthentic comments, and then artificially amplifying their ratings). The
project aims to show how the tracking infrastructure can be re-used as a user
"fingerprint", allowing a lightweight and privacy-preserving form of
identification for third-party web sites.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: In more detail, the project explores whether it is possible to utilize
the ubiquitous online tracking of users for the direct benefit of the users
themselves. Despite the fact that almost every browser click made over the last
decade has been monitored by numerous online trackers, users often have a hard
time proving their identity and uniqueness while using the Internet. On the
other hand, many systems that rely upon open membership are often targets of
online trolling, often via multiple-identity (Sybil) attacks. Organized trolling
has become a serious problem in today's Internet; some argue that it can have a
profound impact on the society. The project is developing a system that would
take direct advantage of the work online trackers do to record and interpret
users' behavior. The key idea is to use the readily-available personalized
content---generated by online trackers in real-time---as a means to verify an
online user's uniqueness in a seamless and privacy-preserving manner. This
personalized content, which would be collected by the users, stripped of
identifying content, and uploaded, would be used to construct a multi-tracker
vector representation of the user. The vector representation would then serve as
a unique "fingerprint" of each user, making it difficult for attackers to appear
as if they were many distinct users, thereby mitigating many trolling
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project has the capacity to
make a significant impact by empowering the Internet community to combat the
online trolling problem. The system under development will not only help
numerous online communities regain trolling-free environments, but also re-use
the extensive tracking infrastructure that already exists to provide tangible
benefits for both end users and web sites. The PIs plan to design and
disseminate personalization-based counter-trolling system as open-source
software, which will enable effective trolling detection and counter-trolling
methods and systems. Education is an integral part of the project, and the PIs
plan to leverage existing institutional and special programs to recruit students
from underrepresented groups into the project.