* 1615845
* AF: Small: Geometric Clustering and Covering: New Directions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Kasturi Varadarajan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 07/31/2022
* USD 399,732.00

Clustering, which collects nearby data together in groups, is a key operation in
data analysis, but one whose computation is surprisingly difficult due to the
many choices for dividing data into groups. &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
some fundamental algorithmic problems and new directions in the areas of
geometric clustering and covering. Progress on the problems considered in this
project will not only enhance knowledge in the PI's core research field, and
that of his graduate students, but also yield new techniques, ideas, and points
of view that will be useful beyond the core area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
avenue for such impact is the training of graduate students who will work on
this project. By the time they successfully complete their dissertations, these
students develop a deep understanding of how technical knowledge may (or may
not) influence real world problem solving, an appreciation for the difficulty of
obtaining reliable new knowledge, and a sense of the excitement of the process
of discovery. This experience informs their work, whether they end up in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In geometric clustering,
the goal is to partition data, viewed as a set of points, into groups based on
similarity. Geometric clustering can help infer useful patterns from data, but
can also help in planning infrastructure installation, such as base station
placement in a cellular network. In geometric covering, we wish to cover a set
of points by the smallest possible number of a given set of objects; such
problems arise in the context of sensor networks. The clustering and covering
problems studied in this project are viewed as optimization problems. These
problems are typically NP-complete, which essentially means that it is not
possible to solve them exactly using an algorithm with guaranteed efficiency.
The PI will examine efficient algorithms that solve the problems approximately,
and study the best approximation that can be provably guaranteed. The PI expects
that the project will contribute exciting new ideas and techniques at the
intersection of the fields of Approximation Algorithms and Computational
Geometry.