* 1615909
* Pattern Formation and Spatiotemporal Complex Dynamics in Extended Anisotropic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gerhard Dangelmayr, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 409,978.00

This project studies the mathematics behind the intriguing features of patterns
observed in examples such as nematic liquid crystals, nanostructures imprinted
on surfaces through ion-beam erosion, the propagation of chemical waves in
catalytic surface reactions, epitaxial growth, and ordered patterns in the
solidification from a melt. These patterns are formed through a phenomenon
described as anisotropic media being driven out of equilibrium through external
forces and have motivated a wide range of experimental studies to find the
physical mechanisms generating them. The feedback from the research findings on
electroconvection in nematic liquid crystals will guide researchers of an
experimental liquid crystal group at Kent State University in their experiments
and will advance the understanding of pattern formation in complex fluids and
their technological applications. Understanding the spatiotemporal changes in
the snow surface - the interface between the atmosphere and the Earth - can
improve the knowledge of hydrologic processes within the snowpack and their
impact on melt dynamics as well as on the climatology of the environment.
Roughness methods developed in the project will be useful for earth scientists,
especially those working in the realm of climate studies, in visualizing
variables over space and time. Mapping and interpretation of dynamic physical
surfaces, such as the snow surface, will help inform sampling and monitoring
strategies, including adequate ground-truthing of remotely sensed
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a
comprehensive and systematic theoretical approach, through the study of
amplitude and phase equations, for the analysis of specific mechanisms and
features of the formation and dynamics of complex spatiotemporal patterns in
anisotropic systems. Key questions to be addressed are the role of symmetry
breaking of a chaotic attractor in the creation of spatiotemporal chaos and the
routes to it and the role of nonlinear interactions of waves in the creation of
spatiotemporal complexity and which anisotropies are involved in their
occurrence. The novelty of this research lies in a combination of qualitative
theoretical predictions resulting from a bifurcation analysis of amplitude and
phase equations with traditional quantitative diagnostic methods used to study
complex dynamics. Moreover, new and innovative tools such as topological data
analysis and roughness measures are proposed for the quantitative
characterization of anisotropic patterns. The results will provide a firm
foundation for the intuition required to make sense of physical experiments and
may suggest interesting further questions to test experimentally.