* 1615555
* Accurate cosmology from the Dark Energy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Gary Bernstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2020
* USD 317,205.00

Dark matter and dark energy cannot be directly observed with any telescope, but
are of great interest because they make up 96% of the mass-energy in the
Universe. Neither dark matter nor dark energy is fully predicted or described by
any current physical theory. The Dark Energy Survey (DES), being conducted on
the 4-meter Blanco telescope in Chile, is designed to measure the properties of
these dark components to high precision, and determine whether General
Relativity is the correct theory of gravity on large scales. This project will
focus on solving three problems that the DES faces: uniformly calibrating the
100,000 galaxy images obtained by the survey (providing an improvement of 10x);
providing accurate redshifts (based on images only, not spectroscopy); and
measuring the subtle distortions of the shapes of galaxies to high accuracy to
determine the distribution of dark matter. This work will then enhance the
quality of the DES observations so that scientists can better measure the
properties of dark matter and energy, as well as those of the other astronomical
objects being observed.

Besides these scientific objectives, the project will work with undergraduates
(from a variety of educational backgrounds) to develop STEM capabilities. In
addition, this program includes a new partnership with the Franklin Institute
for outreach to community-based organizations and middle-school teachers in
Philadelphia through Franklin's "City Skies" traveling astronomy program and
hosted workshops for teachers. City Skies has a focus on historically
underserved inner-city neighborhoods. The City Skies project targets development
of curricular materials and presentations on astronomical topics. Support from
the current project will allow the PI to extend work with Franklin.

This project clearly relates to NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science. In addition, the "Broader Impact" portion of the project does this, and
advances the national health, prosperity and welfare by helping to develop
interest in, and educating, STEM activities among the next generation of diverse
individuals.



DES is collaborative international effort of more than 200 scientists to image
one quarter of the Southern sky in 5 colors using a DOE-funded 500 Mpixel camera
installed on the NSF-funded Blanco 4-meter telescope on Cerro Tololo, Chile. How
can these images measure things that neither emit nor absorb light? First, the
dark matter's gravity bends the light emitted by the 5% of the Universe that is
visible, causing subtle distortions in the shapes of visible objects. The final
DES data will use the "weak gravitational lensing" (WL) signature on the shapes
of 200 million galaxies to measure the clustering of dark matter to ~1%
accuracy. A second gravitational signature of dark matter and energy is that
they drive the motions of the visible galaxies, so that the statistics of their
positions and redshifts (distances) constrain the dark components; this is
especially powerful in combination with the WL information. This proposal
focuses on solving three of the most difficult problems that DES faces in
reaching its full potential for these measurements. The first challenge is
uniform calibration of 100,000 different images taken over 5 years: it will be
improved from the current 1% state of the art to near the 0.1% level that was
achieved for single nights of the survey using previous NSF support. A second
challenge is to measure the WL signature to part-per-thousand accuracy: the
proposers have developed the first practical algorithm to attain this accuracy
on simulated data, and propose to improve it and apply to the DES images. The
third difficult part of the survey is assigning accurate galaxy redshifts
without spectroscopic observations of each source. It is proposed to integrate
the photometric redshift estimation and lensing measurement into a single
process that rigorously treats noise and selection effects to produce a single
joint redshift/lensing posterior probability. This in turn enables a new
technique for analyzing DES data by creating an ensemble of maps of dark matter
density that are consistent with all of the observed positions, shapes, and
colors of the galaxies.