* 1615393
* Exploring the Diversity of Plant RNA Editosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2019
* USD 800,000.00

Plants have evolved an RNA editing mechanism to prevent the detrimental effects
of mutations that have occurred in genes located in chloroplast and
mitochondria, which are subcellular organelles necessary for photosynthesis and
respiration. Recent studies indicate that there are diverse molecular machines,
RNA editosomes,that carry out this important process. Not every RNA editing
apparatus contains the same proteins. In order to understand how the RNA editing
mechanism works, the protein composition of RNA editosomes will be further
characterized using genetic and biochemical methods. By identifying all of the
proteins needed for changing the RNA sequence, editing could be used in the
future for deliberate modification of the RNA product and protein produced from
a gene. Such technology could benefit the biotechnology industry and society
through application in many different fields. The project will provide training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, including students
participating in NSF REU program that involves a high proportion of
underrepresented minorities and women from other colleges. In addition to
scientific approaches, trainees will be mentored in both oral and written
presentation of their experimental data. Both the PI and coPI will continue to
perform administrative service for the scientific community. The co-PI will
continue her efforts to promote participation of women in STEM fields. The PI
will distribute a new multiplexed mass spectrometric protocol that can be used
for individuals studying RNA editing in any organism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent progress has resulted in much increased knowledge
of the composition of the plant RNA editing apparatus, but the precise protein
composition of any particular editosome has not been identified. In addition to
a PPR protein, an editosome contains one or more members of three additional
protein families, the RIP, ORRM, and OZ families and perhaps additional
proteins. Proposed experiments will lead to detailed characterization of
particular types of RNA editosomes. Functional epitope-tagged versions of OZ1
and a PPR protein will be used for affinity purification to determine the
proteins comprising editosomes that contain either OZ1 or the PPR protein. Genes
encoding candidate proteins identified by mass spectrometry analysis will be
subjected to genetic analysis to determine whether they are required for
chloroplast RNA editing. The feasibility of transfer of an editing event to a
heterologous system will be explored. The information that will be gained is
essential for exploiting the phenomenon of RNA editing for genetic engineering
at the post-transcriptional level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.