* 1615342
* Radio telescope computer software for detecting exotic astronomical sources that change with time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Steven Ellingson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,752.00

"Fast Radio Bursts" (FRBs) are linked to exotic astronomical objects in distant
galaxies that produce a sudden and very dramatic burst of radio waves. The burst
lasts a fraction of a second. Yet modern radio telescopes like the Green Bank
Telescope (GBT) in West Virginia can detect these remarkable events - if they
are equipped with sensitive equipment and sophisticated computer programs to
analyze the data. A collaboration of scientists and students (both graduate and
undergraduate) from the University of West Virginia and Virginia Tech plan to
develop these programs for the GBT. Astronomers do not yet know what produces
FRBs. They could be the result of colliding stars, or perhaps black holes
swallowing neighboring stars. Either way, telescopes like the GBT should lead
astronomers much closer to an answer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detection of
FRBs, believed to be extra-galactic in origin, and other potentially exotic
radio transits, has in recent years been enabled by a revolution in radio
instrumentation and computing power. The latter has lead to the development of
sophisticated signal processing algorithms. The principal investigator, working
with her graduate and undergraduate students and a collaborator at Virginia
Tech., aims to develop such algorithms with a view to deploying them on the GBT
and detecting radio transients in real time. The techniques will be prototyped
on radio receivers already in place and in operation at the GBT; the software
will run in parallel with existing data processing systems. The algorithms will
enable sensitive, wide-field surveys of pulsars and other radio transients, in
additions to the FRBs mentioned above. The algorithms and source code will be
made freely available to the astronomical community once commissioned on the
GBT. The PI also aims to develop a "Statistical Signal Processing for Sensor
Arrays" undergraduate course to help make the technology more accessible to a
wider audience and to educate the next generation of scientists and engineers.