* 1615891
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Teleoperation with Passive, Transparent Force Feedback for MR-Guided Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Bruce Daniel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 328,000.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used diagnostic tool that provides
physicians with a remarkable extension to their natural vision, offering
unparalleled high-definition visuals which enable soft tissue pathophysiology
diagnosis, lesion delineation, and therapy monitoring without ionizing
radiation. Increasingly, physicians would like to use MRI not only for diagnosis
but also for guided procedures like biopsy or tumor ablation, for greater
accuracy. However, the MR bore's geometry compels the physician to stand outside
and transmit motions and forces remotely to tools operating on the patient
within. So although MR provides superior imaging, the sense of touch is absent.
To overcome this deficiency and achieve telepresence, physicians require a high-
fidelity force-reflecting teleoperation system. Added challenges are imposed by
MR's intense magnetic field; ferromagnetic materials and electronics with
current flow must be avoided, and even non-ferrous metals can produce imaging
artifacts, which constrains the choice of actuators, transmissions, and sensors.
The PIs' goal in this project is to empower physicians to operate as if they
were directly in contact with their patients, by integrating real-time 3D tissue
imaging with kinesthetic and force feedback for physical interactions. Project
outcomes have the potential to directly affect a large population, because the
high-fidelity force transmission developed here will be applicable to other
image-guided interventions such as drug delivery and ultrasound. The hybrid
hydrostatic transmission will be applicable to (and indeed was initially
conceived for) interactive human-safe robots; advances made in adapting it to
MR-guided interventions will allow maturation of the technology and reductions
in size and cost that will help push it into additional fields like medical
robotics and bilateral teleoperation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
represents a collaboration among experts in robotics, haptics and interventional
radiology. The work will build upon and extend a novel bilateral teleoperator
based on hydrostatic and pneumatic elements with rolling diaphragm actuators
that provides a unique combination of low inertia, passivity, high stiffness and
transparency, and negligible friction and backlash, and which is ideally suited
to provide kinesthetic and force feedback between a physician outside the MR
bore and tools operating on a patient within, allowing physicians to feel tissue
property variations, for example. Sensitive, dexterous tasks will be realizable
with a passive teleoperator if it is sufficiently stiff and light. MR-guided
interventions are a compelling application for the proposed hybrid transmission
because of MR's particular constraints, which as noted above rule out many other
technologies. A key question this research addresses is how to scale the
promising performance of single-axis prototypes to a complex multi-axis system
able to perform MR-guided procedures. The PIs will combine kinematic and dynamic
analyses with user tests for ergonomics to ensure that it supports intuitive
motions and provides transparent feedback while fitting inside the MR bore's
constrained space. They will integrate the teleoperated system's motions with MR
images via compatible sensors and imaging fiducials to provide visual feedback
and prevent accidental intrusion into undesirable regions while the physician
focuses on tool tip interactions. Together, the novel force-reflecting
transmission, kinematic mechanism, sensors, and software constitute a cyber-
human system with unprecedented capabilities. This telepresence system will be
an ideal platform to expand scientific understanding of the impact that
transmission transparency provides for MR-guided interventions.