* 1615084
* Signatures of Shocks and Particle Acceleration from Novae in our Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Brian Metzger, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2020
* USD 342,679.00

1. A nova eruption is a dramatic increase in energy output caused by runaway
thermonuclear burning of hydrogen on the surface of a white dwarf star.
Ordinarily, a white dwarf (a star with the mass of our Sun crammed into a volume
about the size of the Earth) contains little or no hydrogen. If it has an
ordinary star as a companion, however, a white dwarf can sometimes accumulate
hydrogen from the companion onto its surface. As little as a few ten-thousandths
of the mass of our Sun can be enough to trigger the thermonuclear "burning" of
this hydrogen fuel. Runaway hydrogen burning produces the observed nova outburst
and violently ejects mass from the white dwarf. Recent spacecraft observations
have revealed gamma-ray emission during nova outbursts. These observations
demonstrate that hydrodynamic shocks occur in novae. This research aims to use
computer simulations to study the origin, appearance, and implications of these
shocks. The work will greatly improve the understanding of emission at many
different wavelengths during nova outbursts. It will also improve scientists?
understanding of the acceleration of ions and electrons to extremely high
energies. The Intellectual Merit of the work comes from such advances. The
involvement of undergraduate students in the research and public outreach
through movies and an interactive website are good Broader Impacts of the
research.

2. Novae are sudden outbursts of energy powered by runaway thermonuclear burning
on the surface of a white dwarf that has accreted matter from a stellar
companion. The recent discovery of GeV gamma rays emitted during nova outbursts
provides a striking indicator that hydrodynamic shocks occur in these systems.
This project will employ hydrodynamic calculations to study the origin,
appearance, and implications of shocks in novae. The work will also investigate
the efficiency of shock acceleration of electrons and ions as well as magnetic-
field amplification at the shock. In addition, the combination of numerical
simulations and multi-wavelength modelling will be used to constrain various
shock parameters. The Intellectual Merit of the research derives from improved
understanding of emission from novae and of a mechanism of particle acceleration
in astrophysics. The results will also inform both radio and optical surveys for
transient phenomena. The Broader Impacts of the work will involve not only
research opportunities for undergraduates but also public outreach through an
interactive website, color movies, and a workshop for high school teachers.