* 1615834
* SHF: Small: Program Analysis-based Makeover for HPC Application Resilience
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Chao Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

HPC resilience in the presence of increased system failures is a major technical
hurdle for realizing the vision of the US National Research Council for
conducting exascale science. Existing techniques, based primarily on checkpoint
and replay, are no longer effective for emerging systems with orders-of-
magnitude more hardware and software components. This project aims to overcome
the main limitation of existing techniques: the detection and mitigation of
silent errors by developing and leveraging automated software analysis and
synthesis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The new methods under development can compile a
tunable degree of resilience into the application software code, and have
potential to transform the development of future generations of HPC
applications. By treating the software code as white-boxes, as opposed to black-
boxes, these new methods can provide significantly more economical solutions to
the HPC resilience problem compared to existing techniques. The project will
help realize the US NRC's vision of conducting exascale science, which is
crucial for addressing the nation?s urgent needs in frontiers such as new
energy, health care, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
automated program analysis techniques for identifying invariants from software
code, and leveraging these invariants to detect and mitigate silent errors at
run time. By treating the application software code as white-boxes, it seeks to
generate invariants that capture the expected program behavior. By leveraging
the invariants as correctness conditions, it overcomes the major hurdle in
detecting silent errors, which is the lack of visible symptoms. In addition to
detecting errors, the invariants are also used by runtime monitors to
intelligently perturb the execution order or memory state to proactively avoid
failures at run time. When the rollback recovery becomes inevitable, the
invariants are used as guidance to minimize the re-execution
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods and software tools are evaluated on
real applications from the research community as well as sources such as SciDAC.