* 1615553
* High-Redshift Black Hole Mass Measurements with Multi-Object Reverberation Mapping
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Bradley Peterson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2021
* USD 336,125.00

Quasi-stellar objects (QSOs) are the cores of distant galaxies whose extreme
activity is powered by black holes that may be billions of times the mass of our
Sun. The team will study how the optical emission from distant QSOs varies over
time. If a QSO's light emission brightens quickly, the surrounding gas will
brighten after a time delay that depends on its distance from the black hole.
This is the basis of reverberation mapping. The team will measure the time
delays for the gas to brighten in a number of QSOs. By modeling the time delay
for each QSO, the team will determine the mass of its black hole and the
structure of the surrounding gas. They will also develop shortcuts for
estimating black hole masses for distant QSOs. Senior team members will train
junior members. The public will be informed about the fascinating subject of
massive black holes through public talks, social media, and planetarium show
content. The team will complete a multi-year campaign of photometric and
spectroscopic monitoring of nearly 800 high-redshift QSOs. Their goals are to
(1) use reverberation mapping to measure the black hole masses of the QSOs; (2)
study the structure of the broad emission-line regions of the QSOs; and (3)
develop secondary ways of estimating black hole masses for the population of
QSOs at high redshift.