* 1615814
* Probing the Epoch of Reionization with the Brightest High-Redshift Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* George Becker, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 379,646.00

An important period in the early history of the universe is the so-called "epoch
of reionization". This is a period a few hundred million years after the Big
Bang during which all of the atomic Hydrogen gas in the universe was ionized by
newly formed massive stars. These were the first stars to form in the universe.
Understanding this early period is one of the main goals of astrophysics. This
is because properties of the unverse (and the objects causing the ionization)
carry implications for models and simulations of how galaxies form and the
physics of the matter being ionized (the intergalactic medium or IGM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will shed new light on reionization and high-
redshift galaxies by observing the IGM after the epoch of reionization. At these
times, the IGM contains a large amount of information on when and how
reionization occurred. Fortunately, in the past year a set of "ultra-bright"
quasars have been discovered that are much brighter than previously known
quasars at similar distances. The PI and his team will make entirely new or
greatly improved measurements of three aspects of the post-reionization IGM: (i)
the smoothing of baryons in the IGM due to heating during reionization, (ii) the
thermal changes of the IGM due to cool-down following reionization, and (iii)
the most sensitive study to date of the enrichment of elements heavier than
helium of gas in galaxies from this period. This latter measurement will aid in
the understanding of early-period star formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education
efforts supported by this project will reach young children in predominantly
Hispanic, low-income communities. The PI and graduate student funded by this
grant will help to develop, manage, and perform astronomy-themed workshops
designed to promote STEM education in kindergarten, first, and second-grade
students. The workshops will address California's Common Core State Standards
for science, and target underserved communities in Riverside and surrounding
areas. Workshop themes will include Touching the Universe, The Spiral Universe,
Constellations Everywhere, and Smells of the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project clearly relates to NSF's mission to promote the progress
of science. In addition, the "Broader Impact" portion of the project does this,
and advances the national health, prosperity and welfare by helping to develop
interest in, and educating, STEM activities among the next generation of diverse
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the epoch of
reionization remains one of the forefront goals of astrophysics. Along with
being the last global phase change of the Universe, reionization carries key
implications for models of galaxy formation and the physics of the intergalactic
medium (IGM). Over the past several years, notable advances have been made
through observations of high-redshift galaxies, quasars, the cosmic microwave
background, and other probes. Currently, however, the combined constraints on
when reionization occurred remain relatively weak, with the bulk of observations
being consistent with reionization ending either relatively late (z~6-7) or
significantly earlier (z~8-9).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by these new
objects, the PI and his team will make entirely new or greatly improved
measurements of three aspects of the post-reionization IGM and galaxy-IGM
interface: (i) Measuring the Jeans smoothing of the IGM at z~5 will reveal how
much energy has been injected at higher redshifts via photo-heating, and hence
when reionization occurred (more total heating = earlier reionization). This
measurement will constrain the characteristic redshift of reionization to within
Deltazreion=+/-0.7, or a factor of two better than current CMB constraints. (ii)
Measuring the temperature of the IGM out to the highest redshifts ever (z=5.7)
will determine whether the IGM is still warm at that epoch from having recently
been reionized. Alternatively, an IGM that has already cooled by z~5.5 will
imply that reionization largely occurred at z&gt;7.5. (iii) Finally, the survey
for CIV at z~5 will be sensitive to metals down to the cosmic mean density,
probing a factor of six more volume than any other direct survey at any
redshift. This will reveal, for the first time, the full extent to which
reionization-era galaxies enriched their surroundings via galactic winds.
Searching for weak O I systems at z~6 also will establish whether the drop in C
IV with redshift at z&gt;5 is due to a decline in metallicity or evolution of
the UV background.