* 1615896
* Collaborative Research: Telomerase Regulation in Deep Branching Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Bibo Li, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,950.00

This project will examine telomerase function in the early lineage of eukaryotic
evolution. Telomerase is an enzyme that is responsible for making telomeres,
structures that protect the ends of all eukaryotic chromosomes, reminiscent of
the hard ends of shoelaces. The genetic mechanism of telomere replication by
telomerase is better studied in yeast and mammalian cells; far from each other
as those two organisms are, they in fact represent relatively recent branches of
eukaryotic phylogeny. In contrast, we study an ancient, deep branching lineage
of eukaryotes, kinetoplastid protists. Our organism of choice, Trypanosoma
brucei, has telomerase with unique structural and functional properties, and we
will learn how this enzyme works. The project will encourage full participation
from women and underrepresented minorities in science. Apart from training
graduate and postdoctoral trainees, this project will also implement a three-
year undergraduate program (BIOKEYS) in both PIs? laboratories; the major goal
of this program will be to teach undergraduate researchers to value
interdisciplinary sciences early in their research careers. In addition to
gaining experience from designing experiments and problem solving using high-end
technologies, students will be teaching and learning from each other as part of
a research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein enzyme,
provides the major means for elongation of chromosome ends (telomeres), thus
counteracting the loss of linear DNA ends in each cell cycle due to incomplete
DNA replication by conventional DNA polymerases. Telomerase has two core
components, the Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase (TERT) that catalyzes telomere
elongation, and the telomerase RNA (TER), which provides a template for telomere
DNA synthesis. The mechanisms of telomere elongation by telomerase are poorly
understood in Trypanosoma brucei, a deep branching Kinetoplastid. Therefore,
this project dissects structural, biochemical and genetic features of telomerase
RNA in T. brucei to understand the mechanism of telomerase regulation in early
eukaryotic species. The recent discovery of the T. brucei TER reveals novel
features exclusive to deep branching eukaryotes, suggesting mechanistic
differences in the process of telomere synthesis between T. brucei and higher
eukaryotic organisms. Therefore, this project: (i) investigates telomerase RNA
structure at a single nucleotide resolution using NMR and SHAPE chemistry, (ii)
defines key TERT contact sites on TER that are essential for telomerase function
in T. brucei using HITS-CLIP technology, and (iii) establishes the functional
significance of TR domains by genetic manipulations and telomerase functional
assays. Overall, this research will allow significant advances in understanding
the mechanistic details of telomerase evolution in protists.