* 1615762
* Frontier Probability Days Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Edward Waymire, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the research conference "Frontier
Probability Days" held at The University of Utah, May 9 - 11, 2016. The meeting
brings together leading regional and national researchers, graduate students,
and other scientists interested in probability theory and its applications, to
stimulate research activity in this area and foster new interdisciplinary
collaborations. A special feature of the conference is its attention to
"applications of probability." Part of the intent of the meeting is to help
broaden participation with other fields, a source of inspiration for both more
applied and theoretical aspects of probability research. Much of the support in
this award is allocated to travel support for students and early-career
researchers, for whom the conference represents an excellent opportunity to stay
informed of recent research progress and to initiate research collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting is the fifth in a series that meets
approximately every two years in the Intermountain West of the United States.
The format consists of seven plenary talks and several shorter presentations.
The plenary speakers represent a spectrum of leading work in both theoretical
and applied probability. Roughly fifty non-local participants are expected to
participate in the conference. Topics of interest include random matrices,
disordered and interacting systems, stochastic analysis, and probabilistic
applications to biology and dynamical systems. More details can be found at the
conference web site:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.utah.edu/~firas/FPD16/