* 1615616
* Inverse Problems for the Wave Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Rakesh Rakesh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 151,542.00

Many measurements in science, engineering, medicine, and business call for
determining properties of the interior of an object without physical probing or
other destructive testing. Areas in which such noninvasive testing plays a major
role range from medical imaging to oil and gas prospecting. In these situations,
objects are probed by noninvasive methods utilizing sound waves, electromagnetic
radiation, electrical currents, or other means. The expectation is that the
interior of the object will affect the waves or currents, and the body response
will provide a window into its properties so that one can construct an image of
the interior of the object. The goal of this research project is to study the
mathematics behind such imaging techniques and advance the rigorous foundations
on which this field is based. Results have the potential for important advances
in imaging technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will encompass a study
of three inverse problems for hyperbolic partial differential equations. The
first two problems are associated with a hyperbolic operator in three space (and
one time) dimensions, with the operator consisting of the wave operator plus a
compactly-supported potential, where the potential is supported, say, in a ball
of radius one. For the inverse back-scattering problem, one considers the
solution of the hyperbolic initial value problem corresponding to a point source
located on the unit sphere. The goal is the recovery of the potential from the
back-scattering data consisting of the value of the solution measured at the
source location, for all time. To do this, a study of the injectivity of the map
from the potential to the backscattering data will be performed. For the second
problem, one considers the solution of the hyperbolic initial value problem with
the source placed at the origin, and the goal is the determination of the
potential from the trace of the solution on the unit sphere, for all time. For
the third problem, one considers the solution of the standard wave equation with
zero initial position function and arbitrary initial velocity function. The goal
of this part of the project is to recover the velocity function from the trace
of the solution on the light cone, the cone where time equals the magnitude of
the position.