* 1615938
* Mechanistic analysis of microtubule catastrophe
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Luke Rice, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2020
* USD 972,977.00

This project seeks to discover, in one model system, how collective dynamic
behaviors of parts of living cells are determined by the structural and
biochemical properties of the individual components. Microtubules will be used
as the model system for this research. Microtubules are polymers made from a
protein called &amp;#945;&amp;#946;-tubulin, and they play essential roles in
organizing the inside of the cell and in partitioning the genetic material
during cell division. By integrating diverse approaches this research will
decipher and quantify the connections between the underlying structural and
biochemical properties of individual &amp;#945;&amp;#946;-tubulin proteins and
the complex polymerization dynamics that emerges from their collective
interactions. In addition to advancing the understanding of a process of
fundamental importance to cell biology, the project emphasizes educational
impact. Graduate students working on the project will receive interdisciplinary
training. An outreach partnership with a local elementary school will expose
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to the fun of doing
science while providing them and their teachers with access to high-tech but
relatively inexpensive digital microscopes to facilitate inquiry-based learning
and discovery. These outreach activities will also provide new opportunities for
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other members of the UT
Southwestern community to become involved in science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific problem to be studied is
microtubule catastrophe, the sporadic switch from microtubule growing to
microtubule shrinking. The goal is to provide a convincing and testable
molecular explanation for experimental measurements of catastrophe, specifically
how frequently catastrophe occurs as a function of the concentration of the
polymerizing &amp;#945;&amp;#946;-tubulin subunits. The research will combine a
variety of approaches including predictive computational simulations, use of
mechanism-specific site-directed mutants of &amp;#945;&amp;#946;-tubulin, and in
vitro biochemistry and reconstitution. Using this set of tools, we will (i)
incorporate three different biochemical mechanisms into a computational model
for microtubule dynamics and determine how each mechanism affects prediction of
catastrophe; (ii) perform experimental tests for neighbor coupling in the
microtubule lattice, something that has been hypothesized to occur but that has
not been previously testable; and (iii) measure how mutations to an interacting
triad of residues that is conserved in &amp;#945;- and &amp;#946;-tubulin affect
microtubule polymerization dynamics and the conformation(s) of
&amp;#945;&amp;#946;-tubulin inside and outside the microtubule. Together, these
approaches will address outstanding questions about the fundamental mechanisms
of microtubule dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Molecular Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function clusters in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.