* 1615838
* An Improved Accounting: Searching for Faint Dwarf Galaxies Beyond the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christopher Kochanek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2020
* USD 384,890.00

Faint dwarf galaxies are the building blocks of large galaxies, and are
hypothesized to be the most abundant galaxies in the Universe. Because of their
low mass (thus, low gravitational binding energies), they are the most
susceptible to any process that removes or prevents gas from condensing to form
stars. However, because they are so dim, the only well-studied sample of faint
dwarfs consists of those in the Local Group of Galaxies that includes our own
Milky Way galaxy. This project expects to answer some of the open questions
about faint dwarf galaxies using deep imaging data: How abundant are they in the
local Universe? What is the relation between the mass of their stars and their
halos of invisible "dark matter"? Which processes terminate star formation in
faint dwarf galaxies? The researchers will also leverage dwarf galaxy searches
as a way to increase student access to STEM careers. They will develop a dwarf-
galaxy-hunting project for gifted high-school students attending the Ohio
Supercomputer Center's annual two-week Summer Institute, and increase access to
the program including through scholarships to be funded via this project. The
team will produce a "This Is How We Science" video blog (vlog). This vlog will
follow the researchers through the milestones and daily tasks associated with
the project, and will also feature a how-to guide for young students interested
in scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take a census of
faint dwarf galaxies in the nearby Universe using existing deep, multi-
wavelength Large Binocular Telescope imaging data from a "failed supernova"
survey led by the Co-PI. The 21 host galaxies span the range of galaxy types
expected to host most of the faint dwarfs in the local Universe. Analytic, semi-
analytic, and numerical tools will be used to infer the relationship between the
stellar masses of the faint dwarfs and their dark-matter halos, and to infer the
faint dwarf number density in the local Universe. These models will also be used
to investigate the relative strength of environmental, internal, and global
quenching of star formation, as a function of host type and faint dwarf stellar
mass.