* 1615266
* RUI:  Multidimensional Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Eun Heui Kim, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 182,700.00

Conservation laws are fundamental laws of nature that govern many phenomena
observed in physics and fluid mechanics, as well as in engineering applications.
The first part of this research project addresses the mathematical modeling and
analysis of systems of multidimensional conservation laws that mostly relate to
problems in dynamics of gases and liquids. It focuses on change of type
(transonic) problems, from supersonic to subsonic, or mixed type problems with
discontinuities, such as vortex waves and shock waves. The commonly known
manifestation of the latter is generation of a sonic boom when an airplane
exceeds the velocity of sound. This project aims at developing systematic
theories to understand the solution structures of these transonic problems in
multidimensional conservation laws. The second part of the project aims to
investigate the feasibility of various wildfire spread models with sparse data,
and develop efficient algorithms to perform simulations for the model problems.
In recent years wildfires have become an all too frequent occurrence, especially
in the Western United States. The research on the wildfire spread models will
enable effective fire-fighting planning, and thus have a direct impact on the
welfare of society. The project will take place at a large, urban, Hispanic-
serving institution and involve undergraduate/master students in simulations of
the proposed problems, preparing them for further work in the design,
implementation, and development of the algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses long standing open problems in multidimensional conservation
laws, such as Mach shock reflections to resolve the von Neumann paradox, slip
line discontinuity propagation to understand vortex waves, and the transonic
flow to study a flow passing an airfoil. The investigator will focus on these
nonlinear transonic problems to gain new physical insights, to develop novel
analytical tools, and to find the correct mathematical framework in which to
pose the nonlinear conservation laws and to perhaps develop efficient numerical
methods. This research aims to provide more efficient and effective methods for
applications, including compressible gas dynamics, thermodynamics, multi-phase
flow, and porous medium flow. A part of this research will be devoted to
modeling wildfire spread with reaction-advection-diffusion systems. The
investigator will investigate the feasibility of various wildfire spread models
with sparse data and develop efficient algorithms to solve the model problems.
Results will be tested on realistic data. Some aspects of this project will be
conducted in collaboration with early career researchers, and in communication
with the USDA Forest Fire Lab in Riverside, CA.