* 1615607
* Development of biophysical principles of vehicle coating
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Sztul, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 988,998.00

All mammalian cells transport proteins via the secretory pathway to sustain
indispensable cell activities such as growth, division and differentiation.
Transport is mediated by small vesicles that bud from one compartment, move
towards the next compartment, and then fuse in order to deliver their cargo.
Vesicular traffic involves a hierarchy of molecular subprocesses linked to one
another in time and space. The goal of this project is to model vesicle traffic
with the long-term goal of capturing the underlying biophysical principles of
this essential cellular process. In addition, this project will support
interdisciplinary synergy by providing cross-discipline training opportunities
and developing workshops and courses to effectively bridge the gap between
biological and physical fields. Importantly, a focus is to advance scientific
equity by actively recruiting and mentoring under-represented groups and by
participating in programs aimed at increasing representation of minorities and
promoting and developing community outreach programs to increase science
awareness and literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
formation of vesicles that transport proteins at the ER-Golgi interface. Such
vesicles form through the recruitment of the coatomer complex (also called COPI
complex) to the nascent bud. The recruitment is mediated by a small GTPase of
the ARF (ADP-ribosylation factor) family. Like all GTPases, ARF acts as a
molecular switch by cycling between an inactive state when it is bound to a GDP,
and an activated state when it is bound to GTP. Only the active form of ARF can
recruit coatomer and initiate vesicle formation. The activation of ARF is
mediated by a nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) called GBF1. Hence, GBF1
activates ARF, which then recruits coatomer to make COPI vesicle. In addition to
coat recruitment, ARF also regulates the sorting of cargo proteins into the
nascent bud, and this process requires that ARF continuously cycle from between
the GDP and the GTP-bound state. To facilitate the GTP to GDP conversion, a
GTPase activating protein (GAP) called ArfGAP1 is required. Hence, the process
of vesicle formation requires, at the very minimum, 4 key components: GBF1, ARF,
coatomer and ArfGAP1. While we have descriptive knowledge of each molecular
subprocess mediated by each component, we lack the knowledge of how these
processes are connected in time and space to result in vesicle formation. We
also lack even basic understanding of the governing biophysical principles.
Thus, the aim of this project is to elucidate this enigma. We propose four
Specific Aims: (1) Determine diffusion type and parameters of the 4 key
components in cytosol; (2) Determine membrane association processes for the 4
key components; (3) Determine volume and surface densities and define binding
constants and reaction rates for the 4 key components; and (4) Develop
mathematical models describing the formation of the ternary coating complex. We
will measure the dynamic properties of the 4 key components by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) under various experimentally induced
conditions to mathematically describe their behavior. The resulting models will
be refined through targeted perturbations of the system. Our models will provide
the framework for future integration of other participants such as cargo
proteins, lipids and a multitude of known regulatory factors that together
ensure specificity to vesicular traffic. We stress that the machineries and the
mechanisms we will model are highly conserved, and that analogous processes
mediate coating of other types of vesicles for transport between different
cellular compartments. Thus, our models will be generally applicable and will
form an obligatory foundation for understanding the biophysical processes that
govern vesicle traffic. A systems understanding of vesicle coating based on the
laws of physics is crucial for future manipulation in vivo and for building
synthetic organelles and cells.&lt;br/&gt;The funding for this project comes
from both the Division of Molecular and Cell Biology and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences