* 1615560
* CNH-L: Multi-Scale Coupled Natural-Human System Dynamics of Nitrogen in Residential Landscapes
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Robert Johnston, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,600,000.00

Runoff from urban and suburban landscapes has long been known to have a
significant effect upon the water quality of streams that receive this
discharge. A particular concern in this area is the export of excess nitrate
from the use of fertilizers on lawns, which can promote algal or microbial
growth in receiving waters. Recent research has indicated that such nitrate
export is less than expected, but the reasons for this are unclear. This project
will investigate both the natural processes that may regulate the retention and
discharge of nitrogen from lawns, as well as the sociological forces that
influence the decisions of homeowners concerning the level of lawn management.
The results will be incorporated into a model that will identify the locations
and episodes of high nitrate in runoff in order to determine how human decisions
and natural processes work together to control these concentrations. The
conclusions will be applicable to a wide variety of urban and suburban locations
across the country and the project will have direct benefit to the management of
the environmental health of Chesapeake Bay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
models multi-scale, coupled-system dynamics of nitrogen in residential
landscapes to determine how biogeochemical, hydrologic, and human behavioral
processes interact to control nitrogen exports from residential ecosystems and
landscapes. These models will coordinate information from household surveys,
existing data, and geographic information system analyses to evaluate
interconnected spatial patterns of lawn management and hydrologic sensitivity.
The overarching hypothesis is that large-scale social and institutional
influences often induce homeowner lawn-care practices contrary to homeowner
preferences, but that significant changes in behavior can be motivated via
systematic incentives. Field studies on plots varying in land use history
(forest versus agriculture), site management (fertilizer input) and age will be
established to test hypotheses about the limits of nitrogen sequestration in
lawn soil profiles. Geographic, biogeochemical, and social-science data will be
analyzed using ecohydrological models to produce spatial analyses of potential
hotspots of lawn fertilizer export at the watershed scale. The effect of
alternative policies and homeowner practices on land management and nitrogen
exports can then be evaluated rigorously.