* 1615146
* Probing the Weak and Strong Nature of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mahbub Khandaker, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 803,739.00

The Idaho State University medium-energy nuclear physics group will conduct
several key measurements at Jefferson Lab using high-energy electrons to
precisely probe the underlying substructure of nucleons, where a nucleon is a
proton or neutron, and they will make fundamental measurements on how force and
matter interrelate. The group seeks to understand the nature of the strong and
weak nuclear forces and how these forces govern the nucleon's constituents
(quarks). Due to these forces, protons and neutrons are arranged slightly
differently inside large nuclei as evidenced by neutrons tending to occupy the
outer layers of heavy nuclei, with the protons being closer to the center. The
group will lead an experiment to probe this outer neutron skin by making use of
telltale signatures of the weak force in scattering electrons off complex
nuclei. This issue further bears upon the structure of neutron stars. The group
will also determine the precise and accurate diameter of the proton, where there
are currently several conflicting measurements. This group has a strong
tradition of bringing undergraduate and graduate students into their research
program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CoPIs in this proposal are all co-
spokespersons on experiments at Jefferson Lab to perform measurements on the
underlying symmetry and structure of the quark and gluon components of the
nucleon, the size of the proton, and the characteristics of the skin or surface
of a nucleus. Dr. Tony Forest is continuing a measurement of the down quark
fractional polarization in the nucleon to test predictions of pQCD via JLab
experiment E12-06-109. Dr. Philip Cole is co-spokesperson on E12-09-003, an
experiment that will measure the change of the dynamical quark mass as well as
the nature of the nucleon structure and internal quark interactions as the
probe's distance scale enters a regime that directly accesses quarks decoupled
from the meson-baryon cloud. Dr. Cole is also a collaborator on the ELSA
experiment BGO-OD, which will anchor N* measurements at the q2=0 point. Dr.
Mahbub Khandaker will conduct a high-precision measurement of the proton charge
radius&amp;#8232;in experiment E12-11-106 to resolve a current discrepancy
between the proton radius extracted from muonic and electronic hydrogen
experiments. Dr. Dustin McNulty is continuing his work using parity violation to
precisely measure the neutron skin of lead and calcium to test nuclear model
predictions of the difference between the radii of protons and neutrons in a
heavy nucleus, E12-12-004.