* 1615281
* GPU-enabled General Relativistic Simulations of Jetted Tidal Disruptions of Stars by Supermassive Black Holes
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Alexander Chekhovskoy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2018
* USD 5,496.00

Tidal disruption events (TDEs), which occur when a star is destroyed by the
gravitational field of a supermassive black hole, are unique probes into the
properties of otherwise-quiescent supermassive black holes (SMBHs). About 30 of
them have been observed so far and this number is steadily increasing, aided
with surveys and new instruments coming online. Despite this wealth of
observational knowledge, our understanding of the TDE physics, which will
ultimately allow us to interpret those observations, remains rudimentary at
best. In particular, we still do not understand what causes the debris to lose
its energy and angular momentum, fall into the black hole and radiate. This
project will make use of the fact that, at their core, TDEs are ultimately well-
described by the general relativistic magnetohydrodynamics (GRMHD) equations of
motion. By carrying out direct GRMHD simulations of TDEs, the project hopes to
obtain a first-principles understanding of TDE physics.

The proposed simulations will provide answers to several long-standing questions
in the TDE community: How does the debris circularize, dissipate energy, and
accrete onto the SMBH? What fraction of stellar gas forms the disk, what
fraction is ejected as an outflow, and how do these fractions depend on the
black hole mass, spin, and the inclination of the stellar orbit? Do eccentric
accretion disks form and how does angular momentum transport work in such disks?
If such an eccentric disk is tilted, as is naturally expected in TDEs, does it
undergo general relativistic precession? Do such disks produce relativistic jets
and how? Understanding these issues will allow the community to make meaningful,
quantitative interpretation of TDE observations.

Even though the project is focused on TDEs, it elucidates the basic physics of
tilted accretion disks and their jets that is applicable to a range of sources
including quasars, black hole binaries, and ultra-luminous X-ray sources.
Additionally, the proposed simulations will study, from first principles and for
the first time, the development of magnetorotational instability in eccentric
tilted accretion disks and the long-term evolution and GR precession of such
disks under continuous feeding by the debris stream.

Moreover, stars shredded by black holes and producing relativistic jets offer
some of the most fascinating manifestations of general relativity. The project
will disseminate the results obtained as part of this proposal in public talks,
summer schools, radio station and newspaper interviews, and press releases.
Finally, the project will involve undergraduate students in data analysis and
visualization, and they will gain experience in working with Big Data, black
hole accretion and jet physics, presenting their results at conferences, and
publishing their work in peer-reviewed journals.