* 1615147
* Collaborative Research: Flood volcanism and environmental impacts -- A multidisciplinary investigation of the Deccan Traps and events at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Black, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 244,772.00

Increasing evidence suggests that the four most recent mass extinction events:
end-Guadalupian; end-Permian; Triassic-Jurassic boundary; Cretaceous-Paleogene
boundary (KPB)- are closely associated in time with continental flood basalt
(CFB) volcanism. Paradoxically, the KPB is associated with both the Deccan Traps
CFB and the Chicxulub impact in Yucatan, Mexico, engendering an intense three-
decades-old debate over causal relationships. Deccan volcanism began well before
and continued well after KPB/Chicxulub time, but the largest Deccan eruptions
(Wai Sub-group) appear to have been initiated within ~50,000 years of both the
KPB and the Chicxulub impact, suggesting that this subset of eruptions may have
been triggered by the impact. It remains unclear whether large Deccan flood
basalt eruptions or the Chicxulub impact (or both) were the cause of the KPB
extinction, because both may have injected massive amounts of volatiles,
aerosols, and particulates into the atmosphere. This project's research will
improve our understanding of the genesis, timing, and environmental effects of
Deccan Traps volcanism by considering Earth systems interactions from mantle
plume convection to crustal magmatism to eruption and to atmosphere/biosphere
effects.

The research will include studies of: (1) The genesis and geodynamic context of
Deccan magmatism based on physical volcanology and geochemical signatures,
coupled with analysis of volatile contents; (2) Radioisotopic geochronology of
the Deccan Traps to tightly constrain their eruptive tempo and relation to other
KPB events; (3) Geophysical modeling of mantle and crustal magmatic processes,
launching of volatiles and aerosols by the Deccan eruptions, and mechanisms of
volcanic triggering by dynamic (seismic) stresses due to earthquakes and
impacts; (4) Analysis of geophysical exploration data from offshore western
India that has not previously been integrated into the main on-land Deccan
stratigraphy. Results of these studies will be compared with other Phanerozoic
CFB events, some of which are and, importantly, some of which are not associated
with mass extinction.