* 1615102
* CSR: Small: Co-Designing Distributed Coordination Systems and the Datacenter Network
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Ports, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 428,214.00

Datacenter applications must remain continuously available and keep data
consistent despite the fact that individual servers may fail. This is one of the
fundamental challenges of distributed systems design: coordinating accesses to
distributed services. Today's systems solve these problems with sophisticated
distributed algorithms like Paxos and two-phase commit, yet these are frequently
considered too expensive for practical use. This is because these algorithms are
designed independently from -- and must make worst-case assumptions about -- the
underlying network.

This project will explore a new approach to designing distributed systems for
the datacenter: co-designing distributed protocols with the network layer. This
includes designing new network-level primitives to enable datacenter networks to
provide stronger semantics, e.g., an approximately synchronous mode of
execution. Then these primitives will be used to design high-performance
distributed systems, including state machine replication protocols and
transactional storage systems.

This work will improve the ability of distributed systems to provide fault
tolerance with high performance, increasing the robustness of critical
datacenter infrastructure. It will also reduce the cost of strongly-consistent
transactional storage, making it easier for application developers to reason
about concurrent accesses to shared data, and thereby encourage innovation.