* 1615839
* Collaborative Research: Fracture in Soft Organic Solids -The Variational View
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2020
* USD 114,965.00

This award supports a research collaboration on mathematical and numerical
modeling and analysis of failure in soft materials. This research project
concerns the derivation and numerical implementation of a mathematical theory
capable of describing, explaining, and predicting the initiation and propagation
of fracture in soft organic solids---namely, solids made up of networks of long
carbon-based macromolecules such as elastomers, gels, and biological tissues---
when subjected to arbitrarily large mechanical forces. Soft organic solids are
known to fracture in a very different manner than standard hard solids (such as
metals and ceramics). The defining difference is that internal fracture in soft
organic solids initiates through the sudden growth of inherent defects into
large enclosed cavities/cracks (a phenomenon popularly referred to as
cavitation). With the ever-increasing use of soft materials in new technologies,
a fundamental and quantitative understanding of when and how organic solids
fracture is of utmost importance for their advancement. Likewise, such a
fundamental and quantitative understanding is critical in advancing medical
treatments involving soft biological tissues, such as shock-wave lithotripsy, or
treatments dealing with aneurysms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on
a novel variational theory of fracture for finitely deformable solids that is
consistent with the principle of conservation of mass (a highly non-trivial
feature that has been overlooked in the literature by related formulations) and
wherein the newly created surfaces (by fracture) are not restricted to be
hypersurfaces (as in classical brittle fracture) but can also be the boundaries
of N-dimensional cavities, N being the spatial dimension. The main objectives of
the project are: (1) to develop a formulation in terms of variational evolutions
for the initiation and propagation of fracture in soft organic solids under
arbitrarily large quasi-static deformations, and (2) to implement this
formulation numerically and confront its predictions with emerging experimental
evidence of high spatio-temporal resolution. Objective (1) entails rigorous
existence results, while objective (2) entails the construction of appropriate
approximate functionals (of the phase-field type) and their stable and
convergent numerical implementation in the non-convex context of finite
deformations with constraints (in particular, incompressibility).