* 1615626
* How do Spore killers kill spores?  Elucidating the mechanism of meiotic drive by spore killing in Neurospora fungi.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Thomas Hammond, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Candi Phoebe Lostroh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 264,646.00

This project investigates two genes in the fungus Neurospora crassa, one that
kills fungal spores and another that prevents spore killing. While these two
genes can be thought of as forming a poison and antidote system, their purpose
is unclear. Are they beneficial for the fungus or are they detrimental? It seems
they have formed a selfish partnership whose killing and resistance properties
allow the two genes to be transmitted to every one of the organism's offspring,
even when only one parent of a mating pair possesses the genes. The primary goal
of this project is to determine how these genes, poison and antidote, achieve
this remarkable feat. Additionally, the two genes appear to have driven a major
reorganization of the chromosome in which they reside. Therefore, a secondary
goal of the project is to investigate the hypothesis that selfish genes are
major drivers of genome reorganization in eukaryotic organisms. The primary goal
will be pursued by a team of scientists, graduate students, and undergraduate
students at Illinois State University in Central Illinois, while the secondary
goal will be pursued by the same team in collaboration with evolutionary
biologists based in Sweden. In addition, a GK-12 STEM teacher from Central
Illinois will assist with the project. Not only will this provide valuable
research experience to the teacher, the PI and the teacher will design inquiry-
based learning activities for GK-12 classrooms that involve experimentation with
N. crassa and other harmless microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The two
genes under investigation in this study are rfk, the N. crassa spore killing
gene, and rsk, the resistance gene. Although the boundaries of the rfk killing
gene have not been precisely defined, the killing function has been tracked to a
1500 base pair fragment of DNA on the third chromosome of a strain called Sk 2.
The rsk resistance gene is found on the same chromosome. Different rsk alleles
exist in nature, and not all of them provide resistance to rfk. Additionally,
rsk possesses features typical of protein-coding genes. For example, it
possesses a clearly identifiable start codon, stop codon, and open reading
frame. This is in stark contrast to the killer gene, which does not have obvious
protein-coding features, and thus could produce either a toxic non-coding RNA or
a toxic protein. The first aim of this project is to differentiate between these
two possibilities and gather evidence on the mechanism of spore killing. First,
six previously isolated rfk mutants will be sequenced to produce a catalog of
mutations that disrupt killing; second, RNA sequencing will be employed to map
transcripts from a functional rfk locus and to determine the global
transcriptional changes associated with killing; third, the full-length rfk
transcript will be cloned with Rapid Amplification of cDNA End (RACE)
technology; fourth, site-directed mutagenesis will be used to determine if
random insertion mutations are more disruptive of killing than random point
mutations; fifth, a group of six point mutations, which are known to disrupt
killing when all are found within the same rfk allele, will be repaired to
determine which combination of the six is critical for loss of killing; and
sixth, protein chimeras will be produced from resistant and non-resistant
versions of RSK to determine which parts of the resistance protein are critical
for function. The second aim of this project is to perform the same set of
experiments on a different strain called Sk-3. Together, the two aims of this
proposal will define the borders of the killing gene, determine if the killer
gene product is a toxic RNA or a protein, provide a catalog of mutations that
disrupt spore killing, identify transcriptional changes associated with the
spore killing mechanism, and identify critical regions of the protein required
for resistance, all for Sk-2 and Sk-3, two models of selfish gene function and
evolution.