* 1615143
* Strengthening the STEM Pipeline for Elementary School African Americans, Hispanics, and Girls by Scaling Up Summer Engineering Experiences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Karl Reid, National Society of Black Engineers
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,070,877.00

This is a collaborative proposal among the National Society of Black Engineers
(NSBE), Virginia Tech, and Purdue University, submitted to the Successful
Project Expansion and Dissemination strand of the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program. It aims to expand the
implementation of a NSBE-supported program, "Summer Engineering Experiences for
Kids", from 14 sites in 2016, to 31 by 2019; from 3,825 3rd-5th grade African
American, Hispanic, and female students in 2015, to cumulatively 27,000 across
the nation over the three-year duration of the project. By 2019, a total of
42,000 students will have been impacted by the program since its inception in
2007. The project will advance efforts of the ITEST program to better understand
and promote practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to
pursue careers in the fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics
(STEM) by engaging them in a summer program through hands-on, team-based
engineering design projects led by collegiate mentor-teachers. The project will
use "A World in Motion"--an engineering curriculum for elementary and middle
school children developed by the Society of Automotive Engineers, in addition to
other STEM curricula to be incorporated across sites. Participants will
experience applied engineering and computer programming learning opportunities,
including engineering principles and related mathematics and science concepts
and practices through selected activities. While expanding the program,
researchers in the partnership will investigate the contextual factors that
facilitate or constrain its implementation in order to develop a prototype with
a potential to be used in various learning environments. Thus, the overall
hypothesis of the work will be that organizational contexts enable, inhibit, and
shape the experiences that students have, and consequently influence their
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three research questions will be: (1) For
each site and across all sites, what is the change in students' STEM-related
academic and career identity, conceptual knowledge, and interpersonal and
intrapersonal skills?; (2) What is the relationship between students' academic
motivation (i.e., empowerment, usefulness, success, interest, caring) and their
STEM-related academic and career identity, conceptual knowledge, and
interpersonal and intrapersonal skills?; and (3) How do organizational context
factors influence students' experiences and outcomes? To address the first
question, outcome measures will be administered in a pretest-posttest format to
identify changes in students' STEM-related outcomes over the course of the
program. To address the second research question, the project will use
multilevel modeling to incorporate site-specific contextual variables. To
address the third research question, the project will employ a multi-case study
approach to investigate variation in available resources and implementation
strategies across sites each year. Through multiple data collection methods, the
research will capture the influential contextual factors of different sites and
their relationship with students' experiences and outcomes. An advisory panel
comprising scholars and practitioners in engineering education, engineering
outreach programs, and research will provide oversight of the project's progress
and an independent mechanism for evaluation. An external evaluator will conduct
both formative and summative aspects of the project. The key outcome of the
effort will be a research-informed and field-tested model to increase African
American, Hispanic, and female students' achievement and engagement in STEM
disciplines.