* 1615350
* Quantification of prolyl cis-trans molecular switch as a timing device in auxin-regulated lateral root development in rice
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Linda Nicholson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2021
* USD 723,151.00

This project explores a key part of the amazing molecular circuitry that governs
how a seed develops into a whole plant, and addresses a major gap in our
understanding of how dynamic motions in the molecular world can influence the
shape of a living organism. In rice, a specific signal-responsive molecular
circuit has been identified that controls the formation of lateral roots that
branch off of the main vertical root. This research project will investigate
relationships between the sprouting of lateral roots and the rate of a specific
molecular switch that regulates the timing of this circuit, thereby linking this
molecular rate to the formation of the mature plant. These investigations will
foster training of graduate and undergraduate students across multidisciplinary
fields, and will be incorporated into a graduate level course on protein
structure and function. Importantly, a series of four learning modules that
incorporate this scientific research will be produced and then disseminated via
the vast network of 4-H chapters across New York state that reaches
approximately 189,000 youth in regions that include low-income rural and
American Indian populations. The primary potential societal impacts are to train
young scientists in an exciting area of investigation, to contribute key
insights into how molecular motions govern the development of whole organisms,
and to stimulate interest in scientific exploration in youth who otherwise might
not be exposed to concepts that span from molecules to plants.

The overall goal of this project is to quantitatively investigate the role of a
specific prolyl cis-trans molecular switch that acts as a timing device in an
auxin-responsive transcription regulatory circuit that governs lateral root
development in rice. The specific goals are to tune the molecular switching rate
using gene editing, to measure induced changes in rate using NMR spectroscopy,
to quantify the resulting changes in circuit dynamics in single cells using
confocal fluorescence microscopy, and to observe corresponding changes in
phenotype in the whole organism. The results of these experiments will be used
to establish a quantitative mathematical model for prediction of the effects of
this cis-trans switching rate on cellular dynamics, with impact on phenotype.
The potentially transformative aspect of the project is that if successful, it
will integrate knowledge across the scales from motions of individual bonds, to
the dynamics of a molecular circuit that regulates gene transcription in a
single cell, to a well-defined phenotype (i.e., "genotype-to-phenotype").

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics and Systems and
Synthetic Biology Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.