* 1615076
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of RNA dependent RNA polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Saveez Saffarian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms by which a
virus, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) replicates. VSV has a similar RNA genome
to other potent human and animal pathogens such as Ebola and measles. When VSV
enters a host cell it synthesizes an enzyme, RNA dependent RNA Polymerases
(RdRPs) that copies the viral RNA genome. This project will examine the
mechanism by which RdRPs read and copy the viral genome template in infected
cells, which is critical for the replication of viruses. The results from this
study will improve scientific understanding of how RdRPs work and identify
potential target mechanisms for inhibition of viral infections. This study will
train students who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields, by
engaging them within teams doing research at the University of Utah and
University of Massachusetts Medical School at Worcester. The proposed activities
will also support development of Biophysics courses that will benefit
undergraduate interdisciplinary education, and encourage participation of K-12
students in science by communicating aspects of the scientific results through
creation of a "virus dance" project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use
single molecule live cell imaging to visualize transcription events from single
VSV genome templates in infected cells and utilize fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy to measure the concentration of free RdRPs during transcription in
vivo. When stretched, the genome template of VSV is more than 4 microns in size
and RdRPs can only initiate transcription on its 3' end. While 50 RdRPs are
tightly bound to this template, how they initiate and sustain transcription is
not clear. The live cell imaging experiments will determine the number of active
RdRPs per genome and their cooperativity. Measurements of the concentration of
free RdRPs not bound to the genome will verify if a dissociation and 3' binding
mechanism can support viral transcription in vivo. This project will also use
reconstituted templates in vitro to visualize the mechanism by which RdRPs
redistribute on the genome template. We have observed single RdRP sliding on
purified genome templates in vitro. In this project we will further characterize
the sliding mechanism of RdRPs on genome templates. By measuring the dynamics of
RdRPs in vivo as well as in vitro this project will determine the mechanism of
transcription by RdRPs during VSV RNA virus infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project was funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.