* 1615990
* Quantifying molecular and cellular constraints on protein function through in vivo fitness assays and computational protein design
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Tanja Kortemme, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 995,930.00

Proteins facilitate nearly every useful function in biology, and there is
enormous potential in designing proteins to perform completely new functions.
These new functions might be useful in industry, enabling the manufacture of a
new chemical, or in health care or the environment. However, many functions are
currently too complex to design by current predictive methods. This project
seeks to address a major bottleneck by advancing computational models to include
multiple functional states of the protein. The project will then utilize these
multi-state models to provide fundamental insights into design principles of how
proteins function both at the molecular level and in the complex environment of
living cells. More broadly, the resulting new methods and knowledge will advance
academic and industrial design of useful new proteins such as biocatalysts for
cost-effective and environmentally responsible manufacturing. The developed
computational methods will be integrated into the protein design software suite
Rosetta, which is available freely as source code to a large community of
academic users, and is licensed by several biotechnological and pharmaceutical
companies. New design methods will be integrated into graduate-level courses,
and will be incorporated in research and outreach activities focused on students
from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds, underrepresented groups, and
women in computational sciences.

Progress in the ability to design proteins with functions not existing in nature
has been limited by an incomplete understanding of the key constraints on
protein function that need to be captured by a predictive model. To advance
modeling and design of proteins, the objectives of this project are to determine
molecular and cellular constraints on protein function, and to incorporate this
knowledge into improved computational methods to design proteins under multiple
functional constraints. This project will first establish an experimental system
that allows for a comprehensive examination of the effect of sequence changes on
function, and the ability to predict these effects computationally. Experiments
will interrogate the metabolic enzyme dihydrofolate reductase using deep
mutational scanning and in vivo assays that will determine how fitness effects
of thousands of variants change in different backgrounds that perturb molecular
function and cellular context. Second, the project seeks to advance
computational protein design methods to model protein sequences under multiple
constraints. Tests of the model by comparison to experiments will guide
critically needed improvements and will identify cellular constraints not
captured by the multi-state model. The resulting knowledge will lead to improved
computational methods to model and design proteins by considering multiple
functional constraints that can be applied to important challenges in
engineering new and useful protein functions.

This award is supported by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program and the
Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry.