* 1615916
* Modeling the processing of signaling cues by transcriptional networks during cell-fate choice
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Manu Manu, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 659,279.00

During development, cells differentiate to generate the diversity of cell types
required to make a functional organism. In blood development, a single
hematopoietic stem cell gives rise to about 12 distinct cell types. A
hematopoietic cell's decision to choose between alternative lineages depends on
both the internal state of the cell, defined by networks of lineage-specifying
transcription factors, as well as external signals provided by small molecules
called cytokines. Furthermore, the two systems, cytokine signaling and
transcription factor networks, do not function independently of each other. This
project aims to use a combination of computation and experiment to understand
how the interaction between signaling and transcription factor networks controls
cell-fate choice. This study will advance our understanding of cell-fate choice
during blood differentiation and the insights will be relevant to other tissues
and organisms. The computational tools developed during the course of research
will have broad applicability in developmental biology. Educational activities
aim to promote the development of the quantitative and modeling skills of
biology students at the undergraduate and graduate levels. This will be
accomplished by 1) developing course modules based on the research activities
and making them available to the teaching community and 2) mentoring
undergraduate students in research projects.

Cell-autonomous gene regulatory networks and cell-extrinsic cytokine signaling
have often times been viewed as competing and mutually-exclusive hypotheses for
the specification of cell fate during hematopoiesis. The investigators propose
instead that cell fate is an emergent property arising from interactions between
cytokine signaling and gene regulatory networks. They will test this hypothesis
with tightly coupled experimental and mathematical modeling activities. The
research plan leverages a unique experimental tool; hematopoietic cells that can
be inducibly differentiated along alternative lineages at a defined starting
point to probe cytokine-transcription factor interactions in time. Aim 1 will
infer the gene regulatory networks involved in the macrophage-neutrophil cell-
fate decision de novo by measuring genome-wide expression at high temporal
resolution and computing pair-wise mutual information. Aim 2 will build
differential equation models of signaling effector/transcription factor networks
to investigate how emergent dynamics are produced. The models will be predictive
and allow the simulation of the effects of different cytokines and
perturbations. While Aims 1 and 2 investigate the system dynamics at the network
level, Aim 3 will determine how a core group of 13 transcription factor and
cytokine receptor loci are regulated in time at the level of DNA sequence. Here,
a novel experimental-computational approach for reverse engineering cis-
regulatory module logic will be utilized to identify distal enhancers and
silencers and determine how they are regulated. A comprehensive cis-regulatory
module reporter library will be constructed and reporter activities will be
measured in time. Time-resolved activity data will be used to constrain
predictive sequence-based thermodynamic models of transcription to determine the
transcription factors and protein-protein interactions regulating the modules.
This study will use unique tools of the model system, time series data, and
modeling to determine how gene regulatory networks process cytokine signals in a
context-dependent manner. The models and reporter library will be a resource for
a wide range of developmental biologists.