* 1615114
* Petaflops simulation and design of nanoscale materials and devices
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2019
* USD 29,232.00

The President's Materials Genome initiative has amply recognized&lt;br/&gt;the
potential of simulation for helping to design new materials "twice as fast and
at a fraction&lt;br/&gt;of the cost." In the quest for novel and breakthrough
properties, nanoscale science and technology&lt;br/&gt;is particularly
promising, because at the nanoscale the quantum properties of matter
manifest&lt;br/&gt;themselves in unexpected ways, leading to non-linear, novel
behavior that cannot be predicted&lt;br/&gt;by simple extrapolation from either
the molecular or the bulk limits. Furthermore, experiments&lt;br/&gt;are very
difficult at these scales, since they require atomic or nearly-atomic
resolution,&lt;br/&gt;yet must also account for the emergent properties that
involve thousands of atoms. Advanced&lt;br/&gt;simulations can supplant much of
the tedious experimentation, allowing researchers to step
through&lt;br/&gt;different options in the experimental design space. More
importantly, the atomic-scale design principles&lt;br/&gt;leading to the desired
materials or device characteristics can be uncovered through in-
depth&lt;br/&gt;analysis of computational results, leading to accelerated
progress and optimal design for&lt;br/&gt;a given application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate fundamental
properties of nano and nano-bio structures&lt;br/&gt;with potential applications
in biomolecular sensors and nano-scale electronics for beyond-
Moore's-law&lt;br/&gt;era. Specifically, the project will investigate (i) carbon
nanotube-based nanocircuits that can monitor&lt;br/&gt;DNA replication and
potentially enable high-throughput electrical sequencing of DNA, and
(ii)&lt;br/&gt;carbon-nanoribbon-based devices for nanoscale electronics and
spintronics. The proposed simulations are ambitious&lt;br/&gt;and potentially
transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to apply highly
optimized quantum simulation codes to Blue Waters and to&lt;br/&gt;use them in
two projects of high current interest: electrical detection of DNA sequence
and&lt;br/&gt;nanoribbon-based electronics for beyond-Moore's-law era.
&lt;br/&gt;In DNA sequencing, the proposed methodology based on electrical
readout of the DNA sequence would constitute a major breakthrough&lt;br/&gt;and
result in much faster and cheaper sequencing. It would allow for sequencing of a
large&lt;br/&gt;fraction of population, enable truly personalized medicine and
lead to thorough mapping and&lt;br/&gt;understanding of genetic diseases.
Additionally, graphene and graphene nanoribbons are major
candidates&lt;br/&gt;for future nanoscale devices for beyond-Moore's-law era. By
systematically investigating the&lt;br/&gt;transport properties of nanoribbon-
based electronic devices, the project will allow us to
understand&lt;br/&gt;device performance at a quantum level and help to design
the new generation of transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to cheap and
broadly available DNA sequencing would revolutionize health-care and
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;The computational design and discovery of appropriate
nucleotides to enable electrical DNA&lt;br/&gt;sequencing would lead to new
technologies and new manufacturing. Furthermore, the beyond&lt;br/&gt;Moore's
law era is of great interest to computer and computational scientists, engineers
and&lt;br/&gt;the general public. Finally, the project will have significant
educational impact to the project's local institution&lt;br/&gt;by involving
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral
fellows,&lt;br/&gt;in leading-edge computational research, with special effort
being made to ensure participation&lt;br/&gt;of members of underrepresented
groups.