* 1615807
* Dedicated Radio Imaging and Magnetic Field Measurements of the Sun
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,115,132.00

As our closest star, the Sun provides an important laboratory to study the
processes that govern stars in our Galaxy. The Sun is also the primary driver
for the space weather that impacts human life on Earth. The Sun emits
electromagnetic radiation from radio to X-ray wavelengths. This proposal will
support both the science and operations of a dedicated solar facility the
Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array (EOVSA) that will observe the Sun at radio
wavelengths. The EOVSA will provide a valuable resource to the solar physics
community making important contributions to the science of the solar atmosphere,
the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of solar active regions, and the drivers of
space weather. The proposal will also support the education and training of the
next generation of solar scientists with the involvement of students on levels
ranging from high school to graduate students to postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support the science and operations of
the Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array (EOVSA) as a community facility. EOVSA is
a solar-dedicated radio interferometer array, located at Owens Valley Radio
Observatory (OVRO), in Owens Valley, CA. The science that will be accomplished
with the facility includes: (1) locating the acceleration site in solar flares,
elucidating the acceleration mechanism(s) for high-energy electrons, and
understanding the initiation and evolution of the electron energy distribution;
(2) determining the magnetic field strength, direction, temperature, and density
as a function of height in the solar atmosphere, including routine mapping of
the coronal magnetic field up to several times per day, in order to understand
the 3D structure of the solar atmosphere and the initiation mechanisms of solar
activity; (3) obtaining daily full-disk images of the F10.7 brightness
temperature and eruptive events in order to study the physical mechanisms of
magnetically and radiatively dominated processes that impact the Earth and near-
Earth space environment; (4) detecting, cataloging, and studying the spectral
and temporal evolution of radio flares from flare stars and other nighttime
transient sources.