* 1615373
* Refining the Purine/Histidine/Thiamine Biosynthetic pathways in Salmonella enterica as a model network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Eberhard Voit, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,158,135.00

A question that spans biology is how metabolic pathways combine to generate the
robust and efficient physiology of a living cell. In this project, investigators
will probe the physiology of a cell by treating the cell as a complex system,
and using tools that include generation of mathematical models of the metabolic
system in question, testing of these models with genetic/biochemical analysis,
and quantify the metabolites that make up the system. Together, results from
each of these areas will inform the other and provide new understanding of the
complex interplay of metabolic pathways that lead to the robustness of living
systems. Student and postdoctoral personnel involved in this project will be
trained at the interface of biology, chemistry, biotechnology, mathematics, and
computation. Thus in addition to scientific insights, the work proposed will
contribute to the development of critically needed human resources. The PI is
further committed to human resource development with a strategy to increase the
participation of Puerto Rican students in the research enterprise at the
University of Georgia.

The proposed work is a collaboration between a microbial physiologist and and a
systems biologist with expertise in metabolic modeling; and an expert in
metabolomics and synthetic chemistry. This interdisciplinary project builds the
initial collaboration to address a common question: How should one optimally
represent the metabolic network of a cell in a succinct, quantitative way that
is reliable and predictive, and that can be experimentally confirmed? The
specific experimental system is are the purine/histidine/thiamine biosynthetic
pathways, which are amenable to precise manipulations and can be used to test a
wide array of predictions generated by metabolomic and modeling approaches. This
feature of the project will allow the team to establish a "proof of principle"
that it is possible to capture all pertinent features of a metabolic system with
sufficient granularity to claim that the system is "understood". A convincing
proof of this nature has not been provided thus far, but is critically needed in
the field of metabolomics. From the modeling perspective, the chosen bacterial
system provides a means to generate extensive data from a single system that can
be used to refine and train a sequence of models in ways that are not possible
with large-scale networks, which depend on data from diverse sources and are
intrinsically of variable quality. This multidisciplinary approach will generate
new knowledge and advance the approaches needed to quantitatively measure and
model metabolism from sets of experimental data. It will also advance the
development of tools and techniques that are transferrable to studies of
metabolism in all kingdoms of life.