* 1615701
* High-resolution analyses of chromatin responses to DNA damage
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kyoko Yokomori, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2020
* USD 660,000.00

The genetic information in DNA, which is packaged in the form of chromatin, is
protected from damage by multiple DNA repair pathways, and understanding how
this critical task of DNA repair is performed is the long-term goal of this
research. The project will examine real-time changes in chromatin in response to
DNA damage in individual living cells with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution, and thereby determine the significance of chromatin restructuring
during DNA repair. In addition to advancing knowledge of DNA damage response and
repair mechanisms, the project will develop and apply several innovative
technologies that will likely be of great interest to other researchers. The PI
and co-PI are committed to disseminating these techniques broadly in the
research community. The multidisciplinary nature of this project will provide a
unique and valuable training opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows as well as undergraduate and high school students. They are expected to
learn fundamental and cutting-edge techniques relevant to studying DNA repair
mechanisms in mammalian cells, including high-resolution imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chromatin response to DNA damage is highly dynamic and
must be regulated to maintain the appropriate architectural organization that
promotes high-fidelity DNA repair and preserves genomic integrity. How these
chromatin structural dynamics are coordinated with DNA repair is not well
understood. The PIs will develop multiplexing novel fluorescence correlation
methods including pair correlation spectroscopy (pCF) and nanoimaging tracking
techniques to analyze how DNA damage affects chromatin dynamics and how that in
turn dictates DNA repair pathway choice. These phenomena will be investigated in
response to relatively simple DNA breaks or complex DNA damage lesions induced
in different cellular contexts. Aim 1 includes monitoring changes in chromatin
access at the damage site, interrogating the relationship to DNA repair pathway
choice, and determining responsible factors. Aim 2 involves high-resolution
multiplexed analyses of chromatin dynamics at defined DNA double-strand break
sites, and investigating the interplay between DNA repair and transcription. An
overall goal is also to develop new methods that yield 4D and nanoscale views of
chromatin dynamics in single mammalian cells when DNA is damaged, for a
quantitative understanding of how the cellular machinery assesses the damage and
decides how to repair its genome.