* 1615866
* Protein Interactions Underlying Mutagenic Translesion Synthesis in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Dmitry Korzhnev, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2021
* USD 649,999.00

This project aims to elucidate tightly controlled mechanisms that allow
eukaryotic cells to faithfully reproduce their genetic material despite the
presence of DNA damage. DNA lesions can block replication, triggering a cascade
of events leading to cell death. To prevent this, cells utilize translesion
synthesis (TLS) DNA polymerases that can copy over the DNA lesions while
temporarily leaving them unrepaired. These TLS enzymes are central to cell
survival after DNA damage; however, they are also error-prone and often
introduce mutations in genomic DNA. The project will employ an interdisciplinary
approach that combines structural biology, biochemical methods and in vivo
assays to decipher key protein-protein interactions (PPIs) underlying mutagenic
TLS in a yeast model system. This research will advance our understanding of the
structural organization of the multi-protein TLS complexes and also provide new
insights into mechanistic questions about TLS: How do mutagenic TLS enzymes gain
access to DNA replication forks? How do active multi-polymerase complexes
assemble? What molecular events drive TLS DNA polymerase switching? These
questions are central to our understanding of events leading to mutagenesis in
eukaryotes and the ability of cells to cope with DNA damage and faithfully
transfer genetic information from one generation to the next. This project
creates a solid platform for integration of research and education at multiple
levels, from advanced post-PhD training to K-12 education. The project will
provide plentiful material for graduate and undergraduate teaching, including
advanced training courses such as the Connecticut NMR Workshop, laboratory
projects for graduate students, and mini-projects for the diverse undergraduate
students from the Undergraduate Summer Research Internship program. Finally, it
will also engage students from the nearby Farmington High School in "real world"
scientific research under the umbrella of the Cutting Edge Bioresearch
Internship program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In S. cerevisiae, replicative bypass
of most DNA lesions requires the coordinated action of TLS polymerases Rev1, pol
eta and pol zeta that replace replicative polymerases at replication forks
stalled by DNA damage or fill damage-containing single-stranded DNA gaps left
after replication. This process is initiated by mono-ubiquitination of the
processivity factor PCNA, which plays a key role in the assembly of the multi-
polymerase TLS complex at DNA damage sites. The mechanism by which this TLS
complex, often called the Rev1/pol zeta mutasome, is assembled on ubiquitinated
PCNA is poorly understood. Important questions remain unanswered about how TLS
enzymes gain access to sites of DNA damage and how DNA polymerases switch during
TLS. The main goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms by which the
TLS mutasome achieves efficient lesion bypass by analyzing its organization at a
structural level. Our central hypothesis is that mutasome activity is regulated
by protein-protein interactions (PPIs) mediated by accessory domains and
regulatory subunits of the TLS DNA polymerases. We will test this hypothesis by
using a structural analysis to precisely map PPIs that influence the assembly of
the S. cerevisiae Rev1/pol zeta mutasome, combined with in vivo assays to probe
the significance of these PPIs for mutagenic TLS. To date, the structure and
PPIs of accessory modules of yeast TLS enzymes remain largely uncharacterized.
To gain insights into the structural organization and regulation of the yeast
TLS machinery, we will undertake the following specific aims. In Aim 1, we will
examine key PPIs that control the Rev1/pol zeta mutasome interactions with the
sliding clamp PCNA. In Aim 2, we will determine structures and probe PPIs of the
essential accessory modules that mediate assembly of the Rev1/pol zeta complex.
In Aim 3, we will explore additional PPIs that stabilize multi-subunit Rev1/pol
zeta assembly. The project will provide new insights into how individual
components of the TLS mutasome work together to achieve efficient lesion
bypass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded jointly by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.