* 1615575
* Spatially Resolved Nucleosynthesis in Core Collapse Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Patrick Young, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2020
* USD 293,842.00

The investigators will simulate exploding stars, called supernovae. They are
interested in the nuclear reactions during the explosion. The reactions produce
many of the elements on the periodic table. The simulation will model the first
second of the explosion and calculate reactions until the expelled material
collides with the surrounding region. Existing images of these explosions show
that many chemical elements are blown into space. The investigators will compare
their models with the existing observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of
exploding stars captures the public imagination. Through their writing,
teaching, and public lectures, the investigators will share this project
excitement. They will lead teacher training workshops for Navajo Nation, Salt
River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, and Phoenix inner city schools. The
investigators will explain how exploding stars are important for our life on the
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will perform and compare three
dimensional (3D) simulations of core collapse supernova explosions and remnant
development with the observed spatial distribution of nuclear species in the
Cassiopeia A and g292 supernova remnants (SNRs). This is the first opportunity
to compare the production and distribution of elements by nuclear burning in 3D
explosion simulations directly with well-studied SNRs. Their comparison can
provide important constraints on the characteristics of the explosion required
to produce a remnant with the observed geometry and abundances, telling us much
about both the event itself and the explosion mechanism. Three dimensional
smooth particle hydrodynamics explosions of the favored progenitors in realistic
environments will be simulated. The spatial distribution be compared with
estimates of the spatially resolved abundances derived from the optical, x-ray
and infrared observations to constrain the conditions under which nuclear
burning occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production and distribution of heavy
elements by supernovae are integral to the evolution of stellar populations and
the interstellar medium on scales from individual proto- stellar/proto-planetary
systems to galaxies. The project will have impacts in a number of areas beyond
nucleosynthesis in supernovae, including numerical methods and massively
parallel simulations, turbulent hydrodynamics, stellar and galaxy evolution,
astrobiology, and cosmology. This research will integrate research and education
by advancing discovery and understanding, while at the same time engaging
undergraduates and training graduate students.