* 1615288
* RUI: Development of Sparsity-inducing Dual Frames and Algorithms with Applications, II
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shidong Li, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,938.00

This award supports the ongoing research program of the Principal Investigator
in the general area of signal processing. Signal processing is concerned with
making signals easier to handle or better in quality. It is widely used in
modern society, such as in cell-phone communications. In this project, the
principal novelties introduced to signal processing are developments of the
notion of "sparsity-inducing dual frames" ("sparse duals") and advanced ideas of
recovering underlying signals from much smaller "samples" of the signal.
Sparsity-inducing dual frames are a set of signal components used in obtaining
the sparsest (the most concise) decomposition of a signal. The substance of
sparse duals lies in the fact that they have the capacity to greatly advance the
effectiveness of signal recovery through a small number of samples of a signal.
The objective is to advance the art of new signal-detection techniques. This
study has the potential to impact information technology, ranging from
simplified sampling devices to radar systems, commercial imaging techniques,
geographic survey, mapping, wireless communication, surveillance systems,
medical image requisitions and combinations, and a number of signal requisition
applications.

Topics proposed for study include the development of tail-minimization
techniques in the sparse-dual-based l-one analysis approach and applications,
together with the development of a soft-thresholding-infused null-space tuning
algorithm with feedbacks for more effective denoising and signal smoothness.
Several themes will be developed. One theme aims at directly reducing the tail
coefficients of sparse frame expansions. This is motivated by the observation
that the signal recovery error bound is directly proportional to the "tails" of
the signal coefficients. Another theme is to construct sparsity-inducing dual
frames that minimize the tail coefficients for a class of s-sparse signals and
nearly s-sparse signals. Such sparse duals are clearly ultimate analysis
operators in the analysis approach. A third theme is designed to understand an
equivalent l-one synthesis problem derived from a sparse-dual-based l-one
analysis formulation. The new synthesis problem decouples the product of the
sensing matrix and the frame matrix, and the kernel of the new sensing matrix is
smaller. A final theme is aimed at infusing soft thresholding into the iterative
"Null Space Tuning Algorithm with Feedbacks" (NST+FB). The NST+FB algorithm is
known to converge in finitely many steps. The Principal Investigator will enrich
the NST+FB algorithm with a soft-thresholding mechanism for enhanced denoising
and smoothness, for applications such as image processing and radar imaging.