* 1615420
* RUI: Experimtental Study of the Thermal State of Weakly-Coupled Dusty Plasmas and Nonlinear Properties of the Dust Acoustic Wave
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Jeremiah Williams, Wittenberg University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The award will support a series of experiments aimed at understanding
fundamental properties of a unique state of matter, a "dusty" or "complex"
plasma, which is an ionized gas consisting of ions, electrons, and small
particulate matter (dust or ice) that is typically much smaller than the width
of a human hair. In space, examples of dusty plasmas include the clouds from
which stars and planets form, comet tails, planetary rings and noctilucent
clouds in the Earth's ionosphere. Dusty plasmas are also formed in the
chemically active plasmas that are used in industrial plasma processing devices
to create computer chips, contaminating the end product and reducing overall
yield, and the manufacturing of solar photovoltaic cells, where the dust can
increase the overall efficiency of the resulting solar cells. The research
program will support the training of several highly talented undergraduate
students in a small college environment, providing the students with a more
comprehensive research skills training than at comparable experiences at larger
institutions; experience with state-of-the-art software and experimental
techniques; and a variety of practical problem solving skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program consists of several experiments
designed to understand the thermal and transport properties of weakly-coupled
(fluid-like) dusty plasmas. One series of experiments is designed to measure the
thermal state of weakly-coupled dusty plasmas to better understand the mechanism
responsible for the high temperatures that have been measured in a number of
experimental systems. This effort will directly test two models that are
believed to be responsible for the observed heating and will also support the
development of a time-resolved stereoscopic particle image velocimetry (PIV)
system. This work will extend collaborative work done in the development of a
time-resolved planar PIV with colleagues at in the Plasma Science Laboratory at
Auburn University and the Complex Plasmas Research Group at the German Aerospace
Center. Additionally, a portion of this work will be done at the newly
operational Magnetized Dusty Plasma Experiment facility at Auburn University and
will examine the effect that magnetic fields have on the thermal state of these
dusty plasma systems. A second series of experiments is designed to understand
the properties of a fundamental wave mode that propagates in dusty plasma
systems known as the dust acoustic wave. The contribution that thermal effects
have on how this wave propagates and the nonlinear process of synchronization
where the properties of the wave adjust to match an externally applied drive
will be investigated. Together, these studies will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of the thermal properties of dusty plasmas and provide new insight
into the nonlinear properties of the dust acoustic wave.