* 1615255
* Inspiring Commitment for STEM Career Paths through Extended Women's Hackathons
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Youwen Ouyang, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,199,971.00

The project, targeting high school Hispanic girls, will research how a coherent
set of experiences supports student competency, motivation and persistence for
productive participation in the Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
workforce of the future. Participants will join other young women to take part
in the Women's Hackathon @ CSUSM (California State University San Marcos). (A
hackathon is an event that brings computer programmers and other interested
people together to improve upon or build new software programs.) The
participants will then participate in an after-school that focuses on computer
programming, career education, team building, and the non-programming components
of the software development process. The afterschool program will use a project-
based learning approach that will extend the conceptual designs of project ideas
proposed during the hackathon into real solutions, which will be presented by
teams at a culminating public showcase. The project will reach 180 high school
girls over the 3-year duration, with a majority of participants being Hispanic
girls. In the context of these program activities, project research will focus
on understanding the process by which skills and interest are transformed into
commitment to an ICT career, particularly for Latinas. Project research findings
will be widely disseminated to researchers and K-12 educators through
educational research journals and education conferences. The project will
disseminate its work to wider audiences through public and social media. This
project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by researching
effective strategies for engaging Hispanic girls and other youth in ICT and
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research goal is to study how the
relationships among interest, competency, self-efficacy, identity, and values
influence commitment to pursue an ICT career pathway for young women, especially
Latinas. The research will address two overarching research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent does the extended Hackathon
program foster and sustain participants' sense of self-efficacy and identity
with ICT careers, and align their perceptions of ICT workforce with their
values; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent do self-efficacy, identity,
and values build on interest and skills to increase participants' commitment to
an ICT career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws from current social
psychological and educational research, and integrates self-persuasion, social
learning, social identity, and goal congruity theories. This literature has
revealed that, in addition to interest and competency, persistence in domains
such as computer science is strongly predicted by domain-specific self-efficacy,
identity, and an alignment with and internalization of the values of that field
or endeavor. The comprehensive design of the research plan, if successful, will
significantly advance basic research about commitment processes for individuals
from groups underrepresented in the ICT workforce specifically, and STEM fields
more broadly. Quantifying the impact of an extended program on downstream
efficacy, identity and values processes will have a significant impact on
potential modifications to existing intervention programs to increase their
impact on increasing and broadening participation in ICT and STEM.