* 1615387
* Role of RHAMNOSE BIOSYNTHESIS 1 in cell growth and patterning
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Vivian Irish, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2021
* USD 790,000.00

The study of surface patterning of plant cells is critical to understanding
their function. These range from helping pollinating insects grip petals to
decreasing the wettability of plant cell surfaces. In addition, understanding
how this cell architecture is achieved can provide new approaches in
nanotechnology and the design of novel bioinspired materials. This project
combines genetics, biochemistry, and mathematical approaches to investigate how
cell wall associated pectin molecules affect plant cell shape and surface
pattern and contribute to the mechanical properties of plant cells. Through this
project, undergraduates from underrepresented backgrounds, a graduate student
and a postdoctoral associate will receive interdisciplinary training at the
interface of experimental biology and mathematical modeling. In addition, the
results from this project will be communicated to the public through outreach
programs aimed at high school students and at the New Haven area community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work from the PI's lab has shown that mutations in
the gene encoding Rhamnose Biosynthesis 1 (RHM1) affect pectin composition and
show striking patterning defects in cell morphology, resulting in cells with a
left-handed helical twist and a reduction in anisotropic growth. While pectins
have been shown to play important roles in regulating cell expansion, this is
the first described helical mutant that affects pectin biosynthesis, and so
provides an exciting new inroad into elucidating the potential roles of
rhamnose-containing pectins in modulating plant cell shape. Through a
combination of genetic and biochemical approaches with micro-mechanical testing
and mathematical modeling, the role of rhamnose in controlling cell architecture
will be elucidated. The results obtained through this project will have the
potential to shed new light on how pectin composition can affect cell wall
patterning and growth, providing an exciting link between enzyme activity, cell
wall architecture, and supracellular patterning events. The combination of
experimental approaches with testable mathematical models will lay the
groundwork for understanding how the pectin gel matrix can feed back on cellular
and subcellular processes necessary to regulate cell growth and form.