* 1615418
* Stability, Instability and Geometry in Applied Spectral Problems.
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jared Bronski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 289,881.00

Many models studied in engineering and science admit some type of special
solutions. These special solutions, including traveling waves and other coherent
structures, are important phenomenon. They often correspond to behaviors
observed in the real world, and as such it is important to understand them. One
important question is that of robustness: if one takes initial conditions near
one of these special solutions, one would like to predict if the solutions would
have a similar behavior or do something different. This idea of robustness,
known in mathematics as stability, governs which solutions are likely to be
observed in practice. Since real systems are noisy and have uncertainty, one is
only likely to observe special solutions that are stable. This research project
is aimed at understanding and quantifying the stability of solutions to a number
of mathematical models governing diverse phenomena, including the behavior of a
large-scale electrical network and wave propagation in a channel. Results will
include proving theorems that either show that these solutions are stable or, if
they are unstable, by characterizing the unstable manifold, thereby giving some
sense of the manner in which nearby solutions diverge from the solution in
question.

This project focuses on a number of models that arise in different areas of
mathematics and the sciences, including the nonlinear Schrodinger equation,
various shallow water models, the Kuramoto model for synchronization of
oscillators, and various generalizations of the Kuramoto model that take into
account phenomena such as neural plasticity and Hebbian interactions. After
finding coherent structures such as fixed points, traveling waves, and periodic
solutions, we study the spectrum of the linearization of the dynamics about the
coherent structure. We are interested in establishing asymptotic or orbital
stability of these solutions or, in the case where they are not stable, in
counting the dimension of the unstable manifold. We approach the question on
stability using geometric and topological arguments to count the dimension of
the unstable manifold.