* 1615032
* Amino acid networks in enzyme catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* David Boehr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to understand and manipulate the protein machinery necessary
for enzyme function, which will facilitate the development of next-generation
enzymes important for industrial and biotechnological applications. Enzymes
speed up and control the chemical reactions important for life, and many enzymes
have found uses in a wide-range of chemical industries. Enzymes can be
envisioned as nanoscale machines, which have moving parts important for their
function. By learning the principles underlying these mechanical motions,
researchers will be able to better engineer enzymes to speed up desired chemical
reactions under desired conditions. This research will also provide scientific
training opportunities to students from historically underrepresented groups.
This project will integrate middle school, high school and undergraduate
students into research and outreach activities, allowing unique mentoring
opportunities for older students and fostering a diverse and inclusive
scientific research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-dimensional
structures of enzymes are held together by networks of noncovalent interactions.
This research will uncover the interaction networks important for enzyme
function to provide an understanding of how these networks guide the internal
motions of enzymes. The model system that will be studied is tryptophan
synthase, whose alpha and beta subunits catalyze the final two steps in
tryptophan amino acid biosynthesis. The interaction networks are proposed to be
important both for individual enzyme function and inter-subunit communication.
The networks will be delineated by a combination of protein nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and
bioinformatics analyses of protein sequences. The project will also manipulate
these networks and enzyme function by targeting surface-exposed, network amino
acid residues through mutagenesis and covalent modification. The project aims to
develop general rules for engineering interaction networks in enzymes.