* 1615206
* Modeling Physical Processes in the Solar Wind and Local Interstellar Medium with a Multi-Scale Fluid-Kinetic Simulation Suite
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Jacob Heerikhuisen, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,087.00

Flows of partially ionized plasma are frequently characterized by the presence
of both thermal&lt;br/&gt;and nonthermal populations of ions. For example, this
occurs in the outer heliosphere: the part of interstellar space beyond the solar
system whose properties are determined by the solar wind (SW) interaction with
the local&lt;br/&gt;interstellar medium (LISM). Simulation of the SW-LISM
interaction problem with data-driven boundary&lt;br/&gt;conditions, requires the
application of adaptive mesh refinement technologies and petascale
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to use the Blue
Waters system to model solar winds (SW) flows in the inner and outer
heliosphere, &lt;br/&gt;and compare the simulation results with observational
data, thereby revealing the fundamental physics of non-thermal plasma-neutral
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address a variety of physical
phenomena occurring throughout the solar system, e.g., charge exchange processes
between neutral&lt;br/&gt;and charged particles, the birth of pick-up ions
(PUIs), the origin of energetic neutral atoms (ENAs),&lt;br/&gt;turbulence, the
interplay of the heliopause instability and magnetic reconnection at the SW-LISM
interface,&lt;br/&gt;properties of the heliotail, etc. Additionally, the project
will fit the simulation results with observational data to make it
possible&lt;br/&gt;to constrain the properties of the LISM and refine time-
dependent SW models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here is expected to
have major impact in several areas. The project&lt;br/&gt;will provide a leap
forward in the computation and simulation of complex charged and neutral gas
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The development of codes that embrace "coupling complexity"
via the self-consistent incorporation of multiple&lt;br/&gt;physical scales and
processes in models is viewed as a pivotal development in the different
plasma&lt;br/&gt;physics areas for the current decade. The ubiquity of the
underlying model suggests numerous applications&lt;br/&gt;in space physics,
astrophysics, and, in general, plasma physics problems. The components of our
physical&lt;br/&gt;model and corresponding code routines in the publicly
accessible simulation suite may be also useful to&lt;br/&gt;model plasma-beam
interactions in Tokamak fusion devices to be implemented in the burning plasma
experiment&lt;br/&gt;ITER. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the impact on the
modeling of complex physical systems, the project anticipates that
their&lt;br/&gt;approach to computational resource management for complex codes
utilizing multiple algorithm technologies&lt;br/&gt;will be a major advance on
current approaches. Additionally, collaboration with the Blue Waters team will
further promote the application of adaptive technologies to contemporary plasma
physics problems through the development of publicly available packages
suitable&lt;br/&gt;for multiple applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
project will provide leadership in promoting computational science and
plasma&lt;br/&gt;physics within the UAH campus and, through the training of a
broad spectrum of specialists, foster new&lt;br/&gt;technologies within an
EPSCoR state.