* 1615063
* I-Corps:  Improving care, decreasing cost, and preserving antibiotics through rapid diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Lance Price, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Each year in the US, an estimated 263 million prescriptions of antibiotics are
given in outpatient clinics, of which 50% are thought to be unnecessary. If one
could improve diagnosis and management of even 1% of these outpatient visits,
this could avoid as many as 1.3 million unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions
annnually. The primary objective of this project is to determine if a rapid,
point-of-care diagnostic?that informs clinicians if the patient has an
infection, what is causing the infection, and how to treat the infection in an
actionable time frame?could be commercial viable in the outpatient setting. In
addition to reducing unnecessary antibiotic use, the use of this rapid
diagnostic has the potential to reduce healthcare costs and improve patient
outcome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals of this project, a NSF
I-Corps team has been assembled comprising a clinician-scientist board certified
in Laboratory Medicine as the Entrepreneurial Lead, a Professor and Director of
the Antimicrobial Resistance Action Center at the George Washington University
as the Principal Investigator, and two mentors with complementary skills in
creating, managing, and advising start-ups, including those involved in medical
device and diagnostics. To determine if such a rapid diagnostic can be
commercially viable, this I-Corps team will undergo rigorous entrepreneurship
training and apply a systematic approach to elucidate their proposed product's
commercial viability. The I-Corps team will attend the full course of
entrepreneurship training, build and evaluate its business hypotheses, conduct
at least 100 interviews of potential customers, users, and patients, and
reflect/discuss on a regular basis. Through this process, the team also expects
to gain valuable insights into the specification of the minimum viable product,
culminating in a proof-of-concept demonstration and a go-no-go decision at the
end of the seven-week entrepreneurship training.