* 1615737
* Robust spatiotemporal dynamics in multi-layer neuronal networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Zachary Kilpatrick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 234,000.00

To navigate in a constantly changing world, humans and other animals continually
make decisions and store memories. Since the world is noisy and brain activity
is highly variable, it is remarkable that organisms can perform cognitive tasks
as accurately as they do. One feature of the human brain that may account for
its exceptional computational ability is its modular structure. The entire
network of the brain is organized into a collection of densely connected
subnetworks, helping to localize certain neural computations. Studying the
effects of this underlying structure could ultimately help in the analysis of
increasingly large data sets collected by experimental neuroscientists. This
project will consider the impact of modular structures in the brain, focusing on
networks known to perform specific cognitive tasks like categorization, short-
term memory, and spatial navigation. These computations are performed by
networks that can represent spatial position, and the associated mathematical
models often describe variables that change in space and time. This project will
facilitate the development of new methods for studying how noise impacts the
dynamics of neuronal networks with multiple temporal and spatial scales,
specifically in networks with a multi-layered structure. This project will
contribute to the national BRAIN initiative by identifying new computational
tools for understanding the role of the brain's network architecture in
cognition. Furthermore, trainees supported by this award will learn cutting-edge
methods in statistics, nonlinear dynamics, and stochastic processes. These
methods are broadly applicable to many fields in science that utilize large-
scale data such as genetics, social science, and climatology.

This research project addresses the problem of understanding how the multi-
layered structure of many areas of the brain shape neural computation. This
problem will be addressed in three main ways: (i) building multi-layer network
models of observed brain circuits that process spatial information; (ii)
developing mathematical tools for studying these equations to extract
information about their dynamics; and (iii) corroborating this work with
experimental collaborators that record and image propagating activity in brain
tissue. The cognitive tasks of spatial navigation, spatial working memory, and
visual input categorization will be studied. Spatial navigation requires the
integration of both angular and linear self-motion cues, and models developed in
the project will explore different ways multi-layered network architecture can
dampen variability in position codes. The investigation of how multi-layered
architectures with different scales of spatial heterogeneity can robustly
represent spatial position will improve our insights into the function of
spatial working memory. Experimental recordings from visual brain areas have
found that interfaces between network layers modify the propagation of stimulus-
related activity. The impact of this phenomenon on stimulus processing will be
explored in detail using mathematical models of sensory brain activity. All
these projects require the development of new tools for determining how noise
influences multi-scale systems, metastability, and spatiotemporal patterns, of
broad applicability to other scientific fields including epidemiology, systems
biology, and ecology.