* 1615822
* RUI: Probing the Two Distinct Twin-Arginine Translocases of Acinetobacter baylyi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Nathan Rigel, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 04/30/2021
* USD 454,850.00

Bacteria have the amazing ability to colonize and thrive in diverse
environments. Within these diverse environments, the most successful bacteria
can adapt to changing conditions and thereby outcompete their microbial
neighbors. For soil-dwelling bacteria like Acinetobacter baylyi, one key
survival strategy relies on exporting a diverse repertoire of proteins allowing
nutrient uptake and resistance to toxic compounds. The long-term goal of this
project is to clarify how specific pathways contribute to exporting proteins of
A. baylyi, particularly as it relates to aiding survival of this microbe in the
wild. This project will provide opportunities for undergraduate and masters
students at Hofstra University to gain significant hands-on experience in
various areas of molecular microbiology. Integrating part of this research
project into existing courses will enhance the educational experience of Hofstra
students beyond that obtained in a typical classroom setting. Additionally,
students from nearby Brentwood High School will participate in the project
thereby introducing them to hypothesis-driven research.

Protein export pathways are found in all cellular organisms, and these pathways
are critical for sustaining life. The Twin-Arginine Translocase (Tat) pathway is
widely distributed as homologs of it are found in bacteria, archaea, and plant
thylakoids. Therefore, understanding how the Tat pathway functions at a
molecular level has applications for both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms.
A. baylyi provides a unique system in which to study Tat-mediated protein
export. Indeed, the existence of dual Tat pathways in A. baylyi indicates that
Tat-mediated protein export is more complicated than current models suggest.
Using A. baylyi as a model to study Tat-dependent protein export will provide
insights not available in other model organisms like Escherichia coli. In
particular, the researchers will investigate phenotypes important for growth
including biofilm formation and cell envelope biogenesis that are dependent on
Tat. To identify all Tat substrates in A. baylyi, the investigators will use
both a candidate-based approach and a comprehensive proteomic analysis. Lastly,
using both genetic and biochemical approaches, they will investigate the
molecular architecture of Tat complexes purified from A. baylyi cells.