* 1615948
* NSF/MCB-BSF:Transfer of mRNA between cells through membrane nanotubes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Singer, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2019
* USD 698,164.00

Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are molecules that convey genetic information from genes
(DNA) in the cell nucleus to the cell body, where they act as the blueprints for
the synthesis of proteins encoded by the genes. mRNA levels are tightly
controlled by their rate of synthesis in the nucleus and degradation in the cell
body. The regulation of these two processes modulates the number of mRNA
molecules and, hence, protein levels within the cell. Therefore, modulating mRNA
levels directly affects both cellular structure and behavior. Recently, a third
process that affects mRNA levels was discovered, i.e. that cells can transfer
and share mRNA molecules between themselves. However, the implications of
intercellular mRNA transfer upon neighbor cells are still poorly understood.
Thus, there is an immediate need for a quantitative analysis to better
understand this novel process. Characterization of this process is performed
using state-of-the-art microscopy and biochemical techniques. The main goals of
this project are: 1) to develop tools for live imaging of this process, 2) to
determine the scope of this process, 3) to decipher the molecular mechanism that
performs and regulates this process and 4) to define the physiological
consequences of this process.

It was found that mRNA molecules transfer between cells, through structures that
are called membrane nanotubes (i.e. long, thin tubes that connect cells). The
quantitative analysis suggests that 1-5% of the mRNA molecules in cells actually
come from "donor" cells. However, there is much that is still unknown. In this
project, a live imaging system will be developed to visualize mRNA transfer for
the first time in living cells. Second, the scope of this process will be
determined, e.g. how many RNAs undergo transfer and what is the efficiency
thereof? This will be performed by co-culturing human "donor" and murine
"acceptor" cells, followed by separating them by flow cytometry. After the cells
are separated, their mRNA content will be analyzed by RNA-seq techniques and the
scope of human mRNAs that transferred to murine cells will be revealed. In
addition, we will verify the scope of RNA transfer by fluorescence microscopy
using multiplex single-molecule Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (smFISH).
Proteins involved in mRNA transfer will determined using RNA affinity
purification to isolate those that bind the transferred mRNA and by assessing
the effects of mutation of the suspected candidates in cells. Last, but most
important, a series of biochemical, imaging and cell biology assays will be
performed in order to determine if the transferred mRNAs are being translated
into proteins in the acceptor cells, and affect their physiology. Deciphering
the process of mRNA transfer through membrane nanotubes and its consequences
will further our understanding of its role in controlling local cellular
environments with respect to tissue development and maintenance along with the
cellular responses to stress. We will also gain an understanding of how membrane
nanotubes are formed and deliver materials, and our aim is to also develop new
tools and techniques for mRNA imaging and to establish an open database of
transferred RNAs.

This research was funded by a joint Israeli and United State program in which
the NSF provides funding for the US laboratory, located at Albert-Einstein
School of Medicine in New York, while the Israeli BSF provides funds for the
Israeli lab at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot.