* 1615252
* Collaborative Research: Development of a platform enabling analysis of membrane protein interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Barbara Imperiali, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Title: Collaborative research: Development of a platform enabling analysis of
membrane protein interactions

Proteins embedded within or associated with cellular membranes make up 30% of
all proteins. These cellular gatekeepers are critical in biological functions,
including transport in and out of cells, recognition and transduction of
information, energy production and communication amongst cells. Despite the
importance of membrane proteins, understanding of the interactions and functions
of the membrane proteome is still greatly hampered by technical challenges;
there is an urgent need for innovative approaches to uncover how membrane
proteins interact with one another and with their binding partners in the native
membrane environment. This project will develop a versatile experimental
platform that provides maps of protein-protein and protein-membrane
interactions. Under-represented minorities will receive STEM education and
training at undergraduate graduate level. The proposal will also provide video
instructions for high school students to attract students in STEM fields.

This collaborative research will establish a versatile experimental platform
that provides information on protein-protein and protein-membrane assemblies in
Nanodiscs, which represent a native-like model membrane system. The goals of
this research are to establish a versatile experimental platform that provides
vector maps of protein-protein and protein-membrane assemblies. Key cornerstones
of the approach are the use of lipid bilayer nanodiscs (NDs) as a native-like
membrane platform and biophysical approaches that rely on strategically
positioned lanthanide-binding tags (LBTs). The LBTs are dual-function probes
that insert atoms for physical measurements enabling the construction of three-
dimensional vector maps of protein assemblies relative to the membrane plane.
Measurements will be accomplished via small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and
anomalous SAXS (ASAXS) to provide distances between lanthanides and center of
mass and inter-lanthanide distances. The construction of vector maps will allow
accurate measurement of the response of proteins to the presence and absence of
binding partners, dynamic protein modifications, and indeed the composition of
the membrane itself-thus defining the critical determinants of both assembly and
function. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.