* 1615456
* Periodic Phenomena and the Evolution of Cataclysmic Variable Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Joseph Patterson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 172,487.00

1. Most stars occur in systems containing two or more objects. Some pairs
include a very dense star called a ?white dwarf? ? a star with the mass of our
Sun crammed into a volume about the size of the Earth ? plus an ordinary star
smaller and redder than the Sun. In some cases, the red star can transfer a
stream of mass onto a disk of gas around the white dwarf. Matter spirals in
through the disk to accumulate on the white dwarf, heating up rapidly and
shining brightly for a time. The resulting outburst of energy gives these so-
called ?cataclysmic variables? (CVs) their name. Monitoring CVs for outbursts,
or to study the wealth of periodic signals they display, requires far more
telescope time than professional astronomers can afford. For the past two
decades, the Principal Investigator has been leading a world-wide group of
amateur astronomers using small telescopes ? which he calls the ?Center for
Backyard Astrophysics? ? to obtain the necessary observations of CVs. The data
have proven extremely useful to professional astronomers who study these
systems. This project continues that fruitful collaboration, engaging amateurs
around the world in valuable ?citizen science.?

2. Most of the information about CVs comes from various periodic signals they
exhibit. Yet few professional observers have been willing to devote the time
necessary to monitor these systems in order to measure period changes (which can
reveal their evolutionary timescales) or to obtain data on additional periodic
phenomena they may display. These include orbital periods and period changes,
rotational periods, and so-called ?superhumps? in certain classes of CVs. This
proposal seeks to obtain long-term time-series photometry from a world-wide
network of amateur astronomers using small telescopes ? called the ?Center for
Backyard Astrophysics? or CBA ? to fill this need. In addition, the Principal
Investigator expects to be able to use the data obtained to help distinguish
between two diametrically opposed theories for the fate of CV systems: Are the
donor stars whittled away by mass transfer to the white dwarf primary, or are
they evaporated by nova explosions on the white dwarfs? The photometric time-
series data and their implications for improving our understanding of CVs
constitute the Intellectual Merit of this project. The Broader Impacts of this
project stem from the Principal Investigator?s continuing ability to motivate
and engage the world-wide community of amateur astronomers to gather
scientifically useful photometric data on these systems. The amateur observers
willingly and continually fill the gap in observational data that has been
largely abandoned by the professionals, and under the leadership of the
Principal Investigator they produce a steady stream of valuable photometric data
on a wide variety of CVs.