* 1615960
* Collaborative Research: Changes in Molecular Gas and Galaxy Properties Over Time in the Era of Integral Field Unit Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stuart Vogel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2020
* USD 348,587.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes of a galaxy's properties over time are
driven by the quantity of its cold gas, the raw material from which stars form.
Thus, understanding the properties of a galaxy's cold gas component will tell us
both how the star formation process changes over time and how this affects
galaxies. Using a recently completed survey of carbon monoxide gas in a sample
of nearby galaxies, the proposers will (1) measure how the molecular gas is used
up, in order to test how star formation in the galaxies is affected; (2) map the
locations of this gas in the galaxies to determine if/how these locations affect
star formation; and (3) measure how the gas is flowing into and out of the
galaxies to determine how this affects structural changes in the galaxies over
time. In particular, some questions that can be answered from this research
include: What factors affect the conversion of molecular gas into stars? How is
molecular gas structured? How do galaxies grow and age? This proposal will
provide insight into the process of galaxy formation and our understanding of
these objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal plans to combine spatially resolved spectroscopy of carbon monoxide
molecular gas, ionized gas and stellar populations for a sample of 125 nearby
galaxies. Measuring spatially-resolved molecular gas depletion time scales as a
function of various galaxy properties, using diagnostics of spectral lines to
probe diffuse molecular gas, and constraining the rates of gas in- and outflow
for these galaxies has the potential to add greatly to our understanding of star
formation in normal galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of galaxies
across a range of redshifts allow us to witness the growth and aging of the
galaxy population. It has long been recognized that these processes are driven
by the rise and fall of star formation, which is ultimately linked to the supply
of cold gas. Further progress in understanding the regulation of star formation
in galaxies, however, requires additional observational constraints beyond the
molecular gas mass and star formation rate. By exploiting a unique combination
of the largest, most homogeneous interferometric CO survey of galaxies to date
(the Extragalactic Database for Galaxy Evolution, or EDGE) and one of the
principal ongoing optical integral field unit (IFU) surveys (CALIFA), the
project team will confront models of star formation and galaxy evolution with
uniform, high quality measurements of gas masses and star formation rates,
supplemented by a vast array of additional data, including star formation
history, stellar mass, nuclear activity, and the metallicity and kinematics of
the gas and stars. These studies will be conducted on a spatially resolved basis
across a well-defined sample that is representative of the nearby Universe, and
will thus inform future studies of star formation and mass assembly at all
redshifts undertaken by JWST and ALMA.