* 1615975
* Numerical Studies of the Dynamical Orbital Interplay between the Inner and Outer Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nathan Kaib, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 226,735.00

Just after the Solar System formed, the giant planets Jupiter and Saturn moved
closer and farther, respectively, from the Sun in their orbits. These planets
are so large that their wander affected all the other, smaller objects that were
also forming in the Solar System ? planets like Venus and Earth, asteroids, and
comets. These smaller planets were pushed around by the gravity of the giant
planets. The violent forces created by the giant planets? movements caused many
smaller objects to bombard other objects. Mathematical models have been
developed to describe this movement of the giant planets in the early Solar
System. The models, however, suggest forces so great that the smaller planets
cannot survive the process. Using state-of-the-art computational techniques that
include the effects of collisions, these investigators will study the beginning
of the Solar System and place limits on the conditions under which the Earth and
other smaller planets formed. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in the study. The team will share their results with the general
public through public talks and public student posters on recent planetary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Giant planets orbiting our sun and other stars
evolve significantly after initial formation. This is caused by a dynamical
instability among the giant planets that organizes the orbital structure of the
outer Solar System. The terrestrial planets, however, are unlikely to survive
this dynamical interplay. How the exact configuration of the terrestrial planets
emerged from the final giant-impact phase of planet formation is not fully
understood, and the timing of this evolution within our own Solar System is not
well constrained. State-of-the-art numerical simulations, including recently-
developed methods of modeling collisions during planet formation, will be used
here to model the giant-planet instability occurring while the terrestrial
planets are still forming. The effects of this process on terrestrial planet
formation will be assessed to determine whether our current Solar System is
consistent with this scenario, and will be used to place new constraints on
terrestrial-planet formation models. What the investigators learn can also be
applied to exoplanet system formation. The Principal Investigator will mentor a
graduate student in the proposed research, and the graduate student will in turn
mentor undergraduate students. The PI also plans local public lectures on the
research, as well as a student poster contest.