* 1615770
* RUI: Evolution of Bacterial Asparaginyl-tRNA Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Kelly Sheppard, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 368,248.00

The goal of this research is to understand why certain bacteria employ two
distinct routes for preparing the amino acid asparagine for protein synthesis.
The results will provide insights into the evolutionary origin of these
alternate pathways and how they may confer adaptive physiological advantages to
bacteria growing in different natural environments, i.e., in soil versus inside
a mammalian host. Undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented
minorities, will be trained in laboratory research through the project. The
impact of the training will be measured by the presentation of the research at
scientific meetings, student co-authorship of peer reviewed articles, and future
student placement in the workforce and in graduate programs. In addition, the
project will allow studies arising from the research to be integrated into an
experimental biochemistry laboratory course, training additional undergraduate
students in hypothesis driven biochemical research. To expand scientific
literacy and retain more students from underrepresented minorities in STEM
disciplines, the project will provide outreach to middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Translation of a genetic message into the amino acid
sequence of a protein is essential for cellular life. The fidelity of the
process is dependent on the formation of the correct adaptor molecules,
aminoacyl-tRNAs. Attaching an amino acid to the right tRNA is carried out in
cells primarily by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Each tRNA synthetase is specific
for one amino acid and only ligates the amino acid onto a certain set of tRNA
molecules. However, in many bacterial genomes asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase that
directly attaches asparagine to its cognate tRNA is not encoded. Instead these
organisms synthesize asparagine on the tRNA via an indirect two-step pathway.
First they use a non-discriminating aspartyl-tRNA synthetase to aminoacylate
tRNA with aspartate. The tRNA-bound Asp is then amidated by the amidotransferase
GatCAB to form asparaginyl-tRNA. A number of bacteria, including Bacillus
subtilis and Bacillus halodurans, encode both routes for asparaginyl-tRNA
synthesis. A subset of bacteria encoding both routes acquired an archaeal non-
discriminating aspartyl-tRNA synthetase for tRNA-dependent asparagine
biosynthesis. The objectives of this project are to use biochemical and
microbial genetic approaches to elucidate why so many bacteria retain both
routes for asparaginyl-tRNA formation and why certain bacteria acquired an
archaeal non-discriminating aspartyl-tRNA synthetase for the task. Results are
expected to shed light on the evolution of a process that is crucial for the
accuracy of protein synthesis.