* 1615897
* Diffusion of atoms and molecules on interstellar dust grain and ice analogs
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Gianfranco Vidali, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2020
* USD 736,600.00

Interstellar space, or the space between the stars, contains extremely cold and
tenuous clouds of gas seeded with tiny dust grains. Within the densest
interstellar clouds, dust grains are coated with ice, providing sites for
chemical reactions of simple atoms and molecules. Reactions on dust grains and
ices can produce increasingly complex molecules, some of which are the building
blocks of life. This research project will use advanced experimental and
theoretical tools from a variety of scientific fields to study how atoms and
molecules react on dust grains and ices under harsh conditions similar to those
in space. Results from the study will help astronomers understand how processes
on dust grains and ices can lead to the rich chemistry of space. The project
will also train students in an interdisciplinary field at the forefront of
astrophysical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine proven
experimental techniques (atomic and molecular beams, quadrupole mass
spectrometry, and infrared spectroscopy) with new techniques (time-resolved
reactive scattering) to obtain quantitative information on adsorption,
diffusion, reaction, and desorption of atoms and molecules that are commonly
found in the interstellar gas. Newly developed theoretical methods will be used
to derive adsorption (sticking) and diffusion coefficients of the atoms and
molecules from the experimental data. The data and derived parameters will be
used in simulations of interstellar environments. The PI and his team will: (1)
measure diffusion coefficients of atoms and molecules on surfaces of dust grain
analogs and ices; (2) measure sticking coefficients of atoms and molecules on
surfaces of various grain analogs; (3) perform theoretical analyses of the
experimental data; (4) use the new diffusion coefficients in chemical models
that will help interpret observations of interstellar clouds; and (5) provide
the data in a format that can be used by astronomers studying the chemical
evolution of the interstellar gas. The project will also support an
undergraduate student, a graduate student, and a postdoctoral scholar at
Syracuse University.