* 1615752
* Cyanobacterial Circadian Clock Mechanism Probed by Pulse EPR
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,721.00

Photosynthetic organisms live on the energy of sunlight. This project will
determine how some of the simplest photosynthetic organisms, the cyanobacteria
(or blue-green algae), use an internal circadian clock to tell time so they are
prepared for carrying out photosynthesis at the break of dawn. The clock runs
with a set of three proteins, KaiA, KaiB, and KaiC that carry out a 24 hour
biochemical cycle involving chemical modification (phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation) of two amino acids in the protein KaiC. Change of protein
structure over the 24 hour cycle will be monitored by a sensitive spectroscopic
method (electron paramagnetic resonance) that monitors the position and motions
of small molecular magnets linked chemically to specific sites in these
proteins. This project will provide educational and research training
opportunities to underrepresented minorities through variety of dedicated
programs ranging from university to national level. Some of these are directed
to high school students to prepare them to engage in STEM education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of predictions of mechanistic models for
the Kai clock are well suited to be tested with electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) methods based on the use of site directed spin labeling (SDSL) with either
stable nitroxyl radicals or high spin metal ions such as Gd(III) or Mn(II), the
latter being particularly sensitive with new high frequency/field EPR
spectrometers. Multifrequency continuous wave (CW) EPR will be used to measure
protein dynamics at specific protein sites and to determine how these dynamics
are modulated by the KaiC ring stacking and unstacking transitions that are at
the heart of a new model that will be tested experimentally. The pulse EPR
method of Double Electron-Electron Resonance (DEER) will provide direct
measurements of interspin distances and distance distributions on the scale of
several nanometers that is relevant for measuring association and disassociation
of subunits and stacking and unstacking of ring structures. These experiments
probing the KaiA/KaiB/KaiC clock complex will provide new structure and dynamics
data that will test and improve current mechanistic models of its function. This
project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.