* 1615192
* Protein-Protein Interactions of Protein Kinase C During Polarized Growth in Filamentous Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Terry Hill, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 10/31/2020
* USD 520,324.00

This project seeks to increase our understanding of how fungi grow. Fungi are
microorganisms of great importance to industry, the environment, and
agriculture. Many are used to produce commercially valuable products, while
others cause major financial losses due to their spoilage of goods and infecting
crops. Understanding their growth advances technologies involving their use and
aids in developing strategies to control spread of those that are damaging.
Fungal cell growth and development are focused at the cell wall, which is an
outer cellular structure that provides rigidity and protection from potential
environmental stressors. Without a healthy cell wall, fungal growth and the
ability to colonize its host are severely compromised. This project builds on
previous NSF funded research by the same investigators, which identified
candidate proteins involved in fungal cell wall synthesis and growth. In
addition to discovering more growth-related proteins, this work will determine
which of those proteins physically interact with one another and how they work
together during growth. This research will be carried out by a pair of senior
scientists working with undergraduate students at Rhodes College (Memphis, TN).
Undergraduate students will be integrally involved in all aspects of the
research, which will complement and extend their coursework providing a more
complete scientific education and better preparing them for advanced studies.
The investigators will also continue a program initiated during prior NSF
awards, which provides summer research positions to students attending
Historically Black Colleges in the Memphis region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the function of protein kinase C in filamentous fungal
growth and the interplay of its functions with those of other proteins involved
in polarized growth and development. Using the filamentous fungus Aspergillus
nidulans as a model organism, these researchers and others in the field have
identified proteins that localize to sites of cell wall synthesis, namely
growing cell apices (hyphal tips) and forming crosswalls (septa). One such
protein is PkcA (an A. nidulans homolog of protein kinase C), which is a
serine/threonine kinase most similar to the novel protein kinase C isoforms that
have been well described in metazoans and yeasts. Although much has been done to
describe proteins that participate in growth, this project will add what could
be considered the ?PkcA module? to the larger A. nidulans growth network
complex. Using techniques including fluorescence labeled proteins,
immunoprecipitations, and yeast two-hybrid assays, the researchers will uncover
the protein-protein interactions in which PkcA participates at septation sites
and hyphal tips and the PkcA motifs responsible for these interactions. In
addition, the researchers will determine which complexed proteins are
phosphorylated by PkcA using in silico proteomics tools paired with liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Not only will this research
be of value to the filamentous fungi community, but also to the broader cell
biology community, as it will shed light on factors that affect protein
recruitment to complexes and how those protein networks function subsequent to
recruitment.