* 1615782
* Control of G2 and Transition to Endocycles in the Plant Cell Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* John Larkin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2020
* USD 331,547.00

Plant growth is crucial to agriculture, with important implications for yields
of traditional agricultural crops and for production of biomass for biofuels. At
the cellular level, plant growth involves two distinct processes, cell division,
which produces new cells, and cell expansion, which increases the size of the
cells. During division, the cell doubles its DNA content and subsequently the
cell divides to form two cells, a process known as the mitotic cell cycle.
During the cell expansion phase of growth, many plant cells continue a modified
version of the cell cycle, in which the DNA content doubles but the cell does
not divide. Examples of economically important cell types that double their DNA
without division include cereal endosperm, cotton fibers, and nitrogen-fixing
symbiotic nodules in legumes. In addition, this process plays important roles in
cell differentiation, and is essential for nitrogen fixation in legume root
nodules, but the detailed mechanism of this modified cell cycle remains poorly
understood. A protein (known as SIM) has been identified that functions as an
inhibitor of cell division, but allows DNA replication. The goal of this project
is to understand how SIM regulates the balance between division and DNA
replication during plant growth. The project will also play a role in the
education of graduate students and undergraduates from diverse backgrounds, will
test the effectiveness of the film as a classroom teaching tool, both in
learning course content, and on student attitudes towards science, and will
train undergraduates in mathematical modeling for the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIAMESE (SIM) gene encodes a cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor that blocks mitosis without blocking DNA replication.
Although SIM is clearly plays a key role in the transition from mitotic growth
to endoreplication, the control of the G2/M transition in plants is complex, and
many questions remain about how endoreplication is established, and the role of
SIM and related proteins in this process. The proposed work will use a
combination of molecular genetic manipulations, live cell imaging and
mathematical modeling to test specific hypotheses about the role of SIM and the
related SMR proteins in the mitosis/endocycle transition. The Specific
Objectives of this proposal are to answer the following questions: Can a
combination of mathematical modeling, genetic and cell biological experiments be
used to create a coherent model of inhibition of G2/M during the transition to
endocycles? How is degradation of SIM protein regulated? Do SIM or other SMRs
play a role in controlling progression through G2 during the regular mitotic
cycle?