* 1615646
* Collaborative Research: From genotype to fluxome to a comprehensive kinetic model of Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Elucidating and quantifying the complexities of biological systems is of
fundamental and practical interest to synthetic biologists and metabolic
engineers. A useful approach to unraveling biological complexity is to observe
the biological system under perturbed conditions, for example, by removing key
cellular components such as genes. In this study, responses to gene knockouts in
the model microorganism Escherichia coli will be investigated. By systematically
measuring cellular responses to the removal of specific genes in central carbon
metabolism a high-quality data set will be generated that will then be used to
construct a predictive kinetic model. In addition to having significant value in
advancing fundamental biological sciences, this model will provide a valuable
new toolkit for industrial biotechnology. Additionally, this model will form the
basis for the development of new and enhanced educational tools that will
introduce high-school and college students to the biological systems at an early
age.

Developing a predictive kinetic model of cellular metabolism has been the desire
of the scientific community for many decades. However, limitations in
experimental approaches for measuring precise metabolic fluxes and the daunting
task of estimating a large number of kinetic parameters in models of cellular
metabolism have prevented its realization. In recent years, a number of major
breakthroughs have been achieved that allow, for the first time, this long-
standing task to be accomplished successfully. First, new experimental
approached based on parallel 13C-labeling experiments have greatly improved the
precision and accuracy of flux measurements. Second, the ensemble kinetic
modeling approach was developed and validated for biological systems, which
allows systematic construction of comprehensive kinetic models of cellular
metabolism while limiting problems of parameter identifiability that have been a
major concern in the past and have limited previous modeling approaches. In this
project, metabolic flux redistribution in response to gene knockouts will be
comprehensively assessed for a large number of E. coli knockout strains, both
single gene and double knockouts, enabling the development of a comprehensive
kinetic model of central metabolism. The proposed work will add to the
scientific knowledge by: (1) generating extensive high-quality experimental data
on metabolic fluxes for a large number of E. coli mutant strains using state-of-
the-art 13C-flux analysis methods; (2) providing a comprehensive kinetic model
of cellular metabolism for E. coli, an important academic and industrial
microbe; (3) developing and implementing best practices, standards, procedures
and tools for performing, documenting and sharing of 13C-flux analysis results
and kinetic models; (4) building a framework to integrate multiple omics data
sets within the ensemble modeling framework; (5) generating new knowledge and
insights about the regulation of E. coli metabolism under glucose-rich and
glucose-limited conditions.

This award was co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB) program in
the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate and the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering (BBE) program of
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(CBET) in the Engineering Directorate.