* 1615573
* Collaborative Research: Integrating the geological and genomic records: time-calibrating Earth's dynamic biogeochemical history
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mukul Bansal, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 316,714.00

This research will integrate biological and planetary change across geological
timescales by developing a more accurate and precise time-calibrated Tree of
Life (ToL), i.e., a Chronogram of Life (CoL) based on novel methods for dating
microbial evolution. The geological record has long been our sole source of
information about planetary history. In contrast, the deep time record preserved
within genomes has only been recently discovered, and remains poorly
characterized. When unlocked through phylogenetic analysis, molecular clocks,
and robust calibration, this genomic record will provide unique insights into
geochemical, atmospheric, and climate processes across Earth's history. The
timing of many events linking the co-evolution of life and the planet remain
uncertain. This is especially true for very early events in Earth's history,
where the fossil and geochemical record is often sparse, ambiguous, or entirely
absent. In fact, across much of the Archaean (and possibly Hadean) Eons, the
only remaining record may be the one preserved within genomes. To reveal this
record, the research has three major aims: (1) identifying ancient time
calibrations in genome evolution across the ToL by using HGT (Horizontal Gene
Transfer) events via genome stratigraphy; (2) linking the fossil record to
microbial history via sequencing co-evolving microbiomes of ancient animal
lineages; and (3) developing new bioinformatics approaches to integrate these
constraints, generating an accurate and reliable chronology of early life
evolution and planetary history, directly testing several hypotheses related to
the deep biogeochemical history of the Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep,
intertwined relationship between the evolution of life and the planet is of
fundamental importance. While many previous investigations have proposed
scenarios linking events in early microbial evolution to the preserved
biogeochemical record, in order to actually test these different co-evolutionary
hypotheses, independent methods are required to time-calibrate microbial
evolution itself. To this end, the key intellectual contribution of this work is
using horizontal gene transfer (HGT) as a powerful new tool for determining the
timing of events on the early Earth. Flows of genes across the ToL constrain the
relative divergence times of distantly related lineages. This interpretation of
HGT permits genomic stratigraphy, wherein time calibrations available for some
groups within the ToL (i.e., via biomarker and/or fossil records) can be
propagated to other groups. This approach is analogous to biostratigraphy, which
uses the presence or absence of different fossils to date strata of sedimentary
rocks. Similarly, dates from fossil calibrations can be propagated across the
ToL through co-speciation events, as are often observed between microbial
symbionts and their animal hosts. Expanding this technique to previously
unsampled microbiomes of the most ancient arthropod lineages will greatly extend
the temporal reach of this method. Together, these novel stratigraphic uses for
genomic information will translate the ToL into an accurate CoL. This work will
permit direct evaluation of major questions in the evolution of Earth's early
biosphere, geosphere and atmosphere, including the emergence of oxygenic and
anoxygenic photosynthesis, methane production via methanogenesis, and the
establishment of microbial nitrogen, carbon, sulfur,&lt;br/&gt;and oxygen cycles