* 1615457
* Singular Problems in Continuum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anna Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 285,166.00

The investigator studies several problems in fluid mechanics and mechanics of
elastic materials that are characterized by a singular or nearly singular
behavior. In the first part of the project, the investigator focuses on
understanding and modeling the behavior of complex fluid flows under the
requirement of incompressibility, that is, preserving the volume occupied by the
fluid. Many fluids are approximately incompressible, including water and under
some conditions even air. The complex behavior that is investigated is due to
friction between the fluid and rigid walls, and to stirring of the fluid itself.
Both are major phenomena in fluid mechanics and are still not fully understood
rigorously. Wall friction creates drag and produces swirls in the flow that
contribute to the onset of turbulence. Quantifying the effect of stirring and
mixing in fluid flows has direct impact on many physical processes, from
extrusion and molding, to efficient combustion, to pollutant dispersal. In the
second part of the project, the investigator studies the propagation of time-
periodic waves in elastic materials. Waves can be used to remotely probe
materials by recording their elastic response under an applied disturbance. This
is a so-called inverse problem, as material properties are inferred from
measurements, and it is highly sensitive to errors. Mathematical algorithms are
used to improve the reliability of the reconstruction. The type of inverse
problem that is studied finds applications in geological exploration, earthquake
prediction, and ground-penetrating radar. The project provides training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students.

The investigator uses analytical and computational techniques to study problems
in incompressible fluid mechanics and in mechanics of deformable solids. The
project has two main parts: I. Incompressible Fluid Mechanics: I.a. Vanishing
viscosity limit and boundary layer analysis; I.b. Optimal mixing and irregular
transport. II. Elasticity: Inverse boundary problem for time-harmonic waves in
elastic media. These problems are characterized by the presence of
singularities, in the form of singular problems for partial differential
equations (PDE), such as the zero-viscosity limit for the Navier-Stokes
equations, or in the form of singular coefficients in the PDE, such as in mixing
problems under non-Lipschitz flows, or singular domains for the PDE, such as
domains with corners. The project addresses some fundamental open questions in
fluid mechanics concerning the behavior of incompressible fluids at high
Reynolds numbers. It seeks to shed light on the mechanism for boundary layer
separation and the validity of Prandtl approximation through the rigorous
analysis of special flows. It also seeks to quantify mixing properties of flows
under the strong divergence-free constraint from the point of view of transport
equations and geometric analysis. In the second part, the project addresses the
stability and performance of reconstruction algorithms in inverse boundary
problems, which have had a major impact on non-invasive imaging techniques. The
appearance of singularities and the interplay between analysis and geometry are
recurring themes of the project. A variety of techniques, in many cases combined
in a novel way, such as in mixing problems, are used to carry out the work. The
project provides training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students.