* 1615311
* RUI:   Dynamic Ultra-Compact Ionized Gas regions in the Star-Forming Region W49A: Continuing the Search for Flickering Sources
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Christopher De Pree, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 03/31/2021
* USD 255,233.00

The team will use the Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) to search for time-
variable sources associated with massive stars. Such flickering sources at radio
wavelengths suggest that the stars accrete gas in fits and starts. This
surprising behavior was predicted from simulations. The expected changes in the
radio signals are too small to measure from year to year. But they are big
enough to measure from decade to decade. The longevity of the VLA means that the
predictions can now be tested. The team will compare their new VLA measurements
with those from two decades ago. Recent technical upgrades to this NSF facility
will also let the team study the motions of the accreted gas. Undergraduates
from underrepresented groups will be heavily involved in the research. The PI
and his undergraduates will produce educational posters for middle-school
students. They will also lecture at public events at the local campus
observatory. The observatory is the well-known center of a scaled model of our
Solar System spread throughout Atlanta, Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will use the VLA's exquisite spatial resolution and longevity to study W49A, a
massive star-forming complex in our Galaxy. Their goals are to (1) search for
variations in the size and flux density of its continuum sources of ionized
(HII) gas; (2) test the predictions of the simulations; (3) characterize the
properties of the spectral lines from the ionized gas; and (4) look for
kinematic signatures of continuum flickering.