* 1615092
* Nuclear Structure and Reactions from Lattice Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Gautam Rupak, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 264,138.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of strong interactions, the
fundamental force in nature that manifests itself by interactions between the
building blocks of protons and neutrons that form the nuclei of atoms.
Theoretical studies of QCD are central to nuclear physics efforts that seek a
better understanding of the fundamental processes taking place in the Universe,
processes that ultimately impact life on Earth. In this project, the PI will
develop new theoretical and numerical techniques for calculating time-dependent
quantities, in particular the nuclear reaction rates important for the
development of astrophysical models of how nuclei interact to generate the
fundamental elements that appear in the periodic table. Knowing these rates
gives insight into the physics of the early universe and the nuclear reactions
that produce the energy in stars. Broader impacts of this project include
training of graduate students in numerical and analytical work for an academic
or industry career benefiting society.

This project builds on the adiabatic projection method for lattice EFT that was
previously introduced by the investigator using funds from a U.S. National
Science Foundation grant. Typical low energy reactions involve interactions
between two atomic nuclei. The adiabatic projection method allows an effective
two-body description of the participating nuclei starting from a microscopic
description of the nuclei themselves in terms of several protons and neutrons.
These ideas are developed further, here, in several ways. Mixed channel
reactions are calculated that are important in describing inelastic processes.
Reactions involving electromagnetic radiation would be calculated. Long-range
interaction between nuclei due to the Coulomb force would be studied. Key
reactions involving light nuclei that are relevant in Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
and stellar burning would be studied. Some of these reactions play an important
role in interpreting experimental results probing physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. These calculations would complement similar efforts
in the field of halo nuclei. These nuclei are described as a tightly bound core
with usually one or two valence neutrons forming a halo. This research ties in
with planned major U.S. investment in rare isotope beam experiments.