* 1615955
* CDS&E: The development of open-source software with an application to modeling the formation of globular star clusters
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Greg Bryan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 406,729.00

Globular star clusters are among the oldest objects in our Universe, and
understanding their origin has remained a great challenge to astrophysicists for
many decades. This project will develop computer software employing a new
numerical method to perform the calculations modeling the formation of these
clusters of stars. This new computer software will enable better computer
modeling of the astrophysics governing a variety of physical applications. It
will also be the first such software to be made publicly available. The
investigators will then use this software to create computer simulations that
model the formation of globular star clusters, and they specifically seek to
understand the apparent creation of multiple generations of stars in these
globular clusters. This project's goals will advance the national interests of
developing US leadership in physics and enhancing the US cyber infrastructure.
In addition, the investigators will address the national underrepresentation of
minorities in the sciences by funding a graduate student to participate in
Columbia University's Bridge to the PhD in the Natural Sciences program. The
investigators will train the student in the research program and will mentor the
student through the early stages of his or her science career.

More technically, the first part of this project lays out a systematic plan to
develop a new open source moving-mesh code. Recent development of the moving-
mesh method as a viable alternative to smoothed particle hydrodynamics and
adaptive mesh refinement is a promising development. Moving-mesh hydrodynamics
brings many desirable features including low-diffusion in bulk flows, Galilean
invariance, and good shock handling. The software development uses modern design
and coding techniques to produce an efficient, parallel code that will be
capable of using a wide range of physics and that is easy to use and modify. It
will use the widely used Python language combined with Cython (a static Python
compiler) in computationally intensive parts. Coding will be modular and
designed to allow easy and flexible extension to all parts of the code. The
second part of this project is to simulate the formation of globular clusters.
The code will be applied to a three-part plan for understanding globular cluster
formation: (1) modeling the fragmentation and collapse of idealized low-
metallicity gas clouds to understand the relative importance of global collapse
and fragmentation; (2) using cosmological simulations to identify the physical
properties of gas undergoing rapid colliding flows, a prerequisite to bring
together a large amount of gas in a small region for GC formation; and (3)
exploring the ability of gas outflows from the proposed sources of enriched
material to be re-incorporated into a second generation of stars.