* 1615367
* Evolving contributions of the origin recognition complex (ORC) to subtelomeric chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Laura Rusche, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 609,088.00

Gene duplication is a driving force in molecular evolution, as it provides new
genetic material that can be adapted to serve different purposes in living
organisms. This project is aimed at elucidating how duplicate genes diverge and
their encoded proteins acquire distinct properties. In particular, the research
will examine how a protein motif originally capable of one function can be
adapted to perform other functions in the cell. The project is also designed to
integrate research with training of undergraduate and graduate students who will
gain hands-on experience in designing, executing, and interpreting experiments.
In addition, a postdoctoral fellow who is planning a career in undergraduate
education will gain teaching experience by coaching undergraduates in the
laboratory, developing and implementing assessments for an undergraduate
laboratory course, and designing and teaching a course during the three-week
winter session. Finally, this project will enhance genetic resources for model
organisms by developing additional yeast species for comparative evolutionary
studies.

The fates of duplicate genes are well-modeled theoretically. However, few
studies of gene duplication move beyond sequence analysis to elucidate the
changes that occur in protein function as duplicated genes diverge. The project
will help fill this knowledge gap by tracing the evolution of two proteins that
arose from subunits of the origin recognition complex (ORC). ORC promotes the
assembly of a pre-replication complex for DNA synthesis, and five of its six
subunits contain AAA+ domains that bind and hydrolyze ATP. In the budding yeast
lineage, Orc1 duplicated to yield the heterochromatin protein Sir3, and Orc4
gave rise to the telomere-binding protein Rif2. Both Sir3 and Rif2 lack ATPase
activity and have repurposed the AAA+ domain to bind other proteins. The
research will compare the molecular properties of Orc1/Sir3 and Orc4/Rif2 in
non-duplicated and duplicated yeast species, focusing on their protein
interactions and genomic distributions. In addition, the contributions of these
proteins to transcriptional repression and telomere length regulation will be
examined. The findings will illustrate and clarify theoretical models of gene
duplication by identifying how and when new protein functions arise.