* 1615220
* A Systematic Data Driven Characterization of the Atmospheres of Brown Dwarfs: At the Boundary Between Stars and Planets
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Michael Line, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 12/31/2020
* USD 443,158.00

Brown dwarfs are unusual objects in the galaxy. They straddle the boundary
between stars and planets - too large to be called planets and too small to be
stars. They are not massive enough to fuse hydrogen like stars. Also, their
chemical composition often resembles giant gas planets like Jupiter. Studying
them presents a great opportunity to learn about atmospheric physics in both
stars and planets. This award funds work to study thousands of brown dwarfs
using data from public archives. The researchers will update their atmospheric
models, and test them with comparisons with their data. Their main database will
be the SpeX Prism Spectral Library obtained with the NASA Infrared Telescope
Facility. They will also draw conclusions about atmospheric physics based on a
detailed statistical study of these brown dwarfs. The results will also be
useful to interpreting observations of extrasolar planets. A graduate student
and several undergraduate students will participate in the research, including
minorities. The PI will work with the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) to increase the
numbers of Hispanics and Native Americans in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will apply Bayesian atmospheric retrieval techniques, widely employed in
the extrasolar planet community, to a large sample of brown dwarfs. These tools
will be used to determine cloud properties and thermal structures and
chemistries across a broad range of temperatures and gravities. In particular,
they will address outstanding brown dwarf issues such as the behavior of clouds
across the low mass L-T transition, the evolution of disequilibrium chemistry
with temperature, and the first measure of the distribution of metallicities and
carbon-to-oxygen ratios with the populations. First, they will upgrade their
models to include high-temperature opacities and different thermal profiles.
Next, they will apply their analysis across the entire SpeX database and explore
the relationships between temperature, cloud properties, and molecular
abundances and publish results. Ultimately, they will finish retrieval analysis
on all SpeX objects and apply to other available datasets for brown dwarfs.