* 1615318
* RUI: reprogramming cellular processes in proteasome-inhibited plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Douglas Van Hoewyk, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 205,975.00

The goal of this project is to better understand how plants respond to
environmental stress through the study of proteasomes and proteasome inhibition.
Proteasomes are protein complexes inside all plant and animal cells that degrade
damaged proteins to prevent their toxic aggregation. Such damage can arise from
physical stress; however, such stressors may also inhibit proteasome activity.
Thus, the focus of the research will be to understand how plants reprogram their
cellular activities during proteasome inhibition. A better understanding of
plant responses to environmental stress may ultimately improve crop yield and
food security. The project will allow the training of twelve undergraduate
students at Coastal Carolina University. Students with physical disabilities
will participate in the research, and will strengthen the ties between the
College of Science and Office of Accessibility and Disability Services; this
collaboration may serve as a model to other universities seeking to increase
this group?s participation in STEM disciplines. As this project integrates both
research and teaching, it will also facilitate the revision of a laboratory-
based class that will serve to strengthen the curriculum.

This research investigates plant proteasomes, which avert cytotoxicity by
safely removing damaged proteins that result from stress. However, severe
oxidative stress decreases proteasome activity in plants, and this project aims
to identify mechanisms that contribute to its impairment. In contrast to yeast
and mammalian models, the effects of proteasome inhibition in plants are not
understood. This project intends to address this gap in plant biology by
examining how cellular processes are altered in response to proteasome
inhibition. Respirometry, biochemical, and -omic approaches will be used to
reveal if proteasome inhibition coordinates metabolism to restore amino acid
levels or adjust antioxidant metabolism. The outcomes of the study will describe
differences in how plants respond to proteasome inhibition compared to mammalian
and yeast cells.