* 1615726
* Mathematical Analysis on Peridynamic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Tadele Mengesha, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 131,625.00

This award supports the ongoing research program of the Principal Investigator
on the close analytical examination of "nonlocal models," a type of mathematical
model of relatively recent vintage that has proved to be very effective for
modeling certain challenging phenomena, such as fracture in solid mechanics. For
example, understanding how materials behave, their failure as well as their
strength when deformed, is crucial for their proper usage and also for the
design of new materials with potential impact on manufacturing, materials
engineering, and related technologies. For this purpose, models with varied
levels of success have been proposed in the past. This research project aims to
develop basic mathematical techniques that will deliver proper analytical
footing for the recently proposed "peridynamic model" of continuum mechanics.
The findings will also be applicable to other nonlocal models of similar
structure, with applications in social and biological sciences. The activities
not only will contribute to the success and effectiveness of attempts on
modeling development and experimental validation but also will ensure that
future modeling and simulation efforts based on these nonlocal theories will be
more quantitative and reliable. The research project will provide opportunities
and support for the training of graduate students. The Principal Investigator
will integrate the findings of the project into classroom teaching and other
educational endeavors.

This project concerns the development of theory and techniques for nonlocal
models in general and for the peridynamic model in particular. These models are
characterized by their effective description of continuous as well as
discontinuous fields within a single mathematical framework by using integral
equations in lieu of differential equations. The models have been successfully
applied to better describe jump stochastic processes, anomalous diffusion, and
spontaneous formation and propagation of cracks in solids, to name a few
applications. However, the models have also presented the scientific community
with new mathematical challenges. This research is devoted to exploring some
analytical issues while at the same time laying the necessary mathematical
foundation for future analyses on nonlocal and peridynamic models. Issues to be
addressed include research activities that advance knowledge on the analysis of
linearized peridynamic models of practical interest; regularity properties of
solutions of nonlocal equations as a function of applied force, initial data,
and coefficients; and understanding of peridynamic-based nonlinear behavior. The
approaches involve various tools that lead to extensions of classical
mathematical concepts and techniques to the nonlocal setting, including
perturbation methods, calculus of variations, and nonlinear functional analysis.
Furthermore, the basic mathematical infrastructures that will be worked out are
likely to impact the development of effective and reliable finite element
methods and other numerical schemes to solve complex engineering problems via
peridynamics. The research will make nonlocal and peridynamics-based modeling
and simulation more mathematically consistent, and it will contribute to making
such modeling and simulation more quantitative and predictive in practical
applications.