* 1615826
* Addressing the precision-plasticity paradox in metazoan gene regulatory networks
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Keith Yamamoto, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 515,999.00

This project seeks to discover how intracellular and environmental signals
change the repertoire of genes activated by DNA-binding proteins. In a
particular cellular, developmental and physiological context, DNA-binding
proteins normally operate with precision to control a specific network of target
genes. However, changes in cellular or extracellular conditions can increase the
plasticity of protein-DNA interactions, such that an entirely different group of
genes is targeted. This kind of switch from precision to plasticity may hold the
key to proper development in multicellular organism, like humans, and dissecting
the underlying mechanisms may improve our understanding of how organisms
maintain their well-being in the face of environmental fluctuation. In addition
to the expected scientific achievements, tackling this research problem will
strengthen and enrich the scientific enterprise by providing training and
educational opportunities for two women scientists and for a cohort of
undergraduate students, including those who are underrepresented minorities.
Classic and state-of-art genetic and molecular approaches used in this project
will serve as exciting stimuli for the education of budding scientists, as well
as a conceptual framework for reasoning and problem solving for the education of
those who choose other career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms that generate the
remarkable specificity with which gene transcription is regulated in
multicellular eukaryotes. Based on prior work in this laboratory, a bipartite
model has emerged whereby a given DNA-binding transcriptional regulatory factor
(TF) can either operate precisely to regulate a specific set of gene targets or,
under conditions that promote plasticity, operate to regulate an entirely
different set of genes. The model contends that intra- or extracellular signals
create a specific context that governs how the TF will associate with other DNA-
binding and non-DNA-binding coregulatory factors to activate distinct networks
of gene targets. This model will be tested in the nematode, Caenorhabditis
elegans, which offers unique features including a compact genome, facile
spatiotemporal analyses in the intact organism, powerful genetics, and a
comprehensive suite of genomics tools, including CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. The
research will focus on the precise vs. plastic action of the nuclear hormone
receptor TF, NHR-25. Previous results showed that a gradient of NHR-25 activity
--set up by differential post-translational sumoylation (SUMO) of the protein--
in neighboring cells drives distinct gene networks that result in unique cell
fates and subsequent tissue differentiation and organogenesis. The complexity of
transcription network control will be addressed experimentally to: define and
analyze cell-context dependent NHR-25-SUMO regulatory networks; identify
pathways and machineries that enable NHR-25 regulatory plasticity; and prepare
materials for enChIP analysis to identify proteins associating at NHR-25
dependent response elements. The results obtained will be broadly relevant to
metazoan transcriptional regulation and provide an important foundation for
future studies of gene regulation.