* 1615767
* Protein interactions regulate iron storage and utilization in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Mario Rivera, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 676,071.00

The project outcomes will fill a major gap in our fundamental understanding of
bacterial iron metabolism in the pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Several
strains of this pathogen have developed multidrug resistance, causing severe
challenges for the treatment of hospital infections that affect burn victims,
cancer patients and cystic fibrosis patients with chronic lung infections. The
present proposal, while fundamental in nature, is also likely to expose
bacterial iron metabolism as a vulnerability that can be exploited in future
development of therapies that target bacterial iron homeostasis. The project
will train graduate and undergraduate students in a multidisciplinary
environment that draws from the diverse fields of chemistry, biochemistry,
spectroscopy, structural biology and microbiology. In addition, the Harvest of
Hope Leadership Academy (HHLA) at the University of Kansas (KU) hosts a summer
residential academy for high school students from migrant farm-work background.
The Project Director, in collaboration with the HHLA Program Director, will
organize and lead students on tours of Core Research laboratories, where
students will have the opportunity to meet and interact with the Core Laboratory
Directors. HHLA students who become KU undergraduates are mentored during their
first year by the College Assistance Migrant Program (CAMP) organization at KU.
Two deserving students from the CAMP program will be recruited each summer to
participate in research activities related to the project.

The project will test a new model for bacterial iron homeostasis, whereby the
interactions between two proteins in P. aeruginosa (BfrB and Bfd) enable the
bacterial cells to correctly sense changes in intracellular free iron levels and
to efficiently incorporate iron into iron-utilizing proteins. BfrB is an iron
storage protein and Bfd is a ferredoxin required for iron mobilization from
BfrB. The accepted model of bacterial iron homeostasis assumes that iron storage
proteins function simply as iron accumulators and that accumulated iron is
mobilized to the cytosol only when bacterial cells face iron-limiting
conditions. The new model posits that the BfrB:Bfd interaction, by facilitating
iron flux out of BfrB, enables a dynamic equilibrium between free iron in the
cytosol and iron stored in BfrB, which is crucial for the cells to sense and
react to changes in free iron levels. The revised model also suggests that iron
mobilization from BfrB is required for the efficient incorporation of iron into
iron-utilizing proteins, so that inhibition of the BfrB:Bfd interaction will
result in inefficient iron incorporation into iron-utilizing enzymes, which will
adversely affect important physiological process that depend on iron-containing
proteins and enzymes. This proposed path is different from that in the accepted
model, where the source of iron for iron-utilizing proteins is assumed to be the
free iron in the cytosol. The investigators have also discovered a small
molecule probe that inhibits the BfrB:Bfd interaction, and obtained evidence
that this molecule enhances the killing activity of some existing antibiotics.
Hence, the project also aims to obtain a fundamental understanding how the
antibiotic activity is enhanced by inhibitors of the BfrB:Bfd interaction. These
studies will be guided by the idea that irreversible accumulation of iron in
BfrB, which is caused by the small molecule inhibitor of the BfrB:Bfd
interaction, severely restricts the intracellular iron needed to support crucial
metabolic processes required to fend antibiotic-induced stress.