* 1615313
* RUI: A Systematic, Computational Study of the Effect of Macromolecular Crowding on Electrostatic Interactions, Biomolecular Recognition, and Molecular Design
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Mala Radhakrishnan, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2022
* USD 247,627.00

In recent years, sophisticated computer modeling has enabled scientists to
understand and address challenging problems in materials science, engineering,
environmental science, and other fields. In order for a computational model to
be effective, it must be accurate and efficient. In this project, the research
team will evaluate, improve upon, and apply computational models used to study
molecular interactions in biological environments. Specifically, they will focus
on computational models used to study how interactions between biological
molecules are affected by the physical nature of other molecules in their
immediate environment. It has been shown that cells are highly crowded
environments, and the nature of this "crowding" can significantly affect how
crucial molecules interact with each other. A robust way to model such
environments will allow for better predictions of cellular processes, which can
have important impacts on society's collective understanding of biological
systems and its ability to develop solutions when things go "wrong" in such
systems. This research will be conducted at Wellesley College, an all-female
undergraduate institution, catalyzing women's contribution to computational
science, a discipline in which women have long been very underrepresented. The
research team will also conduct outreach activities at a local diverse high
school, introducing youth to the field of computational modeling of biological
systems. The activities developed as part of this collaborative, outreach effort
will be made available online to help excite students across the country about
using computers and physical science to address real-world issues in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, the goal of the project
is to study how macromolecular crowding within the cell affects electrostatic
interactions and molecular recognition between biomolecules via a controlled set
of computational models that are informed through experimental data. Through
computation, the team will first study systems in which the interacting
biomolecules and macromolecular crowders are "virtual", whose physical
properties can be exhaustively and systematically sampled, in order to
understand how molecular and crowding agent properties such as shape, size, and
charge distribution can affect interaction energies. They will use multiple
computational models, including ones that treat the solvent implicitly and
explicitly, in order to assess the extent to which the method used to model the
system affects the predictions made. The team will also simulate experimentally
realizable biological systems, including DNA-protein and protein-protein
complexes within crowded environments. Through a tight cycle of comparing
simulation predictions with experimental outcomes, they will assess and improve
computational models of crowded biological environments. Finally, the team will
assess whether macromolecular crowding can affect the outcome of a molecular
design application. Through computationally designing molecules meant to bind
with specificity to a partner in either a crowded or uncrowded environment and
experimentally testing those designs, they will determine whether accounting for
macromolecular crowding in the design process is necessary for ensuring the
desired binding properties of the designed molecule. As a whole, this project
will increase our understanding of how biological environments can crucially
affect biomolecular recognition.