* 1615697
* Robust Mathematical Models of Ecotoxicological Dynamics Subject to Stoichiometric Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gregory Mayer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 341,316.00

Accurately assessing the risks of contaminants requires knowledge of complex
ecological interactions, elemental cycling, and the interactive effects of
natural stressors, such as resource limitations and contaminant stressors. The
development of ecotoxicological models have contributed significantly to our
understanding of how contaminants impact organisms and cycle through aquatic
food webs. However current models do not incorporate dynamical interactive
effects of contaminant stressors and elemental constraints, such as
nutrient/light availability and food quality. Investigators will design and
conduct laboratory experiments in conjunction with mathematical models that
account for both nutritional value of diet and toxicant load. The results will
generate knowledge and enhance understandings of the environment and global
change. The project will shed light on nutrient and chemical contaminant cycling
and ultimately improve toxicological risk assessment protocols, which will be
beneficial to environmental managers and policy decision makers. User-friendly
versions of the models will be disseminated on the project's webpage. Graduate
students will receive interdisciplinary training in the fields of mathematics
and ecotoxicology to gain a broad understanding of scientific problems,
necessary to communicate effectively across disciplines. Investigators and
graduate students will be involved in K-12 outreach initiatives organized by the
STEM Center for Outreach, Research, and Education at Texas Tech
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of ecological stoichiometry
emphasizes the balance of multiple chemical elements and the relative abundance
of essential elements in organisms that shape ecological dynamics. Investigators
will develop and analyze a series of empirically testable and robust
mathematical models of population dynamics structured under the framework of
ecological stoichiometry. In parallel to model development, investigators will
integrate data from the literature and from new experiments designed in this
research, in order to parameterize, test, and improve the models. Dynamical
systems theory and tools will be used to interpret and analyze the models
including analytical, computational and numerical, as well as bifurcation
analysis. The synthesis of the models and experiments will result in the
development of a robust theoretical framework appropriate for improved risk
assessment applications in ecotoxicology that incorporate the effects of
stoichiometric constraints on concurrent ecological and toxicological processes.