* 1615858
* Bacterial Membrane Integrity under Salt and Alkaline Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Anuradha Janakiraman, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 625,396.00

The ability to maintain pH stability is critical for all living cells since
proteins maintain their natural structure and function only within a narrow and
optimal pH range. This ability is especially critical for single-celled bacteria
that experience a far larger range of stress conditions compared to a typical
cell from a more complex organism. Bacteria largely rely on membrane transport
proteins to counter rapid changes in environmental pH. However, little is known
about how cell morphology is modulated under stress conditions to support the
transport function. The genetically tractable E. coli will be used as a model
system to develop a molecular understanding of how bacterial membrane integrity,
cell shape, and transport processes are integrated, and the overall impact these
processes have on bacterial survival during environmental fluxes. To generate
interest and excitement in fundamental aspects of microbial biology relevant to
our understanding of physiology, ecology, medicine, and industry, early-stage
undergraduates will be incorporated into several aspects of the project both in
the classroom and in the research laboratory. Many of these students are likely
to belong to communities currently underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to counteract pH stress, bacteria
utilize multiple strategies, chief among which is the expression and activation
of cytoplasmic membrane-spanning proton transporters, which play essential roles
in the maintenance of proton motive force across the cytoplasmic membrane and
aid in pH homeostasis. An auxiliary property of a class of these transporters is
their ability to pump out numerous unrelated drugs and provide resistance to
biocides. Often, pH stresses overlap with salt and cell envelope stresses due to
the increase in sodium cytotoxicity at high pH, and the susceptibility of
certain cell wall biosynthetic enzymes to altered pH. While much is known about
individual strategies of pH responses in bacteria, the integration and overlap
of these responses with salt stress and cell envelope integrity, is poorly
understood. To address this gap, this research will identify as yet
uncharacterized cellular factors involved in the interplay between stress
responses and morphogenesis. The repertoire of powerful genetic tools in E. coli
in combination with molecular, cell biological, biochemical experiments, and
microscopy techniques, will be exploited to define the specific function of each
protein, and determine how they interact with known cell morphology factors.
These studies are expected to enhance our understanding of how bacterial cell
morphology and membrane integrity are maintained in response to multiple
stresses.