* 1615483
* A Systematic Search for Stars in Almost-Dark Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Katherine Rhode, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2020
* USD 367,114.00

Galaxies are collections of stars, gas, dust, and dark matter, all held together
by gravity. It is nearly 100 years since American Astronomer Edwin Hubble first
showed that galaxies are island universes, containing of billions of stars. The
investigators seek to understand how galaxies form and change over time. Their
goal is identifying the star formation processes that produced the wide variety
of galaxies observed. The investigators have selected for special study a set of
nearby, gas-rich, galaxies. These galaxies were found with the Arecibo radio
telescope. These galaxies contain large amounts of neutral hydrogen (HI) gas,
the raw ingredient of new generations of stars. Furthermore, graduate and
undergraduate students who work on the project will receive professional
development and training in scientific research, technical and mathematical
methods, image processing and analysis, and computer
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALFALFA survey is a HI survey aimed at
constructing a statistically-complete census of neutral hydrogen gas in the
local universe. ALFALFA covers 7000 square degrees of sky and has cataloged
30,000 objects. This project aims to measure the optical properties of two
specific types of ALFALFA sources: Ultra-Compact High Velocity Clouds (UCHVCs),
which are neutral hydrogen gas clouds with properties that make them good
candidates for nearby low-mass galaxies, and "Almost-Dark" galaxies, which are
HI sources with a wider range of possible distances and masses. Both classes of
objects have no clear optical counterpart in existing catalogs, so the objective
is to detect and characterize the optical emission from these objects in order
to better understand their properties and evolutionary state. To accomplish this
objective, the investigator and her students will obtain and analyze deep, wide-
field, optical imaging with the WIYN 3.5-meter telescope and One Degree Imager
(ODI) of a well-defined sample of UCHVCs and Almost-Dark galaxies chosen from
ALFALFA. The observations will be used to investigate the properties of the
UCHVC and Almost-Dark samples and address important questions about how galaxies
with neutral gas form and evolve. These questions include: What implications do
the UCHVCs have for the ``missing satellites problem''? What fraction of the
UCHVCs have detectable stellar populations? Are there correlations between the
galaxies' environments and locations within the Local Volume and their
properties (e.g., the presence or absence of ongoing star formation, their
evolutionary phase)? What is the nature of the Almost-Dark galaxies, and how do
their properties differ from ``normal'' galaxies in optical catalogs? What do
the Almost-Dark objects reveal about how star formation takes place in galaxies
at the extreme end of the HI mass to optical luminosity regime? The objects in
the UCHVCs sample can also be used to help characterize the Baryonic Tully-
Fisher Relation down to very low galaxy masses (less than ten million solar
masses) and to probe the chemical evolution of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has made major commitments to
the support and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, and to the
training of students in research. The investigator will also work with
consultants at the Indiana University Center for Innovative Teaching and
Learning to revise a large introductory astronomy course for non-majors. The
investigator will use the data taken with optical and radio telescopes in a
course to pique student's interest, help illustrate the concepts being taught,
and show concrete examples of how modern research is done in astronomy. Finally,
the investigator will work on advancing science outreach and education through
her membership on the Board of Directors of the Maria Mitchell Association, a
non-profit research, education, and outreach organization that promotes the
legacy of America's first female professional astronomer.