* 1615138
* Septin assembly and membrane organization
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Amy Gladfelter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2021
* USD 943,152.00

Cell shape is intimately tied to cell function. The skeleton of a cell, called
the cytoskeleton, is made of a network of polymers, which drive shape changes.
The dynamic assembly and rearrangement of the cytoskeleton allow cells to react
in both time and space to specific signals. A fundamental challenge for a cell
is that the molecules of the cytoskeleton are much smaller than the size of the
whole cell. A goal of this project is to understand how information about scale
is transmitted in a cell so that small building blocks (nanometer in size) can
carry out shape changes that are orders of magnitude larger. This work will
reveal the scaling blueprint for one part of the cytoskeleton. The experiments
will determine how structures built from filaments coming together in different
arrangements and patterns leads to differences in cell shape and function. This
work is important because it will reveal basic principals of self-assembly in
living systems. Understanding these principals is essential to design synthetic
cells that will likely be used for solving a variety of current and future
problems such as in computing, bioenergy or
bioremediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The septin cytoskeleton is an
especially powerful polymer network to analyze how cells scale and shape protein
structures because septins assemble into diverse forms in cells. Septin
filaments can be knit together into bundles, gauzes, rings and lattices
depending on the cell context. These different forms can be hundreds of
nanometers to micrometers in size. In many cases these assemblies form on
membrane surfaces where they function as scaffolds and membrane barriers. It is
not understood how assemblies of such varied geometry and size can be built out
of the same fundamental building block of a septin filament. The objectives of
this study address how cells regulate septins to build structures of versatile
form and function. These objectives will be achieved through biophysical
approaches, optogenetics and cell-free reconstitution. Cutting-edge,
quantitative imaging will be employed including single-molecule and polarization
fluorescence microscopy, high-speed atomic force microscopy together with cell
free reconstitution and mathematical modeling. Septins are nearly ubiquitous in
eukaryotes and yet there are major gaps in understanding how cells construct
higher-order structures from septin filaments. The ultimate goal is to
understand how variable function emerges from this variation in form. The
experiments here address problems that are fundamental to how all cells are
spatially organized as there are many examples of micrometer-scale assemblies
that are built from nanometer-sized building blocks.