* 1615562
* A platform for targeted, post-translational control of protein levels in mammalian cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 07/31/2020
* USD 772,669.00

Cells physiologic states are dictated by the collective behavior of thousands of
molecular components and may vary dramatically depending on environmental
factors, resulting in non-linear behaviors. Despite significant advances in
systems and synthetic biology, protein function in cells remains hard to
decipher due to the plasticity and adaptability of cellular regulatory and
quality control mechanisms. The overarching goal of this project is to generate
a platform technology to modulate the accumulation of target proteins in cells.
This technology is expected to provide exquisite dynamic control over protein
expression, thereby providing a tool to study protein function. A series of
complementary strategies will be explored to achieve stimulus-dependent control
over modulation of protein expression and to deploy this technology to study
complex biological processes. As a result, this study is expected to promote
progress of fundamental science , advance the bioeconomy, and enable advances in
healthcare. By providing broad reaching educational and training opportunities
to students belonging to underrepresented groups, this project is also expected
to support education and diversity and to benefit society.

To overcome the limitations of existing methods for regulating protein steady
state levels, the research team built a platform for modulating protein
expression post-translationally using a bifunctional system consisting of a
molecular recognition unit for target specificity and selectivity, and a
degradation-signaling unit that specifies the rate and mechanism of degradation
of the target protein. The goal of the proposed research is to engineer this
technology to generate a universal platform for controlling protein levels
through exogenous or endogenous stimuli. To achieve this goal, three research
objectives will be pursued: 1) engineer stimulus-responsive degradation of
protein depletion, 2) enhance the dynamic resolution of stimulus-dependent
circuits through controlled reporter depletion, and 3) decipher and manipulate
the hypoxia signaling network. This research program will be leveraged to
provide training, research, and mentoring opportunities for high school teachers
and students from the Greater Houston area, and to improve teaching and learning
for college students.