* 1615657
* On the Trail of the Most Massive Galaxy Clusters in the Observable Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* John Hughes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 398,625.00

Galaxy clusters are enormous reservoirs of galaxies, hot gas and mysterious
"dark" matter. The hot gas produces a signal at millimeter wavelengths. The most
massive clusters produce the strongest signals. Such signals can be detected
from clusters anywhere in the universe. The team used millimeter observations
from a space mission to identify massive cluster candidates. They will obtain
follow-up observations to confirm the cluster identifications. The clusters will
be used to test models of how structures form in the universe. They will also be
used to constrain cosmological parameters. Senior team members will train junior
team members. The team will develop material in Spanish and present it in
Spanish in Illinois schools. The team will also engage with underrepresented
minorities in South Africa.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team will conduct follow-
up observations of candidate galaxy clusters discovered through the Sunyaev-
Zeldovich (SZ) effect. Their extensive imaging and spectroscopy with ground-
based facilities will yield confirmed clusters. These are expected to be at high
redshift and have high SZ-determined masses. The team will use the clusters to
(1) test the Lambda Cold Dark Matter model for structure formation in the
universe and (2) improve constraints on cosmological parameters from galaxy
cluster counts.