* 1615154
* RAPID: Patterns of Fluvial Sedimentation and Geomorphic Change Following an Extreme Flood Event
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Allan James, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,341.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS) PROGRAM

ABSTRACT

1615154 Allan James John Kupfer University of South Carolina This rapid-response
research project will delineate and quantify the effects of large floods that
occurred in early October 2015 on numerous rivers and streams in South Carolina.
Extreme flooding generates considerable erosion and sedimentation and provides
an excellent opportunity to study how a severe flood can modify channels and
floodplains. The ephemeral data collected soon after the flooding ended will
improve basic understanding of sediment transport and deposition dynamics during
these large, rare floods as well as their importance in the sedimentary record.
In particular, the duration of stream power above a threshold value will help
predict where and how much bank and floodplain erosion will occur and when the
rates of change in stream power will coincide with patterns of sedimentation.
Project findings will enhance basic understanding of the magnitude and nature of
geomorphic adjustments to large floods. They will help guide policy makers at
city, county, state and federal levels and at local watershed associations, and
they will enable research scientists to develop more effective watershed
management plans for urban streams. The project also will guide the development
of graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in science
and engineering and will build STEM capacity by incorporating undergraduate and
graduate students into the research process through their involvement in field-
based data collection and analytical procedures.

The researchers will investigate the use of longitudinal variations in unit
stream power and stream gradient index (SGI) as potential indicators for reach-
scale changes in sediment flux that identify sites that are vulnerable to future
flooding. Using state-of-the-art mapping techniques including global positioning
systems (GPS), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and light detection and ranging
(LiDAR), the investigators will map and measure channel adjustments to test
theories, explain patterns, and develop predictive models of river erosion and
sedimentation. While modern mapping technologies will help identify, locate, and
recognize patterns of channel and floodplain change, UAVs will acquire low-
altitude aerial imagery, which will be used with "structure-from-motion" (SfM)
photogrammetric techniques to develop high-resolution, large-scale maps of
selected sites. Spatial patterns of erosion and sedimentation measured by these
methods will be compared with patterns predicted by analysis of stream power to
test theories based on the duration of critical power and spatial changes in
stream power. Improvement in the ability to predict channel erosion and
deposition and subsequent changes in flood stages has enormous socioeconomic
implications that will help guide future flood-mitigation efforts.