* 1615006
* High Energy Physics on Blue Waters
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Norman Christ, Fermi Research Alliance, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 31,658.00

The long term goals of high energy physicists are to identify the basic building
blocks&lt;br/&gt;of matter and to determine the interactions among them that
give rise to the physical world we observe.&lt;br/&gt;Major progress has been
made towards these goals through the development of the standard model,
which&lt;br/&gt;encompasses our current knowledge of the fundamental
interactions of physics. It consists of two quantum&lt;br/&gt;field theories:
the Weinberg-Salam theory of electromagnetic and weak interactions, and quantum
chromodynamics&lt;br/&gt;(QCD), the theory of the strong interactions. The
standard model has been enormously successful&lt;br/&gt;in explaining a wealth
of data produced in accelerator and cosmic ray experiments over the past forty
years.&lt;br/&gt;However, high energy physicists believe that a more general
theory will be needed to explain physics at the&lt;br/&gt;shortest distances or
highest energies. The standard model is expected to be the low energy limit of
this&lt;br/&gt;more general theory, and a great deal of the experimental effort
in high energy physics is directed towards&lt;br/&gt;the search for physical
phenomena that will require theoretical ideas beyond the standard model for
their&lt;br/&gt;understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly
supports this effort by carrying out ground-breaking simulations on Blue Waters.
&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand where the standard model might break down and
new physics enter, one must, of&lt;br/&gt;course, determine its predictions and
compare them with experiment. This is particularly challenging
for&lt;br/&gt;quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the component of the standard model
that describes the strong interactions&lt;br/&gt;of sub-atomic physics. At
present, the only means of extracting many of the most important
predictions&lt;br/&gt;of QCD from first principles and with controlled errors is
through large scale numerical simulations&lt;br/&gt;of the type that will be
carried out on Blue Waters. These simulations play an important role in efforts
to&lt;br/&gt;obtain a deeper understanding of the fundamental laws of physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the project has a long
standing policy to make the large&lt;br/&gt;data sets (gauge configurations and
quark propagators) produced and codes developed publicly&lt;br/&gt;available.
Based on past experience, the project anticipates that the data sets and codes
created for the project&lt;br/&gt;will be used by others in a wide variety of
calculations important in high energy and
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, lattice QCD has
been a fruitful training ground for doctoral and postdoctoral students. Those
entering the&lt;br/&gt;field must obtain a broad knowledge of computer hardware
and software, in addition to a solid background in&lt;br/&gt;physics. As a
result, scientists trained in this field have a wide range of employment
opportunities inside and&lt;br/&gt;outside of academia. There are approximately
seventy-five&lt;br/&gt;young scientists in training in this field in the United
States at the present time. Some will benefit from&lt;br/&gt;working on the
project, and many more from the code and data sets produced by it.