* 1615014
* SHF: Small: SlackTrack: Efficiently Exploiting Circuit Slack in Multi-Cycle Datapaths
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 449,936.00

The microprocessor and system-on-chip industry is increasingly focused on mobile
platforms, where maximizing battery life is paramount. As a result, static and
dynamic power consumption are now primary design constraints for general-purpose
microprocessors. In response, chip designers are integrating a plethora of
customized on-die accelerators, which reduce energy consumption because their
control logic, datapaths, interconnect, and memory are tailored for a specific
task. This project tackles the main remaining source of power consumption in
accelerators clocked storage elements and investigates the design of novel
accelerators with very few such elements. Without these kinds of dramatic
innovations in the design of power-efficient, high-performance chips, the
continued device scaling of future nanometer technologies may no longer provide
substantial returns in utility or performance. As a result, the microprocessor
industry, and by extension, the computer industry as a whole, faces a serious
challenge in maintaining the growth-based business model that has sustained it
for four decades. This research has broad industry- and economy-wide impact
since it helps to address or avert these challenges. The findings from this
project will be integrated into graduate level courses which will help students
get a more in depth understanding of the power wall issue which is a big
challenge for architects in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Removing the
overheads imposed by clocked elements will enable accelerator designs to
approach a true energy lower bound for the cost of computation. Furthermore,
pipeline latch removal also exposes additional opportunities for improvement to
the power efficiency and performance of datapath circuits. Most importantly,
since the critical delay paths in a multi-cycle datapath span multiple clock
cycles and traverse many more levels of logic than the base naive pipeline, the
likelihood that random and within-die variations will slow down a critical path
is substantially lower. In other words, since critical paths are two, four, or
even more times longer than in the base case, random and within-die process
variations are amortized over a longer total delay path and are more likely to
cancel each others' effects, leading to a smaller net effect on achievable cycle
time. This tightened variance can be exploited to reduce design-time margins,
allowing the datapath to be operated at a lower voltage for a given frequency.
Furthermore, novel run-time approaches for measuring and controlling available
slack in the circuit's operation enable aggressive timing speculation, allowing
the datapath to run at nearly nominal frequencies while minimizing operating
voltage.