* 1615890
* TWC: Small: Time-Centric Modeling of Correct Behaviors for Efficient Non-intrusive Runtime Detection of Unauthorized System Actions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jerzy Rozenblit, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2022
* USD 453,413.00

Embedded computing systems are found at the heart of medical devices, automotive
systems, smartphone, etc. Securing these embedded systems is a significant
challenge that requires new methods that address the power, time, and cost
requirements under which these systems operate. Because embedded systems must
meet precise time requirements, detecting changes in timing can indicate the
presence of malware. This research investigates new models for capturing the
expected behavior of embedded systems, in which time requirements play a pivotal
role. The project is developing fast, low power, and low cost methods to detect
changes from the expected behavior. The resulting knowledge and tools will
provide developers with techniques to eliminate, detect, or mitigate malware and
cyber-threats in embedded systems. This research will further enable the
development of embedded systems with stronger security guarantees compared to
the existing state-of-the-art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
investigating formal timing-centric nominal system behavior models that capture
the correct system execution behavior, thereby enabling efficient runtime
detection of unauthorized system actions. The formal models combine well-founded
techniques relying on execution call graphs, sequence models, system timing
requirements, and statistical analysis of execution times. The researchers are
developing secure, non-intrusive, and efficient hardware-based identification
methods to detect deviations from the timing and sequence characteristics
defined within the nominal system behavior models. To ensure efficiency, the
researchers are investigating performance models and systematic methods to
evaluate and optimize the tradeoffs between security achieved by these methods
and the area and energy overheads of the monitoring hardware. The project team
is also investigating novel methods for analyzing the timing of networked
embedded systems to separate the intrinsic software execution time from the
incidental execution time resulting from the underlying hardware architecture,
operating system, and physical environment. The resulting methods will
substantially advance the state-of-the-art by: a) enabling fast, accurate, and
non-intrusive detection, b) providing robust new ways of detecting unauthorized
operations, and c) extending anomaly-based detection capabilities to zero-day
exploits.