* 1615879
* Dynamics and Applications of Cell Quota Based Plant-Pathogen Interaction Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 193,873.00

Human activities are altering the influx of nutrient supplies to Earth's
ecosystems. A recent study reveals that nutrient supply dramatically changed the
prevalence and interaction strength between two plant viruses, barley yellow
dwarf virus and cereal yellow dwarf virus. Since viruses hijack host cell
machinery to replicate which requires nitrogen and phosphorus to synthesis
nucleic acids and proteins, given more amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus, one
would expect to see higher numbers of virus replication. By studying and
understanding the complex relationship between key nutrients and disease
dynamics, we may help in planning and advising the future of agricultural
practice. This project will also provide opportunities for undergraduates and
graduate students in research and instructional environments; interdisciplinary
training and professional development for graduate students; and broad
dissemination of our results to a diverse range of mathematicians, modelers,
ecologists and biomedical researchers. Our efforts will provide undergraduate
and graduate students of diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds with first-hand
educational experience in cross-disciplinary communication and exploration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All cells are made of chemical elements. Ecological
stoichiometry (ES), is the study of the balance of chemical elements in
ecological interactions. ES and the theory of evolution have been found to be
crucial lenses through which one can view and understand the dynamics of
populations and communities of microorganisms. ES covers multiple biological
scales, and it allows the construction of robust, mechanistic, and predictive
mathematical models based on cell nutrient levels. Within this theory, the
utilization of energy and multiple chemical elements (especially carbon,
nitrogen, and phosphorus) between organisms and their environment occupies a
central position. However, the ES framework has yet to be effectively integrated
into the modeling of host-pathogen interactions. This project seeks to identify
the relationships of some key biological mechanisms to the rich dynamics often
observed in simulating host (plant)-pathogen models incorporating nutrient
quality and quantity in host and pathogen populations. These relationships may
provide novel insights for better plant disease control. Specifically, we will
construct mathematical models of host-pathogen interactions that are based on
empirical discoveries. The models that the research team will investigate are
novel both mathematically and computationally, as they will motivate challenging
problems in areas of qualitative and computational studies of nonlinear
differential equations and delay differential equations.