* 1615153
* Beta Decay Measurements with Cold Neutron Beams and Ultracold Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul Huffman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 720,000.00

This award will support three important experiments in neutron beta decay, a
process in which a neutron decays because of the weak nuclear force (or weak
interaction) into a proton, an electron and an anti-neutrino. The weak nuclear
force is important because it powers our sun and helps determine the abundance
of elements in the universe. Neutron decay in particular is important because it
plays a key role in the formation of helium in the early universe. Additionally,
neutron decay involves only a single nucleon and that makes it possible to
calculate very precise predictions from the Standard Model of fundamental
particles and interactions without complications from other nucleons. With very
accurate measurements of neutron decay, we can perform a kind of particle
physics forensics, looking for discrepancies in the Standard Model that can
indicate the presence of new forces but without using high energy particle
beams. This research is a part of the "precision frontier" for physics, and
defines the cutting edge of our knowledge of the weak nuclear force and possible
new interactions.&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of this research is the training
of students and post-docs. This contributes to the spreading of technical
methods and expertise. This training comes from the specific nature of the
projects, which use nuclear physics analysis and technology, and from the many
opportunities students have to perform research at our national laboratories and
nuclear facilities. Some of the techniques used have real-world applications in
energy generation and medical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of
the experiments supported by this award, Nab, will use an unpolarized beam of
cold neutrons at the Spallation Neutron Source from the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory to measure the angular correlation between the decay electron and the
neutrino, with the goal of improving the precision of this correlation by over
an order of magnitude improvement. The other two experiments, UCNA and UCNtau,
are situated at the ultracold neutron (UCN) source at Los Alamos National
Laboratory (LANL). The UCNA experiment measures the angular correlation between
the neutron spin and the decay electron momentum (called the beta-asymmetry),
and aims for a factor of 3 improvement over the precision of the global data set
for the axial form factor. UCNtau is designed to measure the lifetime of the
neutron, with the goal of a 1 second uncertainty during the proposal period.
These programs will impact: (1) knowledge of the axial form factor at the level
required for a the establishment of the CKM matrix element Vud from the neutron
at the same level as the super-allowed decays, (2) knowledge of the neutron
lifetime at a level such that it will not limit tests of cosmological 4He
abundance models for some time, and (3) limits on tensor couplings at or above
the level expected from CERN. For each of these experiments, the group brings
its experience in beta decay measurements to bear on key sources of systematic
error by developing instrumentation and analysis required by the experiments.