* 1615570
* Engineering of cold denaturing proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Thomas Szyperski, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 881,335.00

Proteins are large molecules consisting of hundreds or thousands of amino acid
residues forming a polymer with the amino acids arranged in a defined sequence.
They are pivotal for all living organisms and of central importance for health
care and biotechnology. Protein molecules exhibit distinct three- dimensional
structural features governing their function. However, it is not entirely clear
how the amino acid sequence determines structural features. In particular, this
holds for the "hydrophobic effect" which arises because some amino acids with
'oil like properties' are quite insoluble in water. As a result, these residues
tend to form an interior core of the protein molecule (alike a tiny oil droplet
in water) to minimize exposure to the surrounding water. The incomplete
understanding of the hydrophobic effect results from the enormous complexity of
protein-water interactions. In turn, this prevents accurate prediction of
structure and stability from sequence and accurate design of novel proteins. A
primary potential benefit of this project will be a significant enhancement of
the understanding of the hydrophobic effect. This will be accomplished by
combining cutting-edge biophysics with computational protein design methodology
in new and integrated protocols to enable more accurate protein structure
prediction and engineering. All protocols and products of this project will be
made publicly available. Excellent training of young scientists, in particular
from underrepresented minorities, in protein biophysics and computational
design, is a major goal of this project. Apart from highly individual mentoring
of research and career development, annual summer schools will be held to reach
communities outside of biophysical research and to increase interest in "STEM"
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a central conjecture of protein
thermodynamics that the structured state of a protein as well as the loss of
protein structure at very low temperatures ('cold denaturation') result from the
hydrophobic effect. This project will focus on the engineering of cold
denaturing proteins by iterating between computational design of protein
structure and thermodynamic profile using the program Rosetta and biophysical
characterization of the designs. The thermodynamic characterization will be
pursued by use of circular dichroism (CD)-based Gibbs-Helmholtz analyses as well
as differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and the structural characterization
of structured and denatured states by use of CD and nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy, and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). Such iterative
protein engineering will test and improve in an unprecedented manner our
understanding of protein thermodynamics and computational design methodology.