* 1615253
* Collaborative Research:  Using GPS to Unravel the Long-Term Kinematics and Dynamics of the American Southwest from an Ever-Changing Deformation Field
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Geoffrey Blewitt, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 11/30/2020
* USD 246,500.00

Using GPS to Unravel the Long-Term Kinematics and Dynamics of the American
Southwest from an Ever-Changing Deformation Field

This project aims to improve our understanding of the long-term crustal
kinematics and dynamics of the American Southwest, and the underlying Earth
structure, by developing a dynamic model that explains both geodetic and other
geophysical data. The American Southwest (here defined as Arizona, southern
Utah, and southern Nevada) appears to be mostly inactive tectonically. However,
there is evidence that large earthquakes have occurred here in recent geologic
times. We explore the possibility that the amount of crustal deformation in this
area (and thus can generate (large) earthquakes) varies with time and is
modulated by large earthquakes in southern California and Gulf of California. We
have seen evidence for this by using GPS observations of the deformation pattern
before and after the 2010 El Mayor-Cucapah earthquake (M7.2). We will combine
ongoing GPS measurements with different modeling tools to characterize and model
the source of the time-variable and long-term deformation, which we aim to
separate. The time-variable deformation can be understood as visco-elastic
deformation in the lithosphere following large (far-field) earthquakes. The
long-term deformation can likely be modeled by considering the proper ratio of
the far-field stresses imposed by Pacific plate motion and stresses due to
lateral variation in crustal thickness and density in our study area.

This is a follow-on proposal that extends our current EarthScope project on the
Colorado Plateau area. Over the last five years, the long-term kinematics as
measured by GPS are obscured by postseismic deformation from the 2010 El Mayor-
Cucapah earthquake, which occurred 3 months before we installed a new 34-station
continuous network. As a result, important questions on the role of
Gravitational Potential Energy (GPE) variations in driving deformation, the
reasons for the dearth of active faults and seismicity in southern Arizona, and
the reach of plate motion stresses remain unanswered. In order to address these
questions, and simultaneously further our understanding of the postseismic
process, we propose a three-tiered approach: 1) extend existing GPS time-series
to improve characterization of transient deformation, 2) use those data to
explore the crustal and mantle viscosities required to match the GPS time-series
data, and 3) create physical models of the long-term expected deformation, that
includes the latest GPE estimates, to explain the residual motions after
correction for postseismic effects. We will also leverage GPS data from other
NSF funded projects, as well as seismic data products obtained by USArray that
have helped to constrain crustal and lithospheric thickness structure and stress
orientations. Geodetic strain rates could potentially be used as an independent
constraint on the regional seismic hazard, but only after we have corrected it
for all post-seismic effects, and assessed the long-term drivers of crustal
motion. We will employ a female graduate student at UNR to work on the project.
We will also engage a RESESS undergraduate intern during the summer of the
second year. The goal of the RESESS program is to increase diversity in the
Geosciences work force. We will recruit one student from the UA Disability
Resource Center (DRC) to conduct a small research project associated with the
larger goals of the overall project. We will also lead an accessible field trip
to the Grand Canyon for students registered at the DRC in a program that we
developed and implemented in September 2015. The goal of these activities is to
draw attention to the numerous research opportunities made available by the
large volume of data in NSF and other national data archives, available to a
wide range of individuals. Finally, we plan to give outreach talks at the area's
parks and monuments.