* 1615296
* RUI/AAG - Studying Metals in Quasars From the Sloan Digital sky Survey:  Observing Changes in Galaxy Properties Over Time via Absorption Spectra
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kathy Cooksey, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,300.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to connect gas clouds and
gaseous structures with galaxies and their change over time. The observations of
elements heavier than helium in these gas clouds provides important constraints
on the overall amount of these elements produced and spread through space, and
the physical environments of gas clouds themselves. The proposal seeks to study
a large sample of quasars from an important sky survey, using the quasars like a
flash light to observe gas clouds (and their properties) between us and the more
distant quasars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large-
scale gaseous structure of the Universe is affected by the production and
dispersal of chemical elements by galactic processes. Quasar absorption-line
(QAL) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for probing the large-scale gaseous
structure and its change over time. There is an emerging consensus that strong
absorption-line systems trace the extended gaseous halos of galaxies. The
evidence relies on direct detections of strong absorbers near galaxies as well
as absorber properties changing with galaxies. The large scale of this enriched
circum-galactic medium (CGM) enables the study of galaxy formation and change
with relatively little observational expense, at a wide range of redshifts. Open
questions in astronomy motivate the research: What are the chemical properties
of the extended gaseous halos of galaxies? Which type of absorption-line systems
are associated with what class of galaxies? Where are the missing metals? Toward
what galaxies are potential cold flows flowing?