* 1615859
* OP: Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Theory of Slow Light
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Gregor Kovacic, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 234,997.00

This collaborative project expands the research programs of the Principal
Investigators on mathematical models of optical phenomena. It comes in response
to the NSF initiative on "Optics and Photonics". The interaction between light
and optical media is one of the most fruitful areas of study in applied physics
and provides the basic mechanism underlying devices such as lasers and optical
amplifiers. For decades, it has been providing a rich source of new physical
phenomena, among the latest being "slow light", the recently-observed slowing-
down of light pulses to the speed of a bicycle. Slow light can potentially be
used in devices such as optical memory. This project is aimed at understanding
the physical mechanisms underlying the slow light phenomenon by using a
remarkable, highly accurate mathematical model that can be solved with explicit
formulas. The validity of this model and its explicit solutions will be verified
using numerical simulations of more realistic models and careful comparisons
with experiments. Interdisciplinary training in applied mathematics and
nonlinear optics will be provided to graduate and undergraduate students, and a
lively, challenging research and training environment for both student groups
will be established.

The slowdown of light pulses is modeled as the interaction between an optical
pulse and an active medium with two or three working levels, the latter being a
prototypical case known as the Lambda configuration. This interaction is
described by completely integrable Maxwell-Bloch equations with non-vanishing
boundary conditions, a new twist. This project is a mathematical study of novel
dynamics generated by the interaction of light with two-level media and the
Lambda-configuration medium, and includes: (i) developing a systematic,
completely integrable theory of the dynamics for the two-level and Lambda-
configuration Maxwell-Bloch equations with non-zero boundary conditions, (ii)
using the analytical results of step (i) to describe phenomena related to slow
light, (iii) numerical studies of dynamical phenomena in more general cases in
which the two-level and Lambda-configuration Maxwell-Bloch equations are not
integrable. The completely-integrable description of slow light involves two new
aspects: (1) non-zero boundary conditions, (2) non-trivial evolution of the
spectral data. The understanding of the first aspect will be extended from the
Nonlinear Schroedinger equation to the Maxwell-Bloch equations by studying
scattering and inverse-scattering problems with the spectral parameter on a
Riemann surface. The second aspect is complicated by the presence of the former
and involves a careful derivation of how spectral data evolves from the initial
state of the medium and finding correct cancellations of highly oscillatory
terms. In addition to generating new models and descriptions of the dynamics
exhibited by light interacting with active optical media, the project will
advance the theory of completely integrable systems.