* 1615688
* Charting the Structure of the Milky Way Stellar Halo and Disk
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Heidi Newberg, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 361,978.00

The investigator seeks to understand our Milky Way galaxy. The Milky Way has
dozens of smaller dwarf galaxies in orbit around it. These dwarf galaxies are
being ripped apart by our galaxy's gravity into long streams of stars. Some of
these streams encircle the entire galaxy. The investigator recently discovered
that the disk of the Milky Way, which includes the spiral structure, has
previously unknown 'ripples'. These ripples are believed to form when smaller
dwarf galaxies fall into the Milky Way, just as a pebble dropped into a pond
produces ripples on the surface of the water. By mapping the density of stars
throughout the Milky Way, this project model of the interaction between the
Milky Way galaxy and the dwarf galaxies orbiting it. These models will help us
understand where dark matter is located. The models also teach us how the spiral
arms of galaxies are made and sustained.

This project will train undergraduate students in science and computing. The
investigator will engage the public in the scientific process through sustained
public outreach initiatives. Public outreach will include science web pages,
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube videos, Reddit Ask Me Anything (AMA)
sessions, opportunities to observe the sky through small telescopes, and hands-
on outreach activities that will reach thousands of children, teens, adults, and
seniors. A relationship will be maintained between the investigators and the
~20,000 people, at any given time, who volunteer their personal computers to
create the MilkyWay@home supercomputer.

The investigator will map the three dimensional stellar density in the disk and
halo of our galaxy, using Sloan Digital Sky Survey main sequence and turnoff
stars in the galaxy's halo. The investigator will use the technique of
statistical photometric parallax to make the density maps. This technique
recovers the underlying density distribution without measuring the distance to
each individual star, because only the intrinsic brightness distribution is
required.

The outer disk and the stellar halo will be mapped with turnoff stars. Main
sequence stars, which are intrinsically dimmer, will be used to trace the
density of closer stars in the Milky Way disk. The investigator will map the
dominant substructures, including the vertical oscillations of the stellar mid-
plane.