* 1615731
* Repurposing the CRISPR-Cas9 system for dynamic control of cellular metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Eleftherios Papoutsakis, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 912,000.00

This project addresses a challenging problem in synthetic biology, namely the
organization of metabolic enzymes into a sequential multi-enzyme cascade in
order to improve the overall pathway performance. The approach used in this
project is to repurpose the CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeat) Cas9 system as a generalizable platform for site-specific
enzyme assembly and to demonstrate its utility for metabolic engineering and
synthetic biology applications. The two collaborators offer complementary
expertise in pathway engineering and protein engineering in order to pursue a
highly innovative design concept to achieve this goal. The students trained on
this project will be exposed to multi-disciplinary training in the context of
research that is anticipated to significantly advance synthetic biology
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a set
of orthogonal catalytically inactive Cas9 (dCas9) proteins as a new tool for in
vivo assembly of enzyme cascades in order to redirect cellular resources as
desired. The end result is the ability to provide dynamic tuning of endogenous
processes to balance the demands of cell health and pathway efficiency. This
will be achieved by combining metabolite-responsive dCas9 expression and
controlled dCas9 degradation to provide both fast sensing and actuating ability
into an integrated synthetic design in order to modulate the overall output
function. The investigators will demonstrate the feasibility of this capability
by designing multi-enzyme cascades, one using the well-known mevalonate pathway
and the other using the conversion of methanol to lactate. The ultimate goal is
to combine the knowledge gained as a transformative approach toward the design
of dynamic enzyme cascades for any metabolic pathway of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology (SSB) program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB)
Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering (BBE) program of the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) in the Engineering
Directorate.