* 1615408
* The First Census of Accreting Proto-Planets inside the Gaps of Transitional Dust Disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Laird Close, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 293,913.00

Thousands of gas-rich exoplanets are now known. None of these are true
protoplanets that are rapidly adding gas from the areas surrounding them as they
form. The investigators have developed a method of detecting the addition of
hydrogen gas into a forming planet. This method can be used to search the empty
regions or gaps in dust disks located around stars where planets are expected to
be forming. The team has a unique instrumental system that they designed,
tested, and now use with a 6.5-m telescope in Chile. They have made the first
detection of hydrogen gas being drawn into a forming planet about twice the size
of Jupiter in the gap of a dust disk. This project centers on applying their
technique to search for protoplanets in 25 disks that are nearby, young, and
have known gaps. They plan to learn how gas giant planets form, grow, and affect
the dust disks in which they are forming. This project serves the national
interest by increasing our understanding of how planets form. The investigators
will train and include undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral
scientists, in this research project. The principal investigator will give
public lectures on results from the protoplanet survey at Tucson area elementary
and middle schools, as well as 10 Tucson area retirement
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While thousands of gas-rich
exoplanets are now known, none are true protoplanets that are rapidly accreting
gas. The principal investigator's MagAO system on the 6.5-m Magellan Telescope
in Chile is the only adaptive optics system that has published &lt;0.03 arcsec
resolution images at the strongest visible gas accretion emission line
(H-alpha). Transitional disks are disks that have dust-poor gaps. One popular
hypothesis is that these gaps could be cleared by multiple (2-3) massive
accreting planets in the gap. This team has made the first definite detection of
an approximately 2x Jupiter mass accreting protoplanet at H-alpha in the gap of
the LkCa 15 transitional disk. The team will expand their observational studies
by leveraging all the lessons they have learned about direct imaging of
protoplanets to make the first census of nearby accreting protoplanets. They
anticipate understanding where low mass gas giant planets form, grow, and how
they affect their host disks/gaps. The team will utilize MagAO's unique ability
to take simultaneous H-alpha (wavelength = 656nm), continuum (642nm), and Ks
(2147nm) images to carry out a survey for protoplanets with the new simultaneous
differential imaging optics, named the GAPplanetS+. They will survey all 25
nearest (~150 pc), youngest (~1 Myr), brightest (R&lt;12 mag) large gap
(&gt;130mas) transitional disks for the first census of protoplanets. The
investigators will train and include undergraduate and graduate students, and
post-doctoral scientists, in this research project. The principal investigator
will give public lectures on results from the GAPplanetS+ survey at Tucson area
elementary and middle schools, as well as 10 Tucson area retirement communities.