* 1615586
* Mechanism and Specificity of DNA Repair Dealkylases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Patrick O'Brien, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 720,000.00

Genomic DNA undergoes spontaneous chemical modification (alkylation) whereby
cellular or environmental reactive chemicals alter its structure and information
content; therefore, cells require DNA repair pathways to detect and counteract
these deleterious changes. This research will characterize the mechanism and
specificity of a newly discovered pathway called direct repair in which a DNA
repair dealkylase restores the correct nucleotide via a reaction involving
multiple steps. By integrating trainees at all levels into the project, the PI
will prepare individuals for future careers in STEM-related fields. Students
will receive interdisciplinary training in genetic, biochemical, and biophysical
techniques while gaining specific expertise in protein and nucleic acid
biochemistry. A continued focus will be on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups and outreach to the community, from elementary school
all the way up to medical school, to incite a passion for basic sciences and to
foster a diverse scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
identifies ALKB and ALKBH2 as representative examples of a broad superfamily of
DNA repair oxidative dealkylases and addresses important unanswered questions
about how these enzymes search for lesions in DNA, distinguish repair substrates
from non-substrates, and maintain specificity for a broad range of substrates
that complement other known DNA repair pathways. The central hypothesis is that
the mechanism of ALKB enzymes has parallels to independently evolved DNA
glycosylases that use different chemistry and different structural folds to
overcome similar biological and physical challenges. The research will apply a
combined approach of enzymology, transient kinetics, structure/function
analysis, kinetic modeling, and genetics to understand the mechanisms by which
ALKB and ALKBH2 find and repair DNA damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.