* 1615375
* Collaborative Research: Magnetic Filaments at the Center of our Milky Way Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Cornelia Lang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2020
* USD 308,564.00

Radio astronomers have discovered remarkable magnetic field structures near the
center of our Milky Way galaxy. These structures, called filaments, are much
more complicated than simple hot clouds of gas. These filaments are many light
years in length. The filaments are thought to be visible to radio telescopes
because high-energy particles are orbiting along very long magnetic fields. The
investigators will study the detailed physical characteristics of these
filamentary structures using the NSF Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope.
Museum and public events will be developed at both the University of Iowa and
the University of California at Los Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will study non-thermal filamentary structures observed in the
radio images of the Galactic Center. This study will exploit the new
capabilities of the VLA, an NSF radio telescope in New Mexico, to obtain
detailed physical information of these structures, including polarization
analysis. The outcomes of this project have important implications in other
fields of astronomy, in particular the study of the active galactic nuclei in
other galaxies, and the role of magnetic fields in the environments of accreting
black holes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At University of Iowa, the investigator will
work with an undergraduate to develop a museum exhibit. The investigators will
also participate in the museum activities and lecture series. At the University
of California at Los Angles, another investigator will participate in public
education events, as well as in training undergraduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds.