* 1615233
* Investigation of the Low-Lying Nuclear Isomeric Transition in the A = 229 Isotope of Thorium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

This award will support the PI and his group in bringing the techniques of laser
physics to a nuclear system with the goal to directly detect and characterize a
unique excited state in the A = 229 isotope of thorium. The state is a low lying
excited state that is now able to be investigated with current laser technology.
The ultimate goal is to use the characteristics of that state to investigate one
of the most compelling questions in modern science: Are the constants of nature
actually constants? Further, two technological applications with significant
impact have also been proposed: a nuclear clock, which could outperform all
current and planned optical clocks, thereby improving navigation and
communication, and a gamma ray laser in the optical range.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the PI and his group will
perform a direct search for this nuclear transition to better measure the
transition energy and lifetime in order to enable the aforementioned promising
applications. Specifically, they will interrogate thorium-229 atoms, which have
been doped into a vacuum ultraviolet transparent host crystal, with a laser
system capable of directly exciting the nuclear state. The resulting nuclear
fluorescence will be monitored to determine the transition energy and lifetime.
Once the transition is found, the potential of the transition for use as a clock
oscillator will be explored by comparing a preliminary thorium clock
architecture to more established atomic clocks.