* 1615306
* Testing the Cold Dark Matter Model by Constraining Dark Matter Substructure in Gravitational Lens Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Quinn Minor, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2020
* USD 235,407.00

Most of the matter in the Universe is in the form of dark matter, whose presence
we only observe through its gravity. All galaxies appear to be surrounded by
large halos of dark matter. And dark matter dominates the gravitational field of
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Dark matter is dark because it does not emit
or absorb light making it hard to study. In fact, astronomers do not yet know
the true nature of dark matter. But understanding this will advance our
understanding of the fundamental laws of physics.

By studying the dark matter halos of galaxies, and how their gravity bends light
from more distant sources (gravity lenses), astronomers can learn about the
structure of the dark matter in the halos how they were formed. Various models
to explain these things have been developed, and they can all be tested based on
what actually happens in dark matter halos. This proposed study will use high-
resolution images of gravity lenses to learn more about the structure of the
dark-matter halos. The results will also help determine the type of particle
dark matter is.

The PI's institution serves students from underrepresented and/or
underprivileged backgrounds. The Broader Impact part of this project will be to
award promising undergraduate science and engineering majors (a minimum of six
students over three years) a stipend to do research (allowing them to focus on
studies and research rather than work part time jobs outside of school). The
undergraduates will learn skills, and gain experiences, that are vital to STEM
fields, while also producing valuable results for this project. Each year,
students accepted to the program will work at the American Museum of Natural
History (AMNH) during the summer. They will participate in a three-day workshop
to acquire scientific computing skills, attend weekly meetings to discuss recent
papers in astrophysics, and at the end of the summer will give a talk on their
research at the AMNH "Physical Sciences REU Symposium". Finally, after the
following fall semester the students will have the opportunity to attend and
give a poster presentation of their research at the winter American Astronomical
Society (AAS) meeting.

This project clearly relates to NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science. In addition, the "Broader Impact" portion of the project does this, and
advances the national health, prosperity and welfare by helping to develop
interest in, and educating, STEM activities among the next generation of diverse
individuals.

The existence of small dark matter substructure in galaxies is a key prediction
of dark matter theories that remains largely untested. The project's goals are
to test the Cold Dark Matter (CDM) paradigm by analyzing a sample of
gravitational lenses observed at high resolution. The proposed project will
evaluate methods to detect and characterize substructure in gravitational lens
galaxies. In particular it will consist of observing lenses in the submillimeter
electromagnetic spectral range. Galaxies with gravitational lenses are being
discovered rapidly in this area. Using high-resolution observations (e.g. by the
ALMA telescope array) of these galaxies, the PI and team will obtain
unprecedented information on the dark matter distribution in galaxies. And
because gravitational lensing directly exhibits the warping of space time by
dark matter, a study of gravitational lens systems is a promising method to
constrain generic particle properties of dark matter (independent of specific
particle models). The team's primary goal is to show how this information can be
used to constrain the detailed properties of dark matter substructure as a way
of identifying the nature of dark matter itself.