* 1615197
* Underground Study of Stellar Neutron Sources for Trans-Fe Element Production in Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Michael Wiescher, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

The origin of the elements has been identified by the Nuclear Science Advisory
Committee as one of the most important questions of our day. Current
astronomical observations indicate that many elements found commonly on Earth
were first synthesized in the center of stars, where fusion and other nuclear
reactions take place. These nuclear reactions control the associated energy
generation and evolution of stars. However, the stellar conditions are difficult
to reproduce in the laboratory. Under the special conditions proposed here,
using a novel compact accelerator placed deep underground, some of the key
nuclear reactions that take place in stars can be measured. The goal of this
research is to measure nuclear processes that are part of a chain of reactions
leading to the synthesis of elements. These are the elements that make possible
life on Earth. The project seeks to study the strength of stellar neutron
sources that drive the s-process, one of the two dominant sources for the
production of heavy elements. One of the most critical processes is alpha-
particle induced reactions on Ne-22, producing Mg-25 plus a neutron, but other
alpha-neutron reactions may also play a role depending on the stellar
environment. However, the large cosmic ray induced neutron background has been
prohibitive for advancing these measurements into the stellar energy range and
the present reaction rates rely on theoretical extrapolations that carry high
uncertainties. There has been no facility where these measurements can be
pursued in a background neutron free environment. Over the past years the CASPAR
(Compact Accelerator System for Performing Astrophysical Re¬search)
instrumentation has been constructed at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility to address this need. CASPAR operates a 1 million-Volt, high intensity,
fully refurbished Van de Graaff accelerator that can provide alpha beam
intensities of several hundred micro-Ampere. The proposed experiments rely on
the use of a solid and a recirculating gas target system and a He-3 detector
system for neutron counting. Successful implementation of a science program at
CASPAR will offer a competitive opportunity for the US nuclear astrophysics
community to maintain leadership in the field. It will provide a world-wide
unique opportunity to study stellar helium burning reactions associated with the
synthesis of carbon and the neutron production for trans-iron nuclei.