* 1615193
* Exploring a Community-based Approach for Engaging Students and Teachers in Effective STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Richard Wagner, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 09/30/2020
* USD 989,533.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by implementing a
strategy that purposefully combines educational methodologies based on the
Global Learning and Observation to Benefit the Environment program. This effort
will address the need to prepare and inspire up to 6500 students to become
interested and motivated in STEM fields and careers. Students will have
opportunities to increase their knowledge and skills in earth system sciences
topics by engaging in authentic online local and global activities;
collaborating with peers on data-driven research projects, and interacting with
scientists and mentors in face-to-face settings. Pre-service and in-service
teachers will participate in summer institutes, academic year workshops, and in-
class sessions to learn about and use pedagogies that will help them attract and
retain more students in education pathways to STEM careers. These professional
growth opportunities will be led by university faculty members, content and
evaluation experts, STEM professionals, industry and workforce development
specialists and professional education organization consultants. The goal is to
modify and refine a community-based model that will comprehensively address
teacher preparedness and student participation in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a mixed method design to collect data
about goals specific to K-12 students' level of awareness and interest in STEM
careers, motivation to pursue the education necessary for these careers,
improvement in 21st century skill development, and acquisition of STEM content
knowledge through collaborative technology practices. Pre-post surveys,
observations, interviews, focus group discussions, communication chat groups,
and descriptive statistics will be used to capture data about the influence of
project activities on students and teachers. Project outcomes will include the
development of curriculum units that employ technology-driven project-based
collaboration; embody intercultural competence, and promote the understanding of
content knowledge in the earth sciences as well as 21st Century workforce
skills. Outcomes will also include teacher professional development processes
and material for preparing teachers to deliver these technology-based STEM units
that will impact more than 20 metropolitan area school districts that will be
reached through this effort. Beyond dissemination to partnering school
districts, project results will also be disseminated at national and regional
meetings and conferences such as the National Science Teachers Association, the
International Society for Technology in Education, the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics, and the American Educational Research Association.
Publications will also be submitted to peer-reviewed journals. Project partners
including the GLOBE Implementation Office, University of Colorado at Boulder's
Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, Open World
Learning, and the Colorado Workforce Development Council will promote and
disseminate results through their distribution and communication channels.
Social media, especially those geared towards educators, will be utilized to
promote project outcomes to appropriate groups in the educational community.