* 1615487
* Designing and analyzing multi-generational switching in gene circuits for single cell biology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Johan Paulsson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 616,100.00

Memory is central to all living organisms from single-celled bacteria to humans
and yet very little is known about how memory is controlled in biology. This
project proposes to uncover this long-standing mystery by building circuits that
are capable of memory in bacteria. Bacterial systems are ideal for this study
because they are more accessible than multi-cellular organisms, and they allow
for ultra-high precision measurements. The project relies on innovative
biologically friendly chips to collect streaming data from live bacteria.
Specific questions address in this study are (1) How is memory inherited through
hundreds of generations in bacteria? (2) How might memory be robust enough to
withstand large changes at the molecular level such as synthesis and degradation
of proteins? The project will have a large impact on the teaching of science;
many courses have already adopted preliminary examples from this work. More
broadly, since the goal of this project is to demonstrate that engineered
circuits can accurately perform predefined tasks in living cells, this effort
will fundamentally change the way we develop new tools for medicine and other
uses.

One of the main goals of synthetic biology is to construct genetic circuits
whose properties are not only robust on average as conditions change, but which
can operate accurately in single cells without being corrupted by stochastic
fluctuations. In many cases the dynamics also need to play out on a multi-
generational time scale, which is particularly challenging because the states
must be remembered even though the molecular hardware is replaced. Natural
systems often face similar challenges, and though epigenetic memory is typically
associated with higher organisms, bacteria must also decide between alternative
states that can be maintained for tens or even hundreds of generations. Based on
insights from stochastic theory for chemical reactions, and encouraged by
substantial preliminary successes, this project will build synthetic oscillators
and switches with multigenerational dynamics and highly precise timing in single
cells. It will also characterize the on- and off-states of natural genetic
circuits that exhibit slow switching, with a particular focus on DNA looping.
Finally, a combination of classic bacterial genetics, microfluidic engineering,
synthetic genetic oscillators, pulse generators based on DNA looping, and
mathematical analyses will be used to probe the slow dynamics of flagellar
promoters, which again reveal intriguing multi-generational effects. Thus, the
project takes a broad systems and synthetic approach to quantify
multigenerational switching at the level of individual bacterial cells.