* 1615685
* Modeling the function and evolution of metabolic networks across hypersaline-adapted Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,11/30/2020
* Amy Schmid, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2020
* USD 749,995.00

This award, seeks fundamental understanding of how microorganisms gather
nutrients and remain viable while facing the most extreme conditions on Earth.
Many of these organisms reside in salt saturated lakes and ponds that are low in
nutrients and limited for oxygen. These "halophiles", members of the domain
Archaea, can teach us about the origins of energy metabolism since they exploit
a wide array of metabolic strategies to survive on the same pool of scarce
resources. These halophiles naturally synthesize unique chemicals, such as those
resembling jet fuel and biodegradable plastic. Large gaps in knowledge regarding
halophile metabolic functions have prevented the use of halophiles for
alternative energy solutions. This project will fill these gaps by generating
and comparing computational models of energy production pathways across 80
species of halophiles. Empirical measurements of metabolic products from two
test species will be used to refine the model predictions. Each year, the PI's
research group will teach two weeklong science immersion workshops, one for high
school students and the other for undergraduates at University of Puerto Rico.
In both workshops, students will measure and model halophile viability during
extreme stress. This research will provide fundamental knowledge regarding the
evolution of energy production, enable future alternative energy strategies, and
engage a diverse population of students in STEM fields early in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to increase
fundamental knowledge regarding how metabolic pathways of archaeal
microorganisms are regulated in response to varying nutrients in the
environment. Hypersaline-adapted Archaea, or halophiles, provide a unique model
for investigating the co-evolution of the transcription regulatory and metabolic
networks. Member species share a common hypersaline habitat, but exhibit
extensive diversity in how they generate energy. Nutrients are intermittently
available in hypersaline lakes during seasonal variations. In response,
halophiles have acquired a wide array of possible metabolic solutions to survive
on the same pool of scarce resources. Recent transcriptomic and metabolomics
evidence from the PI's lab suggest that halophiles use transcriptional
regulation as a primary mechanism to tune the metabolic network dynamically in
response to nutrient fluctuations. Based on this evidence, the working
hypothesis is that the regulatory network co-evolves with the metabolic network
in diverse ways during nutrient fluctuation. However, to date, archaeal
metabolic diversity has been largely unexplored due to the scarcity of tractable
model organisms. Recently, 80 genome sequences of halophiles have become
available, a scale that is unprecedented among Archaea. Using these genomic
sequence data, the following objectives will be carried out to test the central
hypothesis: (a) Construct and compare metabolic network models for 80 species of
halophiles using automated computational methods; (b) Test model predictions
regarding nutrient and genetic perturbations in two closely related, genetically
tractable halophile model species; (c) Refine metabolic models using
transcriptome and metabolome data as additional constraints.