* 1616664
* Collaborative Research: Controls on along-strike variations in locked and creeping megathrust behavior at the Hikurangi convergent margin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Demian Saffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 03/31/2020
* USD 369,723.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------

Collaborative Research: Controls on along-strike variations in locked and
creeping megathrust behavior at the Hikurangi convergent margin

The physical processes dictating the spectrum of fault slip modes (spanning
destructive earthquakes to slow slip events and aseismic creep) and the links
between these behaviors and long-term morphotectonic evolution of subduction
systems are not understood. There is a fundamental need to address this
important problem with an integrated, system-level approach combining
geodynamical modeling with high-quality geophysical and geological constraints
on subduction margin characteristics.

This project will conduct an interdisciplinary, multinational collaborative
program involving the USA, New Zealand, Japan and the UK to evaluate system-
level controls on processes that govern both slip behavior and long-term
deformation at subduction zones. The focus is on the Hikurangi margin in New
Zealand, where GPS data show a transition in slip behavior from predominantly
stick-slip in the south to aseismic creep in the northern North Island, and
where a wide range of subduction-related processes and characteristics vary
along-strike. The aim is to rigorously investigate the feedbacks between plate
interface slip behavior, solid and fluid mass fluxes, and manifestations of
plate boundary mechanics in the long-term geological record that likely reflect
common driving processes linking forearc uplift, sediment transfer and
underplating, plate boundary strength, and seismogenesis. The Principal
Investigators will address this important problem through an integrated approach
combining large-scale seismic imaging, paleoseismology, and geomorphology,
focused through the lens of state-of-the-art numerical modelling.