* 1616759
* High Resolution Single Molecule Analysis of Fast Folding and its Coupling to Binding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Victor Munoz, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2019
* USD 703,938.00

Proteins are the cellular nanomachines in charge of most biological functions,
including energy production, DNA replication and transcription, enzymatic
catalysis, signaling, cellular scaffolding and defense. But proteins are also
inherently flexible polymers that must fold into the complex native 3D
structures corresponding to their biologically functional states in a self-
assembly process determined by the chemical blueprints encoded in their amino
acid sequence. Thus the mechanisms by which proteins fold and function are a
critical component of almost every aspect of molecular and cell biology.
Understanding the intertwined mechanisms of folding and function also brings
about the opportunity to predict, engineer, and design biological function "a la
carte", thus conveying unparalleled transformative impact to Society. Moreover,
because proteins are at the lowest echelon of biological complexity where
Biology effectively meets Physics, Chemistry, and Engineering, their study
constitutes an ideal arena for training the new generations of multidisciplinary
researchers, preparing them for the emerging fields of Quantitative and
Synthetic Biology. Activities are designed around a team-based structure aimed
at facilitating integration of members at various levels of education ranging
from postdoctoral fellows and graduate students to undergraduate and high school
students/teachers. An equally important element of this project is the strong
commitment to participation of underrepresented groups in research. The PI will
actively recruit project members from several existing research mentoring
programs for underrepresented minorities in STEM fields to participate in the
research activities of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major drive for
modern protein research has been to develop experimental methods to resolve the
myriads of pathways and complex mechanisms that are predicted by advanced theory
and atomistic molecular simulations. Detecting such inherent kinetic complexity
in experiments has remained elusive, even with modern methods that exhibit
improved time, structural, or single-molecule resolution. The overall objective
of this project is to bridge this gap by experimentally monitoring the
transition paths of individual protein molecules as they fold. Advanced single-
molecule fluorescence methods will be used in conjunction with theoretical and
computational analyses to measure transition paths and folding mechanisms of
fast-folding protein domains. Fast-folding domains are optimal targets because
their marginal cooperativity ensures significant populations of "excited" states
and, somewhat counterintuitively, slower transition paths over their broad,
shallow folding barriers. Moreover, the microsecond folding of these domains
facilitates direct comparison with modern atomistic simulations. To reach the
required resolution, we rely on approaches we recently developed for achieving
microsecond resolution single-molecule fluorescence detection, such as better
photoprotection systems and procedures for maximum likelihood analysis of photon
arrival times, together with implementation of 2-color and 3-color FRET schemes
to measure multiple distances. Through the realization of these experiments and
computational analyses on select fast-folding domains we will investigate the
structural, sequence, and environmental determinants of the mechanisms for
folding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics.