* 1616388
* Chemical probing of RNA tertiary structure in a whole transcriptome at single-atom resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Thomas Tullius, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 660,000.00

RNA (ribonucleic acid) is now widely appreciated to be a key participant in
nearly all of the activities of the cell, yet only limited information on the
three-dimensional structures of most RNA molecules are available. This presents
a challenge, because it is known that the biological function of an RNA molecule
depends on its structure. To understand the relationship between structure and
function for the large number of RNA molecules that populate the cell, new high-
throughput experimental approaches for structure determination are needed. This
project will develop a new experimental method that can provide detailed
information on the three-dimensional folding of all the RNA molecules in a cell,
in one experiment. The new method combines chemical probing of RNA structure by
the hydroxyl radical, the quintessential Reactive Oxygen Species, with analysis
by high-throughput sequencing, so that the structures of all RNA molecules in a
cell can be monitored simultaneously. This proposal will provide educational and
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students including
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to develop a new method for obtaining tertiary structural information
for all of the RNA in a cell, in one experiment. The experimental approach will
adapt the hydroxyl radical chemical probing experiment for analysis by high-
throughput sequencing. A key innovation will be the synthesis of a novel set of
"catch and release" small molecule probes that will be used to capture the major
product of hydroxyl radical cleavage of RNA, a strand terminated by a
5'-aldehyde moiety. Hydroxyl radical cleavage and aldehyde catch and release
will be performed in flow format, to streamline the method. The method will be
developed and validated by applying it to RNA molecules of known structure. The
validated method will then be used to map the tertiary structure of the entire
transcriptome, in vitro and in living cells, for yeast and human cells. This
project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.