* 1616981
* Collaborative Research: Non-Markovian Reduction of Nonlinear Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, and Applications to Climate Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Mickael Chekroun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2019
* USD 126,713.00

Liu, DMS-1616450 Chekroun, DMS-1616981

The dynamics of the atmosphere and oceans exhibits several recurrent large-
scale patterns, which include the well-known El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
as a prominent example. The variability of such irregular climate patterns has
always had a large impact on humans; some possible disastrous consequences
include heavy flooding or extended drought in different regions, collapse of
fisheries, plagues, and crop failure. To understand the time variability and to
provide robust prediction of such climate patterns are thus of vital importance
-- both for our economy and for society. These tasks are, however, long-standing
challenges in geosciences due to the complexity of our climate system. In this
project, the investigators and their colleagues study a factor important for
such predictive understandings: the effect of ubiquitous random fluctuations on
the dynamics of some fundamental climate models. In particular, the mechanism of
extreme El Nino warming events such as the 2015-2016 one is explored from the
perspective of noise-induced phenomena. The approach relies crucially on a novel
dimension reduction methodology developed recently by the investigators and
their colleagues. The knowledge gained in this project is expected to bring new
insights into the design of better prediction methods for the evolution of
large-scale climate patterns. Graduate students are involved in the work of the
project.

The dimension reduction methodology adopted and further developed in this
project is based on a new stochastic parameterization technique for the
unresolved small-scale dynamics of the underlying nonlinear stochastic partial
differential equations. The approach has several distinctive features: (i) The
parameterization is pathwise in nature. It is very well suited for cases when
one is not only interested in statistical quantities but also trajectory-wise
dynamical behaviors, which is the case for the applications to climate dynamics.
(ii) The parameterization of the small-scale dynamics leads in particular to
exogenous memory effects in the reduced systems. This non-Markovian feature can
help achieve good modeling performance even in situations that are known to be
challenging for other traditional methods to operate. (iii) A practical way to
construct different parameterizations is also offered within the approach, and a
simple non-dimensional quantity is designed to compare objectively the skills of
these parameterizations prior to numerical simulations of the corresponding
reduced systems. The developed framework can be applied to deterministic partial
differential equations as well; and the method has already been successfully
used in several applications including the study of phase transitions, optimal
control, and the analysis of noise-induced phenomena. For the applications to
climate dynamics, the goals are: (i) to develop useful and easy-to-use low-
dimensional reduced models for ENSO based on stochastic versions of some
sophisticated coupled ocean-atmosphere models, and (ii) to use these reduced
models to investigate the impact of different types of noise on the irregularity
of ENSO dynamics. The challenges inherent to this study of climate models help
provide new directions for the development of the methodology as well as of
parameterization schemes in general. The theoretical and computational tools
developed in this project are general, flexible, and have a broad range of
applications in nonlinear sciences and engineering. Graduate students are
involved in the work of the project.