* 1616248
* AF:SMALL:Sparse Geometric Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* David Eppstein, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 415,894.00

Many real-world problems can be modeled by geometric graphs:
systems&lt;br/&gt;of vertices that represent geometric objects and edges that
represent&lt;br/&gt;connections or interactions between pairs of these objects.
For&lt;br/&gt;instance, the vertices of a road network may represent
intersections&lt;br/&gt;or junctions of roads, while the edges represent the
segments of road&lt;br/&gt;between two consecutive intersections. Although these
graphs are not&lt;br/&gt;planar (a road can cross a bridge without intersecting
the road beneath), such crossings are&lt;br/&gt;uncommon, and the project will
investigate ways of exploiting that&lt;br/&gt;sparse crossing structure to
efficiently solve problems such as route&lt;br/&gt;planning on road networks.
Similarly, the project will investigate the&lt;br/&gt;structure of the
underlying geometric graphs, and the use of that&lt;br/&gt;structure to develop
efficient algorithms, for other problems that&lt;br/&gt;include the
visualization of hierarchically clustered networks,&lt;br/&gt;pattern mining in
social networks, splitting large scientific&lt;br/&gt;simulations into smaller
subproblems with low amounts of interaction&lt;br/&gt;between the subproblems,
the analysis of mechanical systems of rigid&lt;br/&gt;parts connected by hinges,
the design of maps that distort geographic&lt;br/&gt;areas to display other
types of quantitative information, and the&lt;br/&gt;visualization of overlaps
between fragments of DNA sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes attacks on a large collection of problems from&lt;br/&gt;application
areas where sparse geometric graphs naturally arise. The&lt;br/&gt;project
suggests a model for real-world road networks in which a&lt;br/&gt;derived graph
of edges and their crossings has bounded degeneracy, and&lt;br/&gt;seeks to
investigate how sparsity properties of this crossing graph&lt;br/&gt;affect the
underlying road graph. The project seeks to determine&lt;br/&gt;whether it is
hard to recognize the graphs of 4-polytopes and simple&lt;br/&gt;4-polytopes,
and whether a recognition algorithm of the investigator&lt;br/&gt;for a special
class of 4-polytopes can be extended to a realization&lt;br/&gt;algorithm. The
graphs in this class have small separators, and the&lt;br/&gt;project seeks to
determine whether this is true more generally for&lt;br/&gt;certain graphs
derived from planar clustered graph drawings. The&lt;br/&gt;project seeks
efficient data structures that maintain low-degeneracy&lt;br/&gt;orientations of
a dynamic graph and use these orientations to quickly&lt;br/&gt;find features in
the graph, needed when fitting social networks to&lt;br/&gt;exponential random
graph models. Finite element meshes with bounded&lt;br/&gt;aspect ratio for each
element have small separators, but arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;tetrahedral meshes do
not. The project seeks intermediate conditions&lt;br/&gt;on the shape of the
elements in a mesh that would ensure the existence&lt;br/&gt;of small
separators. The graphs arising in kinematic analysis can
be&lt;br/&gt;characterized by linear bounds on the edges in each subgraph,
and&lt;br/&gt;recognized in quadratic time by a pebbling algorithm. The
project&lt;br/&gt;seeks more efficient algorithms to test the rigidity or
degrees of&lt;br/&gt;freedom of mechanical structures in subquadratic time.
Subdivisions of&lt;br/&gt;rectangles into smaller rectangles have applications
in architectural&lt;br/&gt;design, cartographic information visualization, and
VLSI design. An&lt;br/&gt;area-universal subdivision is one that can fit any
assignment of areas&lt;br/&gt;to its rectangles. The project seeks efficient
algorithms to construct&lt;br/&gt;area-universal subdivisions as well as
subdivisions produced by a&lt;br/&gt;recursive splitting process. Unit interval
graphs arise in modeling&lt;br/&gt;human preferences and in DNA physical
mapping. Some problems that are&lt;br/&gt;hard on broader graph classes can be
solved efficiently on unit&lt;br/&gt;interval graphs by representing the graph
using a binary sequence and&lt;br/&gt;applying a finite automaton to the
sequence. The project seeks a more&lt;br/&gt;general explanation of this
phenomenon. In graph drawing, styles of&lt;br/&gt;graph drawing on the basis
that are somewhere-dense allow all graphs&lt;br/&gt;to be drawn in that style
with constant bends per edge while nowhere&lt;br/&gt;dense styles require an
unbounded number of bends per edge. The&lt;br/&gt;project seeks a theory of
sparsity distinguishing nowhere-dense styles&lt;br/&gt;that require many bends
per edge from those that require few&lt;br/&gt;bends. Additional components of
the project include questions on&lt;br/&gt;diameter graphs and book thickness.