* 1616513
* Collaborative Research: Non-thermal Radio Halos of Spiral Galaxies as Clues to Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Richard Rand, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2020
* USD 275,750.00

To understand how stars like the Sun and planets like Earth came to be, we must
understand how galaxies, such as our Milky Way, form and evolve. This project is
an attempt to understand how interstellar gas and energetic particles are
ejected from galaxy disks, where most of the gas and stars are found, and
interact with the galaxy halo. This cyclical process is important for
understanding how star formation proceeds in galaxies, and the rate at which
galaxies grew when they were forming. The study makes use of radio images from
the NSF-funded Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) and the Green Bank
Telescope (GBT), optical data from the Apache Point 3.5-meter telescope, as well
as archival infrared data. The project will provide opportunities for two PhD
student theses at Hispanic Serving Institutions, and the PIs will also
contribute to a training program run by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory
for faculty at small colleges.

Galaxy growth and evolution depend on both the acquisition of gas from the
galaxy environment and energetic outflows from disks. The detailed physics of
these processes needs to be understood, and nearby edge-on galaxies are the best
objects where it is possible to cleanly separate disk and halo components. The
project leverages a major new survey of radio continuum emission from edge-on
galaxies called CHANG-ES (Continuum Halos in Nearby Galaxies: an EVLA Survey).
The first goal is to further our understanding of the dynamics of disk-halo
flows by assessing the role of non-thermal gas pressure gradients in galaxy
halos, using radio maps made from the VLA and GBT. The second goal focuses on
identifying sites of cosmic ray (CR) injection and propagation into galaxy
halos. For this, the spatial variation of the non-thermal spectral index will be
mapped, after robustly separating thermal and non-thermal radio emission using
CHANG-ES maps in conjunction with infrared data and H-alpha images. The third
science goal is to examine the connection between CR outflows and disk-halo
cycling of thermal gas, and whether this relation depends on factors such as
star formation rate.