* 1616236
* Molecular Mechanisms of Stomatal Carbon Dioxide Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Julian Schroeder, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2019
* USD 712,951.00

Specialized pores (called stomata) in the leaves of plants open and close to
regulate the uptake into plants of carbon dioxide from the air, and the loss of
water (as vapor) from plant tissues out into the air. The opening and closing of
stomata is regulated by signals that include the concentration of carbon dioxide
in the air, but knowledge of how this is achieved is incomplete. This project
will define the genes, proteins and networks of control involved in the
regulation of stomata by carbon dioxide, and develop the knowledge necessary for
the breeding of plants with improved growth properties and water use efficiency.
The ability to manipulate these properties of plants is important for
unfavorable weather conditions, climate changes, droughts becoming more frequent
in some locations, and as carbon dioxide levels in the air increase. The
investigators will pursue an outreach program involving research internships,
professional preparation and mentoring with the public Preuss School for
disadvantaged high school students in San Diego County as well as engaging with
summer research interns from Howard University. Project personnel will be active
within the San Diego Science Festival, a large annual event that brings science
and innovation close to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some components
(including carbonic anhydrase, anion channels and protein kinases) of the carbon
dioxide signaling network that regulates stomatal aperture are known. However,
the manner in which diverse signals, genes and proteins (a number of which are
still to be uncovered) are integrated by guard cells into the network that
controls stomatal aperture is not known. This project will use a combination of
systems biology, biochemical, genetic and mathematical modeling approaches to
identify additional critical molecular components of the signaling network and
gain insight into the manner in which this network operates in guard cells to
regulate stomatal aperture and how plants can improve their water use efficiency
and drought resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by
the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and by the Physics of Living Systems program in the
Division of Physics.