* 1616008
* Investigation of Protein Dynamics on Multiple Timescales by  Neutron Scattering and Molecular Dynamics Simulations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xiang-qiang Chu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2019
* USD 136,103.00

This project will utilize neutron scattering and molecular dynamics simulations
to study proteins from hyperthermophilic microorganism found in deep-sea thermal
vent communities. The overall objective is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the relationship between protein dynamics and structures, and
to correlate this information with biological functions at the molecular level.
The proteins that will be studied have the ability to perform catalytic activity
at extreme pressures and temperatures. Such a study will give a complete picture
of protein dynamics and conformational changes under different conditions. It
will provide a framework for comprehensive and systematic studies of the
dynamics in biological systems under various timescales. This interdisciplinary
project encompasses various fields, including physical chemistry, statistical
mechanics, structural biology, and computational biochemistry. Therefore,
students involved in this project will be trained in a multidisciplinary
environment. The integrated research and educational outreach will expose
students to cutting-edge research in biophysics. It will improve biophysics
teaching and education in inner-city middle and high school in Detroit, where
there is a large population of under-represented groups with little exposure to
modern scientific techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological functions of
proteins, such as catalysis, are often understood from their crystallographic
structures; however, it is crucial to take into account dynamic behaviors in
order to fully comprehend these functions. Proteins undergo sophisticated
changes in space and time, in order to keep the cells functioning. These motions
are believed to govern the biological function and activities of the protein on
multiple time scales. Neutron scattering is an exceptional tool for studying the
structures and dynamics of proteins in real time at the molecular level. In this
project, complementary neutron scattering experiments and theoretical
simulations will be carried out to study the effect of pressure and temperature
on protein dynamics and structural changes on different timescales at the
molecular level: (1) the structural changes will be monitored and analyzed by
small angle neutron and X-ray scattering; (2) mid-time dynamics in ps to ns
timescales, which is most relevant to biological activity, will be studied by
quasi-elastic neutron scattering; (3) in the long-time range, from microsecond
to millisecond, protein domain motions will be probed by neutron spin echo; (4)
the short-time dynamics, in less than ps time range, phonon-like motions in
proteins will be investigated by inelastic neutron and X-ray scattering; (5)
theoretical modeling and molecular dynamics simulations will be employed to
interpret and extend neutron scattering experimental data.