* 1616621
* Conference Proposal: The 12th Cyanobacterial Workshop (Tempe Arizona, May 18-21, 2016)
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The Cyanobacterial Workshop presents a unique opportunity to facilitate
productive communication between researchers from multiple disciplines, all
sharing a common interest in cyanobacteria either as the direct subject of their
research or as experimental models to investigate fundamental scientific
questions. The major objective of the workshop is to provide a readily
accessible venue for young scientists (graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows) to present the results of their research efforts, and formally and
informally discuss their work with leading members of the community. The
Workshop will provide support for the attendance of young scientists, with an
emphasis on increasing the participation of women and minorities under-
represented in the field; the diversity of topics and technical approaches
presented at the Workshop will provide a stimulating multidisciplinary
environment for junior and senior scientists alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria are major contributors to the global oxygen,
carbon, and nitrogen cycles and are increasingly used as platforms for
biotechnological innovation for the development of "green" biofuels, chemical
feedstocks, and high value products. The Cyanobacterial Workshop is enriched by
the intersection of disciplines ranging from metabolic engineering to microbial
ecology, and themes include Molecular Responses to Stress; Photosynthesis;
Physiology and Metabolism; Biotechnology and Synthetic Biology; Differentiation;
Environment and Ecology; Regulation; Phylogeny and
Evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by programs in
Cellular Dynamics and Function, and Systems and Synthetic Biology.