* 1616741
* Accounting for Conformational Dynamics in Post-Translational Phosphorylation of Signaling Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Peng, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 513,196.00

Title: Accounting for Conformational Dynamics in Post-Translational
Phosphorylation of Signaling Proteins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To thrive, cells must
regulate dense networks of protein-protein interactions that drive basic
processes such as cell growth, division, and death. One well-known regulatory
mechanism is "post-translational phosphorylation" - the reversible addition of
phosphate groups to specific amino acids within a protein. Phosphorylation can
alter protein binding specificity, enzymatic activity, or sub-cellular location,
thereby regulating its interaction with other proteins. But just how this comes
about is not yet clear. In fact, an atomic level explanation for how site-
specific phosphorylation changes a protein's interaction properties remains an
open challenge. This project addresses this challenge by investigating the
effects of post-translational phosphorylation on protein conformational
dynamics. The protein segments subject to phosphorylation are often the same
segments involved in intermolecular interactions. Critically, they often have
conformational flexibility that defies explanation by standard biochemical
analysis. By investigating how these dynamic protein segments convert
phosphorylation into functional change, this project will provide insight into a
widespread, yet poorly understood aspect of protein phosphorylation. Gaining
this insight is a necessary step toward understanding and manipulating protein
interaction networks. This project will bring interdisciplinary educational
opportunities to students at early stages of college by developing freshmen
courses that introduce physical principles based on biophysical phenomena. This
project will also train doctoral students and undergraduate research interns,
including members of underrepresented groups, to become highly qualified
scientists in the area biophysics and computational biology; the cultivation of
such expertise is vital to keep the U.S. competitiveness in research and in the
global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine liquid-state
multi-dimensional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, and mutagenesis to map how site-specific
phosphorylation impacts protein dynamics and protein-substrate interactions in
the mitotic signaling protein, Pin1. Pin1 interactions with other proteins are
sensitive to both conformational dynamics and post-translational
phosphorylation. This proposal will determine the extent to which
phosphorylation exploits electrostatic networks to achieve long-range site-to-
site communication (allostery). This project will also define how
phosphorylation of intrinsically disordered regions nevertheless elicit
functional changes at remote binding sites. Because Pin1 interacts with numerous
other signaling proteins, results of this project will give broad insight into
the mechanisms by which dynamic protein segments convert phosphorylation into
functional change. This project will also include development of general protein
NMR methods to better characterize dynamic electrostatic interactions in
proteins, and their description in terms of conformational ensembles. This
project is supported by Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.