* 1616970
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Spatial Manifestations Of Social Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 13,193.00

The primary objective of this research is to investigate the continual interplay
that occurs between people and the spaces they construct as settlements change
in size and scale. Archaeology provides a unique time depth for analyzing the
processes of population aggregation and dispersal and can prove informative on a
range of questions concerning the social implications of village life. How do
previously dispersed social groups adjust to cohabitation? How is integration
achieved and at what pace does it occur when new groups of people come together
to construct new villages and other spatial units? Do certain events or forms of
organization foreshadow village depopulation? This research attempts to better
understand the negotiations among distinct groups as they begin sharing space.
Research focused on architecture has revealed important aspects of cultural
systems that shape and are shaped by their physical setting. Migration plays a
major role in the world today -- for example in many regions of the developing
world people flock from rural regions to reshape and expand cities -- and this
proposed study of the past can provide insight into the process as it proceeds
on a much expanded scale today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. E Charles Adams and
Samantha Fladd will examine the strategies used by groups to modify their
spatial setting and the social implications these choices have on the creation
and dissolution of a community. Using excavation records from the 14th century
ancestral Hopi villages of the Homol'ovi Settlement Cluster, architectural
alterations, such as changing room size, internal features, and doorways, and
the use of trash to fill rooms will be located spatially and temporally.
Significant reorganization throughout the occupation of the villages and their
eventual depopulation resulted in frequent architectural changes and the
frequent deposition of cultural materials within rooms. Patterns in the
composition and scale of these practices of modification will allow for
distinctions to be made among social groups within the villages, as well as
allow for the assessment of their relative interactions with one another.
Depopulation of these villages was gradual and modifications to space,
particularly the filling of rooms, illustrate this process. How these groups and
relationships change throughout village occupation can reveal fluctuations in
social organization that shed light on the relative success of strategies of
integration during different phases of aggregation and dispersal. Detailed
models of village aggregation and dissolution, applicable to historic and modern
contexts, will be generated and a greater understanding of the history of the
Homol'ovi Settlement Cluster will be of interest to scholars and descendant
communities. Additionally, this research relies on records from previously
excavated sites, furthering the ideals of preservation and stewardship central
to archaeology and increasing the accessibility to the excavation documentation.
Finally, the framework of this project forefronts the training of students in
archaeological research and archival practices.