* 1616177
* A Study of Gas Flows and Structure Formation in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Joshua E.G. Peek, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 481,212.00

Earth formed from dusty gas in space, circling a young sun. The sun formed from
the core of a huge cloud of molecular gas in our galaxy. The investigators are
studying how other solar systems form from hot gas cooling into dense, dark
clouds of molecular gas. The investigators will map our galaxy to find clouds
where stars are formed. They will also study the environment of our galaxy's
spiral arms. The investigators have already mapped many of the positions of the
clouds in our galaxy. Their new study will add a fourth dimension, the cloud
speed. The speed is used to predict where clouds will collide to form spiral
arms. These collisions can result in the birth of new
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with expert 'information visualists',
the investigator will bring their findings to the public through digital
outreach and direct engagement at science and art festivals. These efforts will
be attached to enhanced and interactive visualizations for astronomers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes by which gas flows together to form gaseous
structures and stars is both a long and a difficult problem to solve in
astronomy. Since the theory of gaseous spiral arms began, there have been
arguments over whether spiral arms are long-lived, galaxy-scale density waves or
short-lived myths of density confusions. In all of these theories, the spiral
arms' gravitational potential brings large-scale combining gas flows. Theories
differ on whether these flows are violent, causing shocks, or gentle, merely
collecting gas without shocking it. It is not yet clear by what method of
combining flows, whether driven by spiral arms or by other means, encourages the
formation of giant molecular clouds (GMCs), or indeed whether combining flows
are even necessary for GMC formation.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hope to
transform this field by developing and applying a new technique, Kinetic
Tomography (KT). KT is a family of methods that transforms already existing
astronomical measurements of the interstellar medium (ISM) into a direct measure
of where gas is flowing together to form new structures or flowing apart in
their destruction, as expressed in the distance-velocity diagram. The proposed
work will test and expand the already-functional prototype KT method, which
draws on cutting-edge applied math techniques such as compressed sensing. They
will measure the rate and structure of convergence and divergence of the ISM,
both on the large spiral arm scale and the smaller GMC scale. Furthermore, they
will compare these measurements to existing data on molecular cloud structure
and predictions from analytic theory and simulations.