* 1616184
* Activation and specificity of USP7: uncovering the molecular mechanisms.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Irina Bezsonova, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 599,001.00

Title: Activation and specificity of USP7: uncovering the molecular mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project will provide a fundamental
understanding of the mechanism of action of a new class of enzymes. It focuses
on one member of this class, the human enzyme USP7, that plays a central role in
fundamental cellular processes such as DNA regulation, stress response and
protein stability control. The aim of this project is to understand how the
activity of USP7 is regulated and how it recognizes its diverse targets. To fill
a critical gap in knowledge of USP7 function, an interdisciplinary approach will
be employed that combines solution Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, cryo-Electron Microscopy, Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS), a
variety of biophysical and biochemical methods, and a range of in vitro and in
vivo assays. This project will create a platform for teaching, training and
learning, including outreach to underrepresented minorities to promote
understanding of basic science. This project will also promote teaching and
training in the K-12 environment by creating several short-term educational and
training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of activation and substrate specificity of
the deubiquitinating enzyme USP7, which rescues a number of diverse cellular and
viral proteins from proteasomal degradation. Its substrates include a number of
transcription factors, E3 ubiquitin ligases and epigenetic modifiers. USP7
exemplifies a newly recognized subgroup of deubiquitinating enzymes that is
characterized by the presence of multiple ubiquitin-like domains (UBLs). These
UBL domains are not catalytically active, but can greatly influence the activity
of the enzyme by a yet unknown mechanism. The mechanisms of USP7 activation will
be addressed by determining the arrangement of individual USP7 domains within
the full-length enzyme. The molecular basis of USP7 specificity towards its
substrates will be addressed by identifying and mapping distinct sites on C-USP7
responsible for recognition of two transcription factors, p53 and FOX(O)4. An
array biophysical and spectroscopic methods will be employed in vitro and in
vivo experiments. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster
of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.