* 1616097
* Collaborative Research: Tracing the Evolution of Planetary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Christine Chen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 10/31/2019
* USD 261,290.00

Debris disks, the disks of dust around many stars, are the places where planets
form. We have, so far, observed the dust and grains of different brightness in
twenty-four debris disks around other stars. We still, however, do not know the
detailed properties of these grains. Debris disks are examples for studies of
how planetary systems form and change with time. The investigators will use the
Gemini South Observatory telescope's Gemini Planet Imager (GPI) Integral Field
Spectrograph and Polarimeter to observe the properties of the dust in many
debris disks in detail, including grain colors, sizes, compositions, and how
thick the grains are in the disks. They will combine these observations with
data from other telescopes to provide an overall picture of the properties of
the dust grains in different debris disks. The results of this research help to
find our Solar System's place with other planetary systems. This program serves
the national interest by increasing our understanding of how the early Solar
System and other planetary systems formed. The investigators will make a program
and video that explain the new GPI instrument, and the science we can learn
using it, for the general public.

Circumstellar accretion disks (debris disks), the dusty disks around main
sequence stars, are the likely sites of planet formation. To date, twenty-four
debris disks have been spatially resolved in scattered light, revealing the
location of the dust and the reflectivities of the grains. The detailed
properties of these grains are, however, not well understood. Debris disks serve
as laboratories for studies of planetary system formation and evolution that
help to place our Solar System into context with other planetary systems. Gemini
Planet Imager Integral Field Spectrograph (IFS) and Polarimeter observations
planned by these investigators will provide an unprecedented opportunity to
discern grain properties. IFS observations will be sensitive to spectral
features and will better constrain the color of the scattered light, therefore
constraining the particle composition and size. Polarimetry will allow us to
determine the difference between particle size and porosity. This team will
combine the GPI observations with complementary high contrast imaging and
thermal mapping data from the Hubble Space Telescope, Magellan Adaptive Optics,
and Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array to develop holistic models that
will significantly improve our understanding of the materials available during
the late stages of planetary system formation. The investigators will create a
program that showcases the new GPI instrument, including a video to explain the
instrument and the science it enables, for the general public.