* 1616459
* Structural and Mechanstic Aspects of Cotranslational Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Silvia Cavagnero, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 940,706.00

TITLE: Structural and Mechanistic Aspects of Cotranslational Protein
Folding&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a better understanding of
how proteins attain their 3-dimensional shape in the cell, providing a gateway
to a deeper understanding and control of crucial life-related processes. The
shape of proteins is extraordinarily important because it determines biological
activity. However, little is known about how proteins achieve their bioactive
three-dimensional shape inside the living cell. This research will elucidate how
proteins gain their precise fold from the earliest stages of their life, from
the time they are made a by a complex machine known as the ribosome. The role of
the ribosome and molecular helpers known as chaperones will be explored.
Molecular movies, showing folding as a function of time, will be generated to
watch the microscopic details of the folding process in real time. This research
will foster the participation of several underrepresented graduate students, and
will be a benchmark to learn advanced biophysical techniques as well as the
mechanisms of protein folding in the cell. In addition, classroom demonstrations
showing illustrative renderings of the protein folding and unfolding processes
will be developed, providing unprecedented opportunities for active learning and
for undergraduate student participation in the classroom. As part of the broader
impacts of this project, campus pre-visits for minority and disadvantaged
undergraduate students will also be organized, to encourage them to pursue
graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the extensive literature
available on the folding of purified proteins upon dilution from denaturant and
upon temperature-jump, there is very little information on how proteins fold in
the cellular environment, where chaperones, molecular crowding and the ribosome
can profoundly affect the sequence and nature of the events leading to bioactive
proteins. This project addresses the earliest stages of folding in the cellular
context, as proteins emerge from the ribosome. The role of nascent chain
compaction and thermodynamic stability, together with the effect of the
ribosomal surface and the rate of full-length protein release from the ribosome,
will be addressed at the molecular level. Experiments will be carried out by a
combination of molecular-biology and biophysical techniques, including
fluorescence depolarization and pulsed proteolysis on wild-type and rationally
designed variants of the E. coli globin apoHmpH and on other control nascent
proteins. Data will be collected in the absence and presence of the
DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE chaperones, to assess the role played by each of these folding
facilitators. The specific interaction between the ribosomal surface and nascent
proteins will be assessed as function of ionic strength. The rate of release of
ribosome-bound nascent proteins will be followed in real time to gain high-
resolution insights into the events accompanying protein birth. Overall, this
project will lead to an improved understanding of intracellular protein folding,
one of the most fascinating aspects of gene expression.