* 1616452
* Dark Matter in Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Eva Noyola, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 382,787.00

The investigators will observe, in fine detail, nearby dwarf galaxies and
globular clusters in the Milky Way. The investigators have previously measured
the dark matter content in some dwarf galaxies and compared their observations
to numerical models. Their results are in better agreement with models than
previous observations. The investigators will use a new, very sensitive,
spectrograph, which can measure the velocities of stars in these galaxies and
clusters with great precision. Their observations are important because
understanding the dark matter content of dwarf galaxies is critical for testing
of models of the universe as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
directly focus on observational studies of low dispersion systems in the cold
dark matter paradigm. There has been a problem in comparing these systems with
numerical simulations over the past 30 years, typically referred to as the
core/cusp problem, the missing satellite problem, and the "too big to fail"
problem. The investigators aim to resolve each of these issues with this study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific advancement, the
investigators are also committed to engaging the public with these studies. The
investigators are designing an exhibit connecting the topic of dark matter with
the optical instruments used in their research. Their presentations will engage
and educate the general public, which includes a large number of Spanish
speakers that live in or near West Texas.