* 1616754
* Collaborative Research: Tidal Disruption of Stars in Galaxy Centers: Connecting Models to Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Kasen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 285,163.00

Abstract for 1615881/Ramirez-Ruiz + 1616754/Kasen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Galaxies like our own Milky Way are vast collections of hundreds of billions of
stars orbiting in a disk perhaps 100,000 light-years in diameter. Lurking in the
centers of many and perhaps all galaxies are supermassive black holes?mysterious
objects containing millions or billions of times as much mass as our own Sun,
but crammed into a volume that would fit easily within the inner solar system.
In the past few years, astronomers have discovered luminous flares emanating
from the core regions of nearby galaxies. These are thought to originate from
the disruption of individual stars that were orbiting so close to the black hole
that they were ripped apart by its strong gravitational force. The energy
emitted as the remains of the star fall into the black hole produces the
luminous flare. The collaborators on this project will carry out detailed
numerical modeling of these events and will make publicly available their
computer codes. The collaborators also plan to make their work accessible to a
wide audience by teaming experts with students in the visual arts and digital
media to produce visual simulations of great power and beauty. In addition, they
will participate in a strong program to recruit and mentor astronomy students
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Over the past several
years, wide-field transient surveys have begun to deliver more and better data
about tidal disruption events (TDEs). A TDE is produced when a star is tidally
disrupted by a supermassive black hole (SMBH) in the core of a galaxy. Because
the theoretical understanding of such events remains incomplete, the
collaborators will bring together experts in numerical hydrodynamics and non-
equilibrium radiative transfer to study how matter from the tidally disrupted
star loses kinetic energy and accretes onto the SMBH, identify the radiative
processes that generate the X-ray/ultraviolet/optical spectra and light curves
of TDEs, develop a numerical toolset to be used in analyzing TDEs, and apply it
to constrain the properties of the star and the SMBH in observed events. For
TDEs with well-resolved light curves, their models will enable a better
characterization of the SMBHs and the dense stellar clusters that surround them.
Building upon existing strengths of the partner institutions, the collaborators
will also cross-fertilize the training of computational scientists and students
in the visual arts and digital media using state-of-the-art astrophysical
simulations as common ground. The resulting visual products will be used to
disseminate the results, help to inform the general public about science and the
universe, and provide raw material for science curricula, documentaries, and
astronomy presentations. The investigators will also continue their program to
recruit and mentor astronomy students from under-represented groups.