* 1616111
* Complete synthesis of designer eukaryotic genome, Sc2.0
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Jef Boeke, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,350,043.00

This project aims to complete the synthesis of the world's first synthetic
eukaryotic genome project, Sc2.0, a human-designed genome powering growth of the
model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Rather than simply re-writing a known
genome sequence, the extensive set of design features written into the Sc2.0
genome is intended to confer increased genomic stability and genetic flexibility
while maintaining normal growth. The Sc2.0 genome is designed to enable unique
experiments that will "teach us biology". The project involves teams of
scientists from around the world working together towards a common goal. The
Build A Genome course, initiated by this project, is a distinctive educational
vehicle for teaching synthetic biology and genomics to undergraduate students.
The Sc2.0 genome is also a platform for bio-manufacturing by increasing the
production of biofuels, vaccines, specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and
biologics. The Sc2.0 project has also taken a lead role in generating a
"statement of principles" for the project addressing bioethics, safety and
related concerns of the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthetic
Saccharomyces genome is well on its way to being completed. A global group of
scientists is building strains encoding individual synthetic chromosomes, with
the ultimate goal of combining them into a single cell to construct the world's
first designer, entirely synthetic eukaryotic genome. Five additional
chromosomes have been completely designed, synthesized and assembled, sequenced,
and evaluated for fitness under diverse conditions. This project will be
critical to its completion. Teams in the Boeke lab are working to complete
chromosomes 1, 4 and 8. Also, while there are essentially 16 teams around the
world each producing one chromosome, an important series of final steps relates
to combining the synthetic chromosomes into a single strain. An extensive set of
design features written into the Sc2.0 genome is intended to confer increased
genomic stability and genetic flexibility while maintaining the ability to grow
at a normal rate. For instance, destabilizing elements such as repetitive
sequences are deleted from Sc2.0 chromosomes while tRNA genes are re-located to
a separate "neochromosome". Additionally, an inducible evolution or genome
scrambling system (Dymond and Boeke, 2012), plus a watermarking system to
distinguish synthetic and wild type DNA, provide unprecedented capacity to
generate derivative genomes with novel structures and track synthetic DNA. All
16 synthetic chromosomes have been designed. The completion of the synthesis and
assembly of one and a half synthetic chromosomes has been reported (Annaluru et
al., 2014; Dymond et al., 2011). Debugging of various types was required in some
of the synthetic chromosomes to produce a high fitness isolate, by restoring to
the native sequence certain designer changes found to be deleterious to
expression, etc. In the coming years work will focus on building a synthetic
yeast mitochondrial DNA, and deletion of all introns and splicing machinery from
the genome, and the power of genome scrambling will be evaluated in new
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sc2.0 project, looking ahead, will answer many
evolutionary questions never before approachable, such as how introns and
transposons evolve and spread throughout host genomes. Additional questions
include: How extensive is the universe of minimal eukaryotic gene sets? Do
introns/splicing machinery play essential roles? Can one build transposon-free
and/or intron-free genomes? Can one add a 21st amino acid to the genetic code?
What happens when transposons are introduced into such genomes? How do
engineered genomes perform in meiosis? Will synthetic and native yeast genomes
make fertile hybrids? Can one build a new type of genetics based entirely on
changing gene sets and gene dosage rather than base changes?