* 1616495
* Cytokinetic events that promote actomyosin ring constriction  and septum formation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Maitreyi Das, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 01/31/2021
* USD 868,120.00

Proper cell division is critical for growth, development, and survival of an
organism. Defects in cell division have been linked to developmental anomalies
and various afflictions. The final stage of cell division is cytokinesis, where
the two daughter cells are physically partitioned. Successful cytokinesis
requires multiple steps that are precisely controlled both in time and space.
The nature and molecular details of this precise regulation is poorly
understood. This project aims at understanding how this complex multi-step
process is precisely controlled to ensure successful cell separation.
Cytokinesis is evolutionarily conserved from yeast to mammals and hence what is
learned in yeast is directly applicable to mammals (such as humans). One of the
best model systems to study cell division and cytokinesis is the fission yeast.
Preliminary work using the fission yeast model system has, with great clarity,
revealed the mechanistic details of the early stages of cytokinesis. Unraveling
the molecular details in cytokinesis in the fission yeast will provide a
paradigm to study similar processes in complex organisms and will lead to a
better understanding of the etiology of various anomolies related to
cytokinesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytokinesis, the final step in cell division,
is central to survival and development of all cells. Cytokinesis is a temporally
organized multistep process that involves the physical separation of a cell into
two. First, an actomyosin ring forms, which then undergoes constriction
concurrent with septum ingression for membrane furrow formation. It is not clear
how these events are temporally organized. In fission yeast, septum ingression
is critical for membrane furrow formation. The ingressing septum provides the
force required to overcome internal turgor pressure in the cell. It is not clear
how actomyosin ring constriction and septum ingression occur concurrently.
Membrane furrowing can occur without an actomyosin ring so what role does the
actomyosin ring play in cytokinesis? Ring constriction and septum ingression
occurs after a short waiting period, post ring assembly. What triggers the onset
of ring constriction and septum formation? Preliminary data shows that post-ring
assembly, the conserved GTPase Cdc42 is activated in a unique spatiotemporal
manner. Cdc42 activation pattern during cytokinesis depends on the localization
of its activators, Gef1 and Scd1. Gef1 promotes the recruitment of a septum
synthesizing protein at the ring to allow timely onset of ring constriction and
septum ingression, while Scd1 is required for normal septum formation. Gef1 also
promotes uniform ring constriction and septum ingression. Based on this data the
proposed central hypothesis is that spatiotemporal activation of Cdc42 enables
the assembled actomyosin ring to act as a landmark and guide for proper ring
constriction and septum formation. To test this, the following aims will be
pursued; 1. To define how Cdc42 is spatiotemporally activated at the division
site post ring assembly; 2. To determine how ring constriction and septum
formation is promoted by spatiotemporal activation of Cdc42; and 3. To describe
how the actomyosin ring acts as a landmark and guide for symmetric ring
constriction and septum formation. This project will integrate live cell
imaging, analysis of protein dynamics, genetics, and mathematical modeling. This
project will provide a deeper understanding of how unique Cdc42 activation
patterns are established, leading to distinct functions in cytokinesis and will
provide insights into how signaling patterns organize complex multistep
processes in the cell. This project will have widespread implications in the
mechanistic understating of cytokinesis in most eukaryotes.