* 1616820
* Metabolic modeling of carbon partitioning under the control of inositol polyphosphate signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Umen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 745,000.00

Photosynthetic algae are a critical component of the earth's carbon cycle.
Carbon dioxide is taken up by algae and converted into macromolecules that are
the building blocks for producing more cells; alternatively this carbon can be
used to produce storage compounds such as starch and storage lipids (oil). Very
little is known about the metabolic control mechanisms that direct carbon
towards these different fates. This project uses the single celled green alga
Chlamydomonas to investigate carbon partitioning under the control of a newly
discovered signaling system involving a specialized class of molecules called
inositol polyphosphates. The regulation of inositol polyphosphates by light,
carbon and other environmental cues will be determined and their impact on
carbon metabolism will be measured and modeled so that the mechanism by which
they control intracellular carbon partitioning can be pinpointed. These studies
will provide a deeper understanding of a key aspect of photosynthetic metabolism
and enable the development of strategies for manipulating algae to improve
yields of biotechnologically relevant compounds. Two postdoctoral fellows and
multiple undergraduate will receive cross-disciplinary training and mentoring in
algal cell biology and physiology, metabolic modeling and mass spectrometry in a
facility whose mission is to perform transformative science and train the next
generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in biology is
understanding how cells control the flux of carbon through metabolic networks to
produce storage compounds versus growth to produce more cells. This project will
decipher a new mode of intracellular signaling that uses inositol polyphosphates
to control steady state metabolic flux into neutral lipids in a model
photosynthetic eukaryote, Chlamydomonas. Inositol polyphosphates and their
biosynthetic enzymes play diverse roles in intracellular signaling, but have not
been previously linked to photosynthetic carbon partitioning. Because inositol
polyphosphates are conserved, the outcomes of this research are likely to be
broadly applicable for understanding algal and plant carbon partitioning. The
PIs hypothesize that inositol polyphosphates produced by Chlamydomonas VIP1
control metabolic responses that specifically impact the production of storage
lipids (triacylglycerol). This research will: i) characterize VIP1 protein
activity in vitro and test whether its predicted catalytic activities are
required for function; ii) test the hypothesis that inositol polyphosphate
isomer levels reflect differences in growth metabolism under different trophic
conditions; iii) characterize transcriptomes and metabolomes of wild type and
vip1-1 under different trophic conditions to identify areas where the mutant
shows altered metabolic regulation; iv) employ quantitative metabolic flux
modeling (INST-MFA) to identify branch points in carbon metabolism impacted by
inositol polyphosphates. This research will expose undergraduates from a
primarily minority institution to cutting edge scientific instrumentation,
analytical methods and modeling approaches and engage post-doctoral scientists
in a highly collaborative project that requires integration across diverse
disciplines and provides them with leadership and mentoring opportunities.