* 1616487
* Exploring how protein conformation influences assembly of transcriptional complexes on snRNA gene promoters
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* William Stumph, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 899,998.00

This research will provide key insights into the mechanism by which small
differences in DNA nucleotide sequence can affect the shape of a flexible DNA-
binding protein. Importantly, this change in protein shape leads to a
significant difference in biological outcome that is crucial to the correct
utilization of genetic information. The project will provide biochemical
training for at least three graduate students, six undergraduate students, a
high school student, and a postdoctoral fellow. These trainees will contribute
to the future of the scientific enterprise by pursuing careers in biotechnology,
academia, or related fields. As the majority of these trainees are expected to
be from under-represented groups, the project will contribute to the diversity
of the scientific workforce.

Genetic information present in the DNA must be read out within living cells in a
very defined and specific manner. The first step in the expression of genetic
information involves the synthesis of RNA from the DNA template in a process
termed transcription. In higher organisms, transcription is carried out by three
different RNA polymerases termed polymerases I, II, and III. Each of these
polymerases is involved in RNA synthesis from a distinct set of genes and must
be recruited to the DNA promoter usually by distinct sets of sequence-specific
DNA-binding proteins. These promoter binding proteins bind to DNA sequences near
the transcription start site. The U1 and U6 snRNA genes code for essential small
RNA molecules involved in the splicing of messenger RNAs. The promoters of the
U1 and U6 genes are very similar to each other, yet contain functionally
significant differences. A protein complex, SNAPc (which is uniquely required
for snRNA gene transcription), adopts different conformations on fruit fly U1
and U6 gene promoters due to binding to minimally-different DNA sequences. It is
hypothesized that these distinct conformations of SNAPc are involved in the
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to transcribe the U1 gene but RNA polymerase
III to transcribe the U6 gene. The project will investigate how the different
conformations of SNAPc lead to differential RNA polymerase recruitment. Protein-
DNA interactions will be mapped by site-specific protein-DNA photo-cross-linking
combined with site-specific protein cleavage. Protein-protein interactions will
be mapped by cross-linking mass spectrometry. Basic biochemical techniques will
be employed throughout the project. The knowledge obtained from these
experiments will be used to construct molecular models to aid in understanding
how RNA polymerase transcription pre-initiation complexes assemble on snRNA
promoters.