* 1616547
* Using Automated Classification of Appearance to Reveal the Physics of Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jeremy Bailin, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 548,539.00

Galaxies are the basic building blocks of the Universe. Knowing how they grow is
a key challenge of current astronomy, and this history is shown by their
appearance. Unfortunately, right now this work uses only small samples studied
by eye. To sort out the physics needs very large numbers of objects. Future
surveys will provide the data but visual inspection will not be feasible. This
study will apply advanced methods from the field of machine learning. Comparing
real galaxies from space-based and ground-based data to computer models will
make major progress in this all-important field. The lead researcher will work
hard to overcome major barriers acting against women and minorities in
scientific fields. This involves several different targeted
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physical processes
responsible for the growth of galaxies is one of the key challenges in
extragalactic astronomy. The assembly history of a galaxy is imprinted in its
detailed morphology, but current quantitative classification schemes are only
useful for broad binning. Thus, the comparison of observations with theoretical
predictions has only used small samples of visually classified galaxies. Coping
with the large samples needed to disentangle the complex physics involved
requires a robust quantitative classification scheme. This study will implement
a promising machine learning algorithm that has proven successful at identifying
bars, single-armed or multi-armed galaxies, rings and Hubble type. The project
will: determine a robust quantitative classification and apply it to multiple
ground and space based data sets; study the dependence of bars, rings and spiral
arms on properties such as mass, star formation, environment and redshift;
determine triggering and destruction mechanisms of bars and spiral arms; compare
observed trends to those of simulated galaxies; and apply this robust
classification scheme to 3D data cubes to compare stellar, gas and kinematic
morphologies. The work for countering the underrepresentation of women and
minorities in STEM fields includes more frequent public observing nights, buying
a portable planetarium to encourage daytime visits by university and school
students, creating planetarium-based lecture-tutorials and interactive
demonstrations for teachers and pupils, and arranging discussions with former
physics majors about alternate career pathways.