* 1616257
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Molecular Mechanisms Underpinning The Kin Selection Theory Of Intragenomic Conflict
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Christina Grozinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 389,462.00

This project seeks to understand the genetic mechanisms regulating selfish and
cooperative behaviors in animals, using honey bees as a model system. Previous
studies showed that, in honey bees, genes inherited from the father promote
selfish behavior, while the genes inherited from the mother promote cooperative
behavior. The current project will use advanced genomic tools to unravel the
molecular mechanisms that mediate this conflict between the father's and
mother's genes, and provide a framework for understanding how the interactions
between these genes generate behavior. The insights gained and methodology
developed for these studies can be easily applied to explore these questions in
other social animals. This project will be used as charismatic platform to
increase understanding of social behavior in animals, how genes produce
behavior, and why genes may be in conflict with each other, in K-12 students and
teachers, the public, undergraduate and graduate students.

This project evaluates the function and regulation of intragenomic conflict in
mediating social behavior, using honey bees as a model system. The kin selection
theory of intragenomic conflict predicts that, in honey bees, patrigenes
(inherited from the father) favor selfish behavior while matrigenes (inherited
from the mother) favor altruistic behavior. Previous studies provided the first
empirical support for this prediction. The current research will expand on these
studies by: (1) confirming that patrigene expression mediates selfish behavior
by developing new methodology for allele-specific manipulation of transcript
abundance; (2) determining if parent-specific gene expression (PSGE) patterns
are labile and vary according to tissue and context, while still corresponding
to the predictions of kin selection theory; and (3) evaluating the extent of
parent-specific DNA methylation (PSDM) across the genome and its role in
regulating PSGE. These studies will integrate genetic crosses, behavior,
physiology, RNAi approaches, whole transcriptome sequencing, bisulfite
sequencing, bioinformatics, and statistical genomics, and open the door to
examining intragenomic conflict as a pervasive force that can shape a myriad of
traits related to fitness in social groups.

This project is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Animal Behavior Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.