* 1616761
* Collaborative research:  Information integration by gene regulatory networks controlling bacterial cell fate decisions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Masaya Fujita, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2022
* USD 664,934.00

Bacterial biofilms, which are surface associated aggregates of cells, are highly
resistant to toxic chemicals such as chlorine and to many antibiotics that are
used to treat human infections. This project aims to understand how cells decide
to form a biofilm by analyzing a gene regulatory network that is crucial for the
decision-making process. The mechanisms underlying these decision-making
processes are not fully understood, even for the best-studied gene regulatory
networks. Using the biofilm-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis as a model, this
research will define general principles underlying decision making by regulatory
networks. B. subtilis is closely related to and shares many regulatory networks
with medically important pathogenic bacteria, including Clostridium sp., B.
cereus, and B. anthracis. Hence, this work may serve as a model for
understanding how such bacteria decide to initiate biofilm formation. This
project will provide students with interdisciplinary training in microbiology
and mathematical modeling. A special emphasis will be placed on engaging
underrepresented students from the University of Houston, which has been
designated as a Hispanic-Serving Institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to obtain a systems-level understanding of how B. subtilis cells
sense starvation and make the decision to initiate either a unicellular
(sporulation) or a multicellular (biofilm) differentiation program for survival.
The proposal will test whether gene-regulatory networks are able to assess
nutrient availability by sensing the cell growth rate. Further, it will
investigate how different dynamics (i.e. modulation of activity in time) of a
single master transcriptional regulator can direct cells to alternative cell
fates. These questions will be addressed with a synergistic combination of
systems and synthetic biology tools, including synthetic network perturbations
and rewiring, single-cell imaging, statistical data analysis, and mathematical
modeling. Thus, this project will illustrate various fundamental concepts of
complex (but not too complex) living systems. The project will also provide
abundant interdisciplinary training opportunities for the participating students
and postdocs working together on experiments and/or mathematical modeling.