* 1616038
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the regulatory network of inositol phosphate signaling in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Pablo Sobrado, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 186,809.00

The inositol phosphates are a class of compound that in plants is thought to
play a role in sensing (and making available) energy for the plant to grow and
develop. The goal of this project is to understand how inositol phosphates are
used to sense the energy status of plant cells, and how they signal this status
so that the plant can use this information. The knowledge gained from this
project is relevant to plant-derived bioenergy (e.g. biofuels); it will lead not
just to an improved understanding but also to strategies to manipulate and
maximize bioenergy for desired outcomes such as increased agricultural
production of food and biofuels. The project will provide unique,
interdisciplinary training in plant science, biochemistry and bioengineering for
students and postdoctoral fellows. Outreach activities will focus on engaging
high school students in authentic scientific inquiry with a variety of plants
generated from this project, using an established program called the Partnership
in Research and Education using Plants. Project personnel will also engage
elementary students through a 4 day experience called Kids Tech
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize biochemical, genetic
and computational modeling approaches to define the inositol pyrophosphate
kinase protein interaction network (which includes the sucrose non-fermenting
related kinase 1 in plants and the VIP kinases that generate inositol
pyrophosphates) in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana and provide knowledge of its
role in sensing and signaling a high or low energy status in the plant.