* 1616954
* OP:  Complex Media Optics and Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Knut Solna, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 235,954.00

Scintillation of the stars is a physical phenomenon that everyone observes and
most appreciate as a fascinating and beautiful phenomenon. Albeit well
understood from a physical perspective, the phenomenon still is not rigorously
described from a precise quantitative perspective. This project concerns an
analogous phenomenon that arises in biomedical applications, where one needs to
describe how the optical field "scintillates" and is affected by tissue
microstructure in imaging studies. High-resolution biomedical imaging is
fundamentally important for early cancer detection, monitoring of drug
efficiency, computer assisted surgery, and for the evaluation of health of
tissue, organs, and bones in general. Monitoring of glucose level, heart rate,
blood pressure, and other medical indicators may in the future be optically
based, and new drugs that are activated by focusing of optical energy may
significantly reduce potential side effects in the treatment of cancer or
diabetes. Biological tissue is typically so complicated that one can only
describe the microstructure in a statistical fashion. In this project the
complex multiscale propagation environment will be modeled as a heterogeneous
multiscale random field varying in both space and time. The project will support
the development of new optically based techniques in biomedical imaging by
enhancing our understanding of how the optical field is affected by the
microstructure. The project will also support the development of new techniques
in other areas of imaging and wave propagation, such as remote sensing and
communication through the atmosphere and in geophysical imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, specific scaling relations will used to
derive asymptotic descriptions of wave field statistics. The descriptions will
be used in the development of optimal filtering and imaging techniques that can
exploit the vast amount of data that new optical technology provides. Such a
description of the wave field will have important applications in a range of
areas in optics and imaging, while the focus here is on quantitative biomedical
imaging. The project aims at developing new results that allow one to model
optical wave propagation in complicated media. This will concern propagation
both for paraxial waves and propagation in the sub-diffusive regime, moreover,
propagation in the radiative transfer and diffusion regimes. The development is
based on stochastic modeling of the multiscale medium and using scaling limits
that allow one to characterize the statistics of the wave field. A main
technical challenge in this work is the fact that in the context of waves,
information flows in all directions due to wave scattering, rather than being an
evolution problem as in the classic context of stochastic processes. This
situation leads to an infinite family of imbedding problems that couple
statistically. Novel imaging and filtering techniques that exploit spectral wave
information for multi-point observations of the optical field will be analyzed
and developed in the project, using the scaling limit results developed together
with random matrix theory and statistical estimation techniques.