* 1616425
* Analysis and Control Theory for Moving Boundary and Nonlinear Phenomena in Interactive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Pelin Guven Geredeli, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2020
* USD 328,901.00

The theme of this research project is to conduct mathematical and computational
studies on classes of partial differential equations (PDE) with moving
boundaries. The first part of the project mathematically describes the
phenomenon of acoustic sound waves within a chamber whose flexible walls are
allowed to move freely as time evolves. For such acoustic wave dynamics, the
goal is to determine which pre-assigned chamber geometries will give rise to an
interior acoustic field that is as "quiet" as possible. That is to say, because
of the analytically pre-determined chamber configuration, the acoustic pressure
will be minimized and external noise optimally reduced. The second part of the
project focuses on structure-fluid interactions as they occur in nature and
engineering, for example the nucleus of a cell interacting with the cellular
cytoplasm. In this example, the wall of the nucleus might be described by
structural PDE, and the cytoplasm mathematically modeled by fluid flow PDE. The
goal of the project is to develop and analyze more realistic models that
comprise both fluid and structure PDE dynamics.

The first part of the project will address the feasibility of stabilizing
interior acoustic wave dynamics on a time-evolving bounded domain through the
means of prescribing, in advance, the evolution of the geometry. That is, as
time gets large, the prescribed moving boundary feedback law should cause the
acoustic wave solutions to either decay or approach a certain set of finite
energy states. Since the associated wave energy is majorized by wave boundary
trace quantities that resemble velocity feedback mechanisms, this "geometry-
control" problem might be viewed as a moving boundary analog to Neumann boundary
stabilization of the wave equation on a fixed domain. The second part of the
project will consider linear and nonlinear structure-fluid PDE models in which
the structural components are mathematically modeled by physically relevant but
quite complex Reissner-Mindlin-Timshenko (RMT) plate systems. By decoupling
these structure-fluid dynamics, the associated pressure variables are eliminated
in a nonstandard manner, intrinsic to the coupling mechanisms in place. Having
resolved the well-posedness, the study will consider an associated optimal
control problem that will reveal certain ocular dynamics. In addition, the
question of global exact controllability for nonlinear von Karman plate dynamics
will be investigated. The objective is to establish the exact steering property
with respect to finite energy states of arbitrary size, not only target states
within a small neighborhood of the origin. This control process will be
simulated numerically and the dependence of the controllability time on the size
of the initial and target states will be examined.