* 1616854
* Entropic Springs in Tandem Repeat Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* David Thomas, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 674,999.00

This project aims to understand the physical and chemical principles that govern
the function of a large class of biologically important proteins, called "tandem
repeat proteins". In particular, the research focuses on understanding the
relationship between tandem repeat protein structure in a protein found in
muscle fibers and their ability to transduce force. The research involves a
powerful combination of experimental and computational techniques, carried out
by scientists at two University of Minnesota campuses. Its success will have
impact on the understanding of force transduction in biological systems and
establish a new approach to solving previously intractable problems in the
biological sciences. It will provide valuable training for both undergraduate
and graduate students, who will carry out most of the research. More broadly,
this research will enhance educational programs at both campuses, and it will
enrich an established regional educational program in this field, in
collaboration with the Biophysical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on proteins containing tandem repeats that include intrinsically
disordered regions. Dystrophin serves as the model protein for this study. The
central hypothesis is that disorder plays a critical role in the energetics and
mechanics of these proteins. Therefore, the project combines experimental and
computational tools that are optimal for probing disorder-to-order transitions
in proteins. The first aim combines several high-resolution calorimetric
techniques with computational molecular dynamics simulations to test the
hypothesis that energy dissipation in this system involves entropic springs. The
second aim employs electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), fluorescence, and
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques that are designed to quantify
dynamic disorder in proteins. This aim tests the hypothesis that increasing the
number of tandem repeats increases protein dynamics and decreases stability. The
third aim probes the role of water dynamics in these processes, using Overhauser
dynamic nuclear polarization, which combines the principles of NMR and EPR. The
overall goal is to advance understanding of the coupling between energetics,
structural dynamics, and mechanics in these systems. While this project focuses
on dystrophin, the principles and techniques established here will impact the
entire field of tandem-repeat proteins, which are involved in numerous
neuromuscular functions.