* 1616317
* NeTS: Small: Fine-grained Measurement of Performance Metrics in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Muhammad Shahzad, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 449,999.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) enables an exchange of data that was not previously
available, such as temporal and spatial distribution of soil moisture, power
consumption of electrical appliances in smart buildings, and integrity of
concrete structures. Each IoT application scenario requires unique guarantees on
certain performance metrics (such as latency, loss, power consumption etc.) from
the IoT infrastructure deployed in that scenario. A small deterioration in these
performance metrics can cause violations of service level agreements and result
in revenue and functional losses. In order to ensure that the IoT infrastructure
delivers the guarantees on these performance metrics, the first step is to
measure these metrics. In this project, the PI proposes to develop a framework
to measure IoT performance metrics, which is required by the IoT network
managers to reactively perform troubleshooting and to proactively locate and
update potential future bottlenecks. The successful completion of this project
will greatly benefit our society. First, the research conducted in this project
will result in tools that will enable network managers to perform fine-grained
monitoring of the health of their IoT networks. Second, the PI will make the
traces collected during this project publicly available for research. Third, the
proposed project will bridge several different communities such as mobile
networking, measurements, wireless sensor networks, and systems; and foster
interaction and communication among them. Fourth, the educational side of the
project will integrate the research findings into the undergraduate and graduate
curricula at North Carolina State University in addition to several other
broader impacts and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance
metrics that this project will measure include both quality of service metrics
such as latency, loss, and throughput and resource utilization metrics such as
power consumption, storage utilization, radio on-time etc. The framework will
measure these metrics passively, i.e., without interrupting the regular
operations of the IoT network. In developing such a framework for measuring IoT
performance metrics, the PI proposes a three phased approach: a recording phase,
during which IoT devices record information about the performance metrics of
interest; a transportation phase, during which IoT devices transport the
recorded information to a server that has ample storage (such as a data center);
and a querying phase, during which a network manager or an automated monitoring
service queries the server for the values of the performance metrics of
interest.