* 1616233
* Absolutely Robust Dose Responses in Biochemical Reaction Networks and Cellular Communication
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* German Enciso, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2021
* USD 297,855.00

Chemical reaction networks lie at the heart of biological processes at the
cellular level such as signal transduction, development, gene expression and
metabolism. Cells need to be sensitive to environmental signals, while being
robust to unwanted cell-to-cell and environmental variability. This research
will characterize the chemical reaction networks that are absolutely robust with
respect to some proteins in the system (background noise and variability) but
not to others (molecular signals). While there are many mechanisms for
implementing robustness, the proposed framework relies on intrinsic structural
properties of the network. Key downstream proteins are activated and
deactivated, so that at steady state the active form has exactly the same
concentration in all cells, while inactive forms act as buffers to absorb excess
protein. The goals include: (1) generalizing existing results on absolute
robustness to allow for robustness with respect to some proteins but not others,
and applying these results to bacterial two-component models; (2) determining
the viability of ultrasensitivity, specificity and other signal processing
mechanisms in absolutely robust networks; (3) calculating the mean and variance
of stochastic absolutely robust systems, and implementing the results to better
understand systems of cellular differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
techniques to make measurements inside individual cells are increasingly
demonstrating that protein concentrations routinely vary several fold from one
cell to the next in cellular tissues. An important question is to understand how
cells handle such variability and perform in a consistent manner. This question
is relevant for many medical issues including abnormal cellular signaling and
development. It could also underlie problems of inconsistent cellular responses
to drugs such as chemotherapies. This grant will develop mathematical methods
that are grounded in experimental data, which can help discover new molecular
design principles for robustness to total protein concentrations.