* 1616661
* The cell biology of dynamic and stable intercellular bridges in situ
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Amy Maddox, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2021
* USD 872,500.00

Every animal living on Earth is a collection of cells. Our human bodies contain
trillions of cells. These cell building blocks are so tiny that over 1500 of
them would fill a layer the size of the period at the end of this sentence.
However, every animal living on Earth has developed from a single, exceptionally
large cell, the egg. This large size is important for early development to
proceed properly. We are studying the way in which the mother animal's body
creates such big cells. We already know that this requires helper cells to
donate their contents to the growing egg, via stable connections. Our ongoing
research is on the maintenance of the stability of the window-like connections
between helper cells and the egg. We are also studying how the connections are
closed at the right time, so that the egg is finally autonomous. Education and
outreach activities will include mentoring of K12 teachers, development and
engagement of 2nd grade students in development, a math-biology hands on lab for
undergraduates, and a novel approach for matching trainees with scientists and
engineers. Also included are efforts to broaden participation of URM students
and women in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archetypical animal cell has one
nucleus. However, in diverse organisms, this rule is broken by tissues such as
syncytia. Syncytia are specialized tissues that contain multiple nuclei
connected to a common cytoplasm via intercellular bridges. Syncytia are found in
diverse contexts such as fruit fly egg chambers, filamentous fungi, mammalian
muscle myotubes and plant seeds. In many animals, the egg- and sperm-producing
organs are syncytial, and the maintenance of intercellular connections is
essential for fertility. Our central aims are to determine the composition,
dynamics and regulation of intercellular bridges that connect developing oocytes
(egg cells) to a common syncytial cytoplasm. For the propose studies, the model
system will be the egg-producing syncytium of the tiny free-living nematod worm,
C. elegans. Egg production in the C. elegans syncytial germline is well
described genetically and developmentally but has only begun to be explored with
cell biology. The small size and transparency of C. elegans make it amenable to
quantitative high-resolution in vivo imaging. In addition, quantitative image
analysis, photo- and micro-manipulation, biochemistry, reverse genetics and
corroborative modeling will be combined to study intercellular connections. C.
elegans is highly suitable for dissecting molecular mechanism due to its well-
annotated genome and the ease of protein depletion, and genome editing for
fluorescent protein tagging. Syncytial intercellular bridges can be thought of
as abortive cell division, wherein the cytokinetic ring failed to separate the
daughter cells. Therefore, our vast knowledge about how cells pinch in half
during cytokinesis has informed hypotheses about the structure and function of
intercellular bridges. The high conservation of cell division machinery predicts
our findings will be applicable across phylogeny. Furthermore, the conveyor
belt-like arrangement of oocyte development from the distal to the proximal
gonad will reveal spatio-temporal correlations that predict causal
relationships.