* 1616483
* Picturing the faces of stars: limb-darkening models vs. interferometer measurements
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Brian Kloppenborg, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2021
* USD 375,956.00

This award is made to study hundreds of stars with optical interferometry and
spectroscopy. Interferometry combines light waves from different telescopes and
produces very high angular resolution images. This allows astronomers to record
the brightness variations across a stellar disk. The center shows deeper and
warmer layers of a star, whereas the edges show shallower and cooler material.
This effect is called limb-darkening. The group will also record optical
spectra, which measure light emitted or absorbed by individual chemical
elements. This enables derivation of fundamental parameters of the stars not
already provided by interferometry, such as overall stellar luminosity, and
chemical composition. All the data will be used to determine stellar diameters
and temperature profiles and to test stellar astrophysics models. The data and
modeling codes will be released to a public database. Two graduate students will
be trained in both interferometric and modeling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use the NPOI (Naval Prototype
Optical Interferometer) and CHARA (Center for High Angular Resolution Array)
interferometers to obtain sub-milliarcsecond resolution images. They will
collect moderate-resolution optical spectroscopy with Apache Point Observatory
and Georgia State University telescopes. They will use several atmospheric
models to explore three-dimensional effects and non-local thermodynamic
equilibrium (NLTE) effects. The project will run precise model grids for a
hundred stars and at least three different models. The stellar atmosphere model
code SATLAS will be made fully open-source with updated microphysics and NLTE
refinements. This code and the 3D radiative hydrodynamic STAGGER will be
accelerated by Graphic Processor Units through partnerships with industry
collaborators.