* 1616115
* Occultations by Pluto, Triton and Large Trans-Neptunian Objects
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2020
* Eliot Young, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 10/31/2020
* USD 458,821.00

Solar System objects pass in front of bright stars from time to time, cutting
out the starlight. The amount of light that is cut coupled with the amount of
time during these passages tells us about the size, shape, whether the object
has an atmosphere, and how thick the atmosphere might be. These events are
called occultations. This project will observe occultations of stars by the
Trans-Neptunian Objects Pluto, Triton, Makemake, Quaoar, and Salacia. Since
1988, Pluto's atmosphere has been tracked by occultations. Its atmosphere has
gotten thicker during this time. It is now expected to get thinner as Pluto
moves farther away from the Sun in its orbit, and its temperature gets cooler.
Two occultations by Pluto will be observed over the next three years to record
changes in the thickness of Pluto's atmosphere. These changes will be modeled
with data that we already have to describe how Pluto's atmosphere changes. The
other large TNOs, covered with bright ice, could also have changing atmospheres
like Pluto. Observations of one occultation are planned for each of the other
objects listed above. Many amateur astronomers and students will be trained to
be part of the occultation observations.

Occultations of reasonably bright stars by Trans-Neptunian Objects (TNOs)
provide an opportunity to learn their sizes, shapes and densities, and presence
and details of any thin atmospheres. This project will observe occultations of
stars by the TNOs Pluto, Triton, Makemake, Quaoar, and Salacia, resulting in
data that are crucial to building accurate atmospheric models for these objects.
Pluto's atmosphere has been monitored by occultations since its discovery in
1988. It has been doubling in size roughly every ten years, despite the fact
that Pluto itself has move farther from the Sun in its orbit. Images of Pluto's
surface from the New Horizons spacecraft show large ice reservoirs that are the
source of Pluto's atmosphere. These reservoirs have been getting slightly warmer
as Pluto has moved away from the Sun, suggesting that Pluto's subsurface stores
heat. Models predict, however, that Pluto's frost temperatures will soon start
to fall. Two occultations by Pluto will be observed over the next three years to
monitor changes in the amount of Pluto's atmosphere. Other large TNOs, covered
with bright ice, potentially have changing atmospheres like Pluto. Observations
of one occultation are planned for each of the other objects listed above. The
planned observations will be sensitive to very thin atmospheres and will refine
the size and shape estimates for all objects. Many amateur astronomers and
student researchers will be trained and added to support the occultation
observations.