* 1616185
* RUI: Advanced Numerical Simulations of Black Hole Accretion
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Patrick Fragile, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2020
* USD 220,411.00

1. The force of gravity that a black hole exerts is so strong that even light
cannot escape. Some black holes form when the core of a star collapses in on
itself during a supernova explosion. (A supernova is an exploding star that
briefly shines as brightly as the combined light of all the hundreds of billions
of stars in an entire galaxy.) Supermassive black holes, with masses millions to
billions of times larger than the Sun's may lurk in the centers of most
galaxies. A black hole exerts strong tidal forces that can rip apart stars that
orbit it too closely. A black hole does not emit radiation itself, but the
disruption of a star and infall of the resulting debris both generate
considerable energy. Many accreting black hole systems exhibit rapid quasi-
periodic oscillations (QPOs). Some produce jets of very high-energy plasma that
speed away at velocities close to that of light. The Principal Investigator will
use his improved numerical code Cosmos++ to perform simulations of accretion
onto black holes. The Intellectual Merit of the proposed research is that it
will advance scientists' understanding of black-hole accretion and of the nature
of QPOs and properties of jets in such systems. The Broader Impacts include the
involvement of students in the research project, as well as the Principal
Investigator's participation in various public outreach activities and from the
incorporation of his results into classroom lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The
proposed research will employ the general relativistic magnetohydrodynamics
(GRMHD) code Cosmos++ to perform cutting-edge simulations of black hole
accretion. The Intellectual Merit of the work is that it will advance
astrophysicists' understanding of the differences between viscous and MHD
treatments of accretion disks around black holes, of the nature of quasi-
periodic oscillations (QPOs) observed in some such systems, and of the
orientation of jets in misaligned accretion systems. The Broader Impacts result
from the Principal Investigator?s involvement of students in this RUI project,
through a variety of public outreach activities, and from the incorporation of
his results into his classroom lessons.