* 1616950
* The 2016 NAACL Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Nianwen Xue, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests funding to subsidize travel, conference and housing
expenses of students selected to participate in the NAACL-HLT 2016 Student
Research Workshop, which will take place during the main NAACL-HLT conference
June 12 - June 17, 2016 in San Diego, California. The annual meeting of its
North American chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics (NAACL)
is one of the most prestigious and selective international conferences in these
fields. The Student Research Workshop (SRW) is an established tradition at ACL
and NAACL conferences, allowing students to present their research and receive
feedback from senior researchers. The Student Research Workshop provides a
valuable research opportunity for students at different stages (undergraduate
students, early graduate students and advanced graduate students) of their
academic careers, and contributes to the development of a skilled and diverse
computational linguistics and natural language processing workforce. This year,
two of the student organizers are women, which will help promote and broaden the
participation of women in natural language processing and computational
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAACL-HLT 2016 Student Research Workshop
(SRW) encourages submissions in three categories: 1) thesis proposals, for
advanced students who have decided on a thesis topic and wish to get feedback on
their proposal and research direction; 2) research papers, for graduate students
to present either completed work or work in progress that has already achieved
preliminary results; 3) undergraduate research papers, for undergraduate
students to present their work. Each accepted paper will be assigned a mentor
who will meet with the student during the NAACL conference and provide
individual feedback. By including students at different stages of their academic
careers (undergraduate students, early graduate students and advanced graduate
students) and by encouraging a spirit of collaborative research, the Student
Research Workshop aims to build a supportive environment for a new generation of
computational linguists. In addition, the SRW is organized by students
themselves, advised by two senior researchers in the field. The students who are
involved in running and reviewing for the workshop have ample opportunities to
interact with the researchers on the organizing committee of the main
conference. The opportunities for interaction with other students and with
senior researchers will positively influence the students? experience in
research and will likely inspire many to devote further effort to academic
studies and careers.