* 1616992
* RUI: Resolving Astrophysical Water Formation Pathways on Dust Grain Surfaces
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Gerardo Dominguez, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2020
* USD 314,909.00

Dust grains in cold interstellar gas clouds provide sites for chemical reactions
of simple atoms and molecules. Reactions on dust grains can produce molecules
such as water, which is one of nature's most important compounds, and is
essential to life as we currently know it. This research project will use
advanced experimental techniques to study how water forms on cold surfaces
similar to those of dust grains in space. Results from the study will help
astronomers understand how processes on interstellar dust grains can produce
water in space. Understanding these processes could also allow astronomers to
understand the origins of Earth's water. The project, conducted at an
undergraduate institution with a largely Hispanic student body, will train
students in methods of advanced scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator will undertake laboratory studies of water formation on
cold surfaces to: (1) understand the predominant formation pathways of water on
dust grains in cold molecular clouds and protoplanetary disks; and (2) explain
the anomalously high 16-oxygen abundance in the Sun relative to the terrestrial
planets. Specifically, the studies will gauge the relative importance of two
water formation pathways --- H + oxygen and H + ozone --- by depositing H atoms
and oxygen or ozone molecules on a cold surface and then analyzing the isotopic
composition of the water molecules produced. This will be done using a cavity-
ringdown spectrometer calibrated for isotopic analysis, allowing a direct
measurement of the branching ratios of the reactions to within 1%. The
investigator will conduct this project at an undergraduate institution with a
predominantly Hispanic student body. This will allow him to provide training in
laboratory astrophysics to students from diverse backgrounds.