* 1616490
* Structural Effects of Protein Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Brian Bahnson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 699,263.00

TITLE: Structural Effects of Protein Phosphorylation and
O-GlcNAcylation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human genome encodes for approximately
22,000 proteins, a relatively small number comparable to that in worms and less
than that in most plants. The complexity of life in eukaryotic organisms (from
yeast to plants to humans) is due in part to modifications that occur
dynamically to proteins, which allow proteins to have different functions at
different times as a result of a series of potential modifications. The most
common modifications of proteins within cells include phosphorylation, the
addition of one or more phosphate groups, and O-GlcNAcylation, the addition of a
sugar. These modifications are central to a wide range of cellular functions.
Both phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation can occur on the same sites within
proteins, but how these modifications affect the structure of these proteins,
and therefore how they can affect the function of these proteins, is generally
poorly understood. This work will provide a comprehensive understanding of how
phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation affect protein structure. This work will
train undergraduate researchers, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in
multidisciplinary methods in science that are necessary for scientific advances
in the 21st century, preparing them to be scientific leaders who can work across
diverse fields. One significant challenge in undergraduate laboratory education
is the engagement of students in current research. This work will also develop
new undergraduate laboratories that both train students comprehensively in
multiple techniques and that directly involve students in scientific research.
The results of these undergraduate laboratory experiments will both be included
as part of the scientific literature and will provide new methods for teaching
students in methods in structural biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein
phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are central to signal transduction in all
eukaryotes. Protein phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are competing
intracellular protein post-translational modifications of serine and threonine
residues, which modulate signal transduction cascades to control cellular
function. Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation have diverse functional effects,
which are sometimes complementary and sometimes opposing in function. This work
will develop new principles and directions to understand biological function and
to specifically understand structural effects of protein phosphorylation and
O-GlcNAcylation. This work will combine theory, bioinformatics, experiments in
solution, and experiments by x-ray crystallography to provide a detailed
framework for understanding the effects of post-translational modifications on
structure and function, with application to systems from yeast to plants to
mammals. The research will use peptides and proteins combined with structural
analysis by circular dichroism, NMR spectroscopy, x-ray crystallography, and ab
initio calculations to examine independently and comparatively the effects of
phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation on modulating the structure of proteins,
specifically examining the differences due to modification at serine versus
threonine residues. Peptides will be synthesized to analyze the effects of
phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation of serine and threonine on structure in
diverse contexts, including in short model peptides amenable to detailed NMR
analysis, ab initio calculations, and small-molecule x-ray crystallography, and
in larger peptides and proteins amenable to thermodynamic characterization,
enzymology, and protein x-ray crystallography. These experiments will lead to
new insights in the roles of the post-translational modifications of
phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation on protein structure and function in
intracellular signaling and on the differential roles of serine and threonine
residues in proteins. This work will also develop new theoretical understanding
of the bases for phosphorylation- and O-GlcNAcylation-mediated structural
changes, applicable to more accurate modeling of proteins with post-
translational modifications. This work will specifically develop new discovery-
oriented undergraduate laboratories that will train students in solid-phase
reactions, peptide synthesis, comparative studies of amino acids, and structural
analysis using 1-D and 2-D NMR, while simultaneously having students in
introductory labs contribute to the development of scientific knowledge.