* 1616016
* Mechanisms of light regulated translation in chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2021
* USD 814,891.00

Energy from sunlight fuels life on earth through the process of photosynthesis.
Light is both an essential resource and a source of stress, in that it damages
the photosynthetic apparatus and other cellular structures through a process
called photo-oxidative processes. As such, plants have evolved mechanisms that
optimize the use of light, minimize light-induced damage, and promote repair of
the photosynthetic apparatus should it occur. In this study the light-regulated
synthesis of a gene product essential to this process, D1, will be examined. The
rate of D1 synthesis changes rapidly in response to shifting light intensity and
therefore the goal of this project is to elucidate the signaling pathways and
mechanisms that mediate D1?s response. This problem will be addressed through
genetic, molecular, and biochemical approaches in maize and Arabidopsis. These
activities will provide research training for two undergraduate students, one
PhD student, and a high school teacher. In addition, novel methods will be
explored that have the potential to propel research on other topics.

The hypotheses to be tested arise from recent ribosome profiling data that
provide the first genome-wide views of the impact of light on translation in
chloroplasts. Genetic, molecular, and biochemical approaches in maize and
Arabidopsis will be employed, including a state-of-the-art method for
identifying proteins bound to specific RNAs-of-interest in vivo, and a novel
strategy involving designer RNA binding proteins. One set of experiments will
test the hypothesis that the rapid light-induced change in ribosome occupancy on
psbA mRNA (which encodes D1) is mediated by post-translational modification of
proteins that bind the psbA 5' untranslated region. A second set of experiments
will test the hypothesis that the global change in translation elongation rate
is mediated by light-dependent post-translational modifications of proteins that
stall ribosomes or catalyze translation elongation. A third set of experiments
will address whether light induces these responses via the same signal
transduction pathways that trigger other adaptations in response to
photosynthetic activity. Finally, experiments will test the hypothesis that
gene-specific translational regulators in chloroplasts, including those that
regulate translation in response to light, generally act by modulating RNA
structure proximal to ribosome binding sites.

This project is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Plant Genome Research Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.