* 1616026
* A Study of Magnetic Fields in the Formation of Molecular Clouds and Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* David Collins, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 319,928.00

Stars form out of giant clouds of hydrogen, but the details of the collapse are
still unclear. The investigators will use computer models to simulate the
collapses of clouds to form stars. The investigator seeks to answer three
important questions concerning star formation. (1) How much of a cloud turns
into stars? (2) How fast does this happen? (3) Are magnetic fields the most
important force on collapsing gas? The investigator will produce a series of
synthetic observations to hunt for the very first signature of collapsing gas.
Star formation of takes millions of years. Astronomer's observations of many
clouds in our galaxy are snap shots of the history of star formation. The
computer models allow astronomers to organize all these observations into a
single story of the birth of stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
produce a sequence of synthetic, all-galaxy, maps of molecules and hot gas in
our galaxy. The numerical models use adaptive mesh refinement and include the
effects of magnetic fields, radiation feedback, and models for the chemical
composition of the clouds. The open source code ENZO will be used for the
simulations. The simulations have a physical scale of 1000 pc and resolution of
100 astronomical units. The investigator will start with initial conditions
similar to those seen in the stratified galactic disk. At higher linear
resolution, the simulation will be concentrated on molecular clouds and the
dense cores that harbor young stars. The complete assembly history of forces and
observational signatures will be produced.