* 1616575
* TTP: Small: Network-Level Security Posture Assessment and Predictive Analytics: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Manish Karir, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2021
* USD 515,982.00

This project addresses the following two key questions in cyber security: (1)
how is the security condition of a network assessed, and (2) to what extent can
we predict data breaches or other cyber security incidents for an organization.
The ability to answer both questions has far-reaching social and economic
impact. Recent data breaches such as those at Target, JP Morgan, Home Depot,
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and Anthem Healthcare, to name just a few,
highlight the increasing social and economic impact of such cyber security
incidents. Often, by the time a breach is detected, it is too late and damage
has already occurred. Consequently, being able to predict such incidents
accurately can greatly enhance an organization's ability to put preventative and
proactive measures in place. The answers to these questions also have
implications on public policy design - not only for the security policies
themselves, but also for related incentive mechanisms. Such mechanisms might be
aimed at encouraging adoption of better security policies and cybersecurity
frameworks, including cyber insurance, liability limitation, and rate recovery
among others. Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) 21, on Critical Infrastructure
Security and Resilience, encourages efforts to strengthen and maintain secure,
functioning, and resilient critical infrastructure. Understanding the potential
attack vector presented by an enterprise or organization is a crucial part of
achieving this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project follows a comprehensive
agenda aimed at transitioning to practice technologies developed by the research
team in the domain of quantitative assessment of the security posture at both a
network and an organizational level. The use of such assessments enables more
accurate forecasting of cyber security incidents. The technological innovation
is a sound quantitative framework that combines a large collection of
cybersecurity data, novel data processing methods, advanced machine learning
techniques, and extensive cybersecurity domain expertise. The resulting
framework produces accurate predictions of security incidents for a given
organization, thereby providing tangible information and crucial input for
decision makers such as an insurance underwriter, or an enterprise customer
seeking to validate vendor specifications.