* 1616511
* Chemical and Dynamical Forces in Building Large Particles in the Disks Around Young Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Patrick Schelling, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 05/31/2021
* USD 382,865.00

During the early stages of planet formation, small dust particles stick together
to form larger particles. If the particles are smaller than 1 km in size, forces
on the surfaces of these particles, called van der Waals forces, are thought to
cause the particles to stick together. Other forces, however, can cause bouncing
or breaking apart of the smaller particles. The typical van der Waals force is
not strong enough to stop these particles from breaking apart. The investigators
will study the possibility that particles joining together depend on chemical
forces between the grains, not the van der Waals forces, as the chemical forces
are stronger than van der Waals forces. The investigators will model the
interaction between chemical forces sticking grains together and physical forces
breaking grains apart, in a way that represents the early Solar System formation
as we now understand it. This project serves the national interest as it
advances our knowledge of the early building processes of the Solar System. The
investigators will work to include Bridge Program students in this research
project, as part of the UCF Physics Department's participation as an APS Bridge
Program site, and will also include research results in K - 12 and college-level
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most current hypotheses for
the formation of planets in protoplanetary disks are based on the accretion of
small dust grains into macroscopic dust aggregates. Several barriers have been
identified at different stages of planet formation that could lead to bouncing
or fragmentation of particles instead of increased sticking together and
subsequent growth of particles. At sizes less than ~1km in diameter, surface
forces are thought to be responsible for accretion. These forces are typically
modeled as van der Waals forces. Experimental results, however, indicate that
the typical strength of the van der Waals force is not sufficient to prevent
fragmentation during collisions. Consequently, the mechanisms for the initial
stages of planet formation remain poorly understood. The investigators describe
here a plan to demonstrate how much the forces between particles in
protoplanetary disks might depend on the chemical state of the mineral grains.
The objective is to model grain interactions and collisions in a chemical
environment that is intended to reflect what is known about the early Solar
System during the initial stages of planet formation. Preliminary results
indicate that the chemical state of grain surfaces plays an extremely important
role, and the usual assumption of weak van der Waals forces is often invalid
especially when surfaces are not passivated. Atomic-scale simulation results
will be used to develop coarse-grained simulation models that can be used to
understand collisions between larger aggregates. As part of the UCF Physics
Department's participation as an APS Bridge Program site, the investigators will
work to mentor several Bridge Program students with the potential to involve
them in this research project. They will also include research results in K - 12
and college-level classes.