* 1616076
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Establishing the microtubule-actin crosstalk in the preprophase band by the rice kinesin OsKCH2
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Bo Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 489,575.00

This project studies the fundamental mechanisms that regulate cell division and
growth of the rice plant and is expected to have a broad spectrum of societal
impacts. First, findings from this project will impact future breeding of rice,
which feeds half of the world's population. Second, young scientists at both
Oregon State University and University of California in Davis will be trained in
multi-disciplinary areas by participating in the discovery-oriented research.
Third, this project contains light microscopy-based short courses and hands-on
training opportunities for underserved students, which will stimulate their
interests in STEM disciplines. In addition, to increase public awareness of
cutting-edge research programs, plant motor proteins will be included as living
examples in advanced light microscopy workshops for high school and community
college science teachers.

Specifically, this project is aimed at investigating how OsKCH2, a plant-
specific kinesin in the rice plant Oryza sativa, enables the crosstalk between
microtubules (MTs) and filamentous actins (F-actins) at the cortical division
site and how it regulates cell division. Kinesins are motor proteins that use
the energy from ATP hydrolysis to power numerous essential cellular processes
such as transporting cargos along MTs and organizing/remodeling physiologically
important MT-based arrays. OsKCH2 belongs to the group of Kinesins with a
Calponin Homology domain (KCHs) in high plants. KCHs are known to crosslink MTs
and F-actin in vitro, but their functions in plant growth and development remain
poorly understood. The project is based on several critical preliminary findings
including: (1) mutations in OsKCH2 caused a dwarfism phenotype, (2) OsKCH2 is
specifically associated with the PPB during early stages of mitosis, (3) OsKCH2
directly binds to and transports F-actin on microtubules in vitro, and (4)
OsKCH2 is the first minus end-directed Kinesin-14 to demonstrate processive
motility as a single dimer. This project will use a multi-disciplinary approach
to address two objectives: (1) dissecting the regulatory mechanism underlying
the processive motility of OsKCH2 using in vitro single-molecule imaging, and
(2) interrogating the in vivo functions of OsKCH2 in cell division and plant
growth by examining phenotypes linked to a null kch2 mutation.