* 1616178
* What Controls Selenenic Acids? Understanding the Biochemistry of Selenocysteine
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Sharon Rozovsky, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 498,780.00

TITLE: What Controls Selenenic Acids? Understanding the Biochemistry of
Selenocysteine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the fundamental
biochemistry of selenium containing proteins in order to uncover the unique
advantages gained from employing selenium instead of sulfur and which ultimately
make selenoproteins essential constituents of cellular life. During the course
of these scientific efforts an undergraduate student with disabilities will be
continuously trained. Starting in the freshmen year, the student will be
provided with far-reaching mentoring and training by the research group. In
addition, the student will receive support through an extensive network that
originated from our accompanying REU program for students facing similar
challenges and that is aimed at increasing participation of students with
disabilities in the STEM disciplines. Experiences will be widely shared with
both STEM students and professionals in order to raise awareness and to
ultimately increase opportunities and participation of the disability community
in the scientific, social and financial structure of our society. Likewise,
society will benefit from increased acceptance of such minorities and subgroups,
promoting infusion of their ideas, influences and
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The element selenium, incorporated into the rare
amino acid selenocysteine, is used by nature to expand the chemical versatility
of enzymes beyond what is available through the 20 canonical amino acids. The
resulting selenoproteins are mostly enzymes that are involved in cellular signal
transduction, detoxification, and maintenance of oxidants. While it is widely
assumed that the use of selenium in proteins must impart unique properties and
particular advantages, the key differences that set selenoproteins apart remain
to be systematically studied and described. This research will focus on the
reaction intermediate, selenenic acid, that is formed when selenocysteine reacts
with oxidants. These highly reactive acids can undergo numerous reactions with
nearby thiols, amines, amides and oxidants, which will affect selenoproteins
interactions with itself and other proteins and ultimately modulate their
function in signaling cascades. In order to understand this effect on biological
function, 77Se NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry will be used to study the
lifetimes of selenenic acid, their tendency to be further oxidized by oxidants
and their interactions with protein partners. Together this forms a research
plan that is designed to illuminate how selenoproteins control this unusual
semi-metallic amino acid, selenocysteine, and harness its chemical properties
for cellular use.