* 1616804
* SBE: Small: Technological Con-Artistry: An Analysis of Social Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* W Goe, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,386.00

One of the most serious threats in the world today to the security of cyberspace
is "social engineering" - the process by which people with access to critical
information regarding information systems security are tricked or manipulated
into surrendering such information to unauthorized persons, thereby allowing
them access to otherwise secure systems. To date, little systematic research has
been conducted on social engineering. This research will fill this void by
examining who social engineers are, why they engage in social engineering, the
processes they use to conceive of and implement social engineering projects, and
how they view information privacy and security and justify their behavior.
Further, to understand how organizations affected by social engineering cope
with the threat it poses, this research also examines the perspectives on social
engineering of IT professionals who oversee organizational computer systems and
the security of potentially sensitive information. Through gaining a deeper and
more accurate understanding of social engineering - a phenomenon currently
shrouded in myth and misconception for many - this research will contribute to
important advances in criminology and other fields with a vested interest in
learning about the human dimensions of information security and inform the
development of information security strategies.

This study uses a cross-sectional, non-experimental research design that employs
both qualitative and quantitative data. The qualitative component involves semi-
structured interviews of social engineers "in the wild," security auditors, and
IT professionals. Open-ended interview questions will be used to elicit this
data. In addition, these interviews will be used to gather quantitative data to
measure demographic, computer use, and other social characteristics of social
engineers. A set of structured survey questions will be administered by the
interviewer as part of the interview process. To select a sample of subjects, a
nonprobability, purposive, "snowball" sampling design is used, which is well-
suited for studying "hidden" populations such as social engineers. To analyze
the qualitative data, grounded theory techniques are used which involve the
transformation of data into concepts, which are then summarized into broader
analytic categories, leading to the isolation of patterns in the data.
Quantitative data will be analyzed through an assortment of univariate,
bivariate, and multivariate techniques.