* 1616592
* I-Corps:  Commercialization for an Autonomous Attitude Determination and Control Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Ronald Marsh, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This project prepares an orientation determination and control system for
spacecraft, aircraft and other vehicles for commercial development and use. This
technology is important because it allows these craft to determine their
orientation and take corrective actions after an anomaly (such as unanticipated
reorientation or sensor or movement hardware failure) has occurred. Perhaps more
importantly, this technology would enable an intelligent response to changes
(whether gradual over time or abrupt) to facilitate keeping the system operating
across a variety of real world circumstances that might otherwise significantly
impair or disable the craft (or leave it needing controller input that cannot be
received due to it being unable to regain the control required to point its
antenna at controllers). This I-Corps team believes that this could have a
significant positive effect on a number of application areas ranging from
commercial spacecraft operators to national defense
contractors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work seeks to achieve several goals.
First, the team aims to further advance the technology towards a point where it
is ready to be commercialized. Second, the team plans to build several
conceptual demonstration units to facilitate explaining the technology to
prospective licensees or users. Specifically, the team intends to conduct over
100 interviews with prospective users of/customers for the technology to aid in
the team's assessment of its commercial potential. The team also plans to
develop additional simulations and physical demonstrations to aid in prospective
customer/user understanding of the technology.