* 1616590
* Molecular Modeling of Bioenergetic Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Klaus Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,120,914.00

The project, building on very recent experimental and computational
methodologies, investigates at atomic level detail the key macromolecular
apparatus that generates energy from sun light or food in higher life forms.
Outcomes of the research are new solutions for solar energy conversion and
agriculture as well as health benefits. The research extends the size scale of
macromolecular systems within cells that can be studied and advances the
technological frontier of computational technologies employed in the life
sciences. The project provides an exceptional interdisciplinary training
opportunity for young researchers from the fields of biology, chemistry,
physics, and computer science. Planned activities also include development of
advanced visualization and analysis tools, dissemination of teaching material on
photosynthesis and respiration, and the production of a movie "Birth of Planet
Earth" showcasing the early evolution of photosynthesis establishing life on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two ubiquitous biological energy conversion systems
are investigated: the thylakoid systems of plant chloroplasts and the
respiratory complex of mitochondria. The two macromolecular systems involve
large protein complexes and share physical processes as well as constituent
proteins. The project combines molecular electronics, stochastic quantum
mechanics, and molecular dynamics methods to answer critical questions in
bioenergetics: how do the many participating processes coordinate themselves
and, in some cases, how do they achieve actually their conversion function? The
research strategy for the two systems is anchored in the PI's four decades of
work, including work on the photosynthetic apparatus of purple bacteria. In case
of the first system, the supramolecular organization of the thylakoid membrane
will be determined along with its energy transfer and conversion processes. In
case of the second system, the ability of the respiratory complexes of
mitochondria to harness energy will be determined on the basis of published
structures. For both systems a detailed computational description of energy
storage and transduction will be provided that extends understanding of these
systems beyond what is provided by experiment alone. The findings are expected
to resolve apparent discrepancies between structural and functional
characteristics of the systems. The research links atomic level supramolecular
structure to energy and charge transfer processes through dissipative quantum
mechanics and molecular dynamics descriptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Division of Physics.