* 1616591
* Single Molecule Studies of Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Susan Marqusee, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,424,820.00

A fundamental obstacle to understanding the rules of Life, is the lack of a
predictive, molecular understanding of the mechanisms by which the genome
encodes the function of a protein. This project will provide biophysical
information on how the amino acid sequence and the environment tune a protein's
energy landscape, the mapping between protein structure or conformation and
thermodynamic properties which govern its stability. This connection between
amino acid sequence, environment and energy landscape is imperative for the
ability to design proteins with targeted behaviors such as function, mechanical
properties, and lifetime. In addition, the PI will develop a program to provide
broad career exposure, exploration and experience to graduate students and
postdocs in the life sciences at UC Berkeley. A novel Professionals in Residence
(PIR) program will be instituted, where professionals from diverse fields
(Industry and Entrepreneurship, Education and Outreach, Policy and
Communication, Academic and Research Institutes) will spend several days a year
at UC Berkeley interacting with both trainees and faculty - exposing them to
successful professionals from a variety of career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this research is to
investigate the protein-folding problem using single molecule mechanical studies
and hydrogen exchange techniques. The results from this work will further our
understanding of protein folding, the mechanism by which the amino acid sequence
directs the energy landscape of a protein (the structures, energies, and rates
of interconversion of all of the accessible conformations), a major challenge
for modern molecular biology. Without a better understanding of how these
features are encoded in a protein sequence, the expanding sequence databases
continue to conceal the answers to many important questions. The results of the
single-molecule protein folding studies will yield observables that can be used
directly in theoretical studies of protein folding and the experiments will be
carried out in an iterative collaboration with theoreticians in the field.
Mechanical stress plays a ubiquitous role in protein function and biology, and
therefore, in addition to providing needed insight into the protein-folding
problem, this work will also provide much needed information about the
mechanical stability of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division
of Physics.