* 1616081
* Dynamics of RNA Tertiary Structures using Photocaged Nucleotides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Marc Greenberg, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 725,062.00

RNA (ribonucleic acid) is a central molecule in all cells, and plays a vital
role in helping living beings adapt to stress, or grow in new environments.
Certain RNAs act by turning other genes on and off or by ensuring the faithful
synthesis of proteins. Many RNA molecules fold into specific three-dimensional
shapes that allow them to perform these different functions in the cell. The
goal of this research project is to learn the physical rules that govern how RNA
molecules fold into specific three-dimensional shapes. This is important for
understanding how RNAs evolve over time and in different organisms. It is also
important for learning how to engineer RNA for applications such as toxin
sensing or biofuel production. Sensitive microscopes will be used to observe how
single RNA molecules fold over time and show whether the structure of a
particular RNA is flexible or rigid. New photo-reactive chemical groups will be
synthesized and used to turn on the function of the RNA with light. The ability
to control RNA with light will produce new research tools that can be used by
other scientists. In addition, this research project will contribute to science
education and increase STEM education among underrepresented groups by providing
research experience to undergraduate students and by engaging undergraduate
teams to develop simplified protocols for laboratory modules on RNA structure
and evolution. This research project will contribute to US competitiveness and
is expected to produce new chemical tools for controlling RNA with light that
can be used by other scientists and biotechnology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-coding RNAs self-assemble into complex
structures to catalyze biochemical reactions, regulate gene activity by diverse
mechanisms, and scaffold cellular compartments in the nucleus and cytoplasm.
They are important drivers of molecular evolution and essential for the normal
growth of all life forms. This research aims to identify fundamental principles
of RNA self-assembly, using catalytic RNAs (ribozymes) as model systems.
Previous studies of a bacterial group I ribozyme demonstrated that cooperative
networks of tertiary interactions in different regions of the RNA drive assembly
toward a unique native conformation. It is not known whether this is a general
property of all naturally evolved RNAs, nor how tertiary interactions alter the
conformational dynamics of RNA. Single-molecule FRET (smFRET) will be used to
monitor millisecond to second motions of RNA helices under different conditions
and distinguish native and non-native conformations. The folding dynamics of the
stable Azoarcus ribozyme will be contrasted with that of Twister ribozyme, which
requires less Mg(II) for self-cleavage than for folding. New photo-reactive
nucleotides will be synthesized to control folding and self-cleavage of the
small Twister ribozyme with light. New photocaged nucleotides will be
synthesized and combined with smFRET to directly observe the dynamical motions
in the RNA before and after RNA self-cleavage. This project is jointly funded by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences of the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.