* 1616064
* Dynamical Systems and Singular Perturbation Theory for Multiscale Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Tasso Kaper, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 542,828.00

This research project encompasses a series of critical mathematical and
scientific questions for multiscale problems arising in the fields of pattern
formation, chemistry and combustion, neuroscience, electrical engineering, and
multi-particle systems. The first project is on pattern formation and analyzes
the dynamics and stability of fronts, pulses, and spots in paradigm reaction-
diffusion systems. The second project studies model reduction methods used in
complex multiscale chemical reactions, biochemical networks, and combustion by
incorporating also the effects of diffusion. The third project involves a
completely new class of solutions, known as torus canards, found in models from
neuroscience. These solutions help understand the transitions between periodic
spiking and bursting. The fourth project will focus on ways to model and analyze
the impacts of cut-offs on the dynamics of fronts. The project involves graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in the research, as well as collaborations
with scientists at national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project addresses a series of questions concerning multiscale problems in
pattern formation, chemistry and combustion, neuroscience, electrical
engineering, and multi-particle systems. In the pattern formation project,
paradigm reaction-diffusion systems will be studied. The goals are to develop
new analytical techniques and mathematical theory for determining the boundaries
of the stable pattern-forming regimes, analyzing the stability of semi-strong
pulse interactions, modeling the scattering of pulses in 1-D systems and spots
in 2-D systems, extending renormalization group methods for stability of
modulating pulses, and predicting the dynamic bifurcations of pulses and fronts.
The second project centers on accurate model reduction methods for large-scale
combustion, chemical, and biochemical systems exhibiting multiple time scales.
The goals are to analyze, develop, and improve cutting-edge model reduction
methods for finding the low-dimensional manifolds that govern the effective
system dynamics in the presence of diffusion. In the third project, the new
phenomena of torus canards and canards in partial differential equations will be
investigated. A theory of generic torus canards will be developed for fast-slow
systems with multi-dimensional fast and slow variables. Known to exist in many
neuroscience models, such as the Hindmarsh-Rose equations, the Morris-Lecar-
Terman model, the Wilson-Cowan-Izhikevich system, and the forced van der Pol
equation, torus canards are critical in the transition regimes between tonic
spiking and bursting. A detailed study will also be carried out of the new
bursting rhythms known as amplitude-modulated bursting rhythms. The fourth
project will study the impacts of cut-offs on the reaction terms, introduced to
accurately model regions of low particle densities, on the speeds, shapes, and
stability of propagating fronts. A series of important problems related to
fourth-order models, two-dimensional space dynamics, front initiation, and front
pre-cursors will be studied.