* 1616967
* Intra- and interspecific siderophore cheating in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Martin Schuster, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2021
* USD 614,565.00

The goal of this project is to study mechanisms that help maintain cooperative
iron acquisition in bacterial communities. Cooperative iron acquisition is
crucial to the survival of many microbial communities, but it is vulnerable to
exploitation by social cheaters that reap the benefits of iron acquisition
without paying the cost. Cooperative iron acquisition is widespread in microbial
communities, including communities that are important for soil ecology,
agriculture, and medicine. This work will provide important information about
the conditions and circumstances that stabilize such communities and general
information about how more complex communities are stabilized. This project will
contribute to the training and career development of students at the graduate,
undergraduate and high school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much has been learned
about the molecular mechanisms of microbial cooperative behaviors such as
biofilm formation, virulence, and nutrient acquisition. However, only recently
have microbiologists also begun to investigate these behaviors from the
perspective of social evolution. The focus of this project is on the
evolutionary stability of cooperative iron acquisition in pseudomonads. Several
Pseudomonas species acquire iron by secreting pyoverdines, a structurally
diverse class of non-ribosomal peptide siderophores that are internalized by
cognate receptors. The evolutionary stability of pyoverdine cooperation is
challenged by intraspecific cheating between P. aeruginosa pyoverdine producers
and non-producers, and by interspecific cheating between two Pseudomonas
species, P. aeruginosa and P. protegens, in which the latter recognizes the
pyoverdine produced by the former but not vice versa. Both cases involve the
potential exploitation of cooperative pyoverdine production by cells that reap
the benefits without paying the costs. Based on preliminary experimental and
modeling data, it is hypothesized that bacterial growth physiology, specifically
the nature of the growth-rate limiting nutrient, and asymmetric competition,
specifically pyoverdine receptor affinity, are two important factors that
determine the costs and benefits of cheating. These hypotheses will be tested
with a combination of modeling and experimental work. Modeling will involve
whole-genome metabolic models and dynamic population growth models. Experimental
work will involve batch and chemostat growth of single and co-cultures under
defined nutrient conditions, as well as measurements of pyoverdine receptor
binding affinities and expression levels. These studies will provide insights
into the mechanisms that contribute to the evolutionary stability of cooperative
iron acquisition. Cooperative iron acquisition and other microbial social
behaviors are of great relevance to natural ecosystems and have implications for
the evolution of sociality in general. Graduate, Undergraduate and high school
students will be trained in a wide range of skills in microbial genetics,
physiology, biochemistry, evolutionary biology, and mathematical modeling. High
school students will be hosted through the Apprenticeship for Science and
Engineering, a summer internship program at Oregon State University.