* 1616824
* Structure-function relationships in metalloenzymes with multiple redox-active centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Sean Elliott, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 799,999.00

The ultimate aim of this project is to better understand the chemistry of
biologically driven ammonia-nitrite inter-conversion. Ammonia (a major component
of fertilizer) and nitrite are two examples of "reactive nitrogen"; that is,
nitrogen usable by many living organisms, as opposed to "elemental nitrogen"
which makes up 78% of the air we breathe, but is directly usable by only a few
bacteria. Over the last 50 years the balance between reactive and elemental
nitrogen has shifted significantly towards the former, as more fertilizer was
generated to produce food and (recently) biofuels. A better understanding of
ammonia-nitrite inter-conversion may lead to the more efficient use of ammonia
fertilizer, and thus help redress the imbalance. One to three graduate students
per year are funded directly to work on this project. The project's highly
interdisciplinary nature provides the students with a wide breadth of skills
that make them very competitive when they go on to independent careers after
graduation. In addition to graduate students, an average of three undergraduate
researchers and two high school students normally work on the project during any
given year. The undergraduates are typically financed through supplemental
grants from NSF, or through institutional support from the University of
Wisconsin Milwaukee, while the high school students are funded through the
American Chemical Society's "Project SEED" program. The graduate students funded
to work on this project also provide direct supervision for the more junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research concentrates on the
reaction mechanism of cytochrome-c nitrite reductase (ccNIR), an enzyme that
allows certain bacteria to reduce nitrite to ammonia. The bacteria can extract
energy from the process, which without ccNiR would be too slow for bacterial
survival. The long-term aim of the project is to determine how ccNiR and
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO), an enzyme that different bacteria use to
extract energy from ammonia oxidation, and that has an architecture broadly
similar to ccNiR's, are tailored to shepherd the ammonia-nitrite inter-
conversion preferentially in one direction or the other. Intermediate states
that form and decay during the reaction catalyzed by ccNiR are being
investigated using a variety of methods, most notably time-resolved
crystallographic techniques. X-ray crystallography is one of the few methods
available for determining the 3-dimensional arrangement of atoms in a biological
macromolecule. Time-resolved methods take advantage of ultrashort high intensity
X-ray pulses, which are available at facilities such as BioCARS at the Advanced
Photon Source, or the LCLS X-Ray free electron laser at Stanford, to create
"freeze-frame" snapshots of enzyme molecules during the course of reactions. By
piecing together the exposures taken at varying times after a reaction is
initiated, "movies" of molecular changes are obtained. These relatively new fast
crystallography techniques have enormous untapped potential, the development of
which is an important complementary aim of the project.