* 1616127
* Engineered Control of Cellular Aging
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Nan Hao, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 673,666.00

Cellular aging is a complex biological process, in which genetically identical
cells show heterogeneous aging behavior. While it is generally believed that
aging is driven by accumulation of genetic and cellular damage, molecular
regulation of the aging process remains largely unclear. As aging studies in
mammals are prohibitively long and resource-intensive, much of the progress in
understanding human aging comes from studies in model organisms, such as the
budding yeast. The proposed project will develop novel technologies to enable
visualization of the aging process in a large number of single living cells in a
dynamically controlled environment. These new technologies will be combined with
computational modeling and synthetic biology approaches to advance the
fundamental scientific understanding of the aging process in living organisms.
The broader impact goal of this project is to foster the growth of the emerging
field of quantitative biology and to train the new generation of scientists
capable of integrating experiments with quantitative analysis. In particular, a
new summer experimental program focusing on hands-on training in quantitative
analysis of aging is designed to expose undergraduate students to cutting-edge
quantitative biology technologies at very early-stages of their scientific
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yeast replicative aging has been intensively
studied for a half century and serves as a uniquely tractable model for the
aging of many mitotically active cell types in mammals. However, a mechanistic
understanding about the regulation of yeast aging remains limited. This is in
part due to the lack of technologies to directly monitor molecular processes in
living cells during aging. The investigator's research group has developed novel
microfluidics and single-cell imaging technologies that enable visualization of
the aging process in single yeast cells in a fully automated fashion. The
objective is to combine these transformative methodologies with synthetic
biology to engineer the aging process in single cells. The project will focus on
engineering the regulation of chromatin silencing, which protects cells from
genomic instability, a major causal factor of cellular aging. The dynamics of
chromatin silencing in single cells will be measured using novel fluorescent
reporters to quantitatively correlate these parameters with the aging process.
The expectation is that this approach will allow the prediction of the aging
stage and remaining lifespan of a living cell. Quantitative experiments will be
integrated with modeling and synthetic biology to further investigate the
dynamic regulation of cellular aging by chromatin silencing. This work will for
the first time reveal the dynamic regulation of chromatin stability during aging
at the single-cell level and will provide new mechanistic insights into the
cause of cellular aging and the source of cell-cell variability in lifespans.
The combined approaches could potentially lead to the creation of synthetic
yeast cells with much extended longevities.