* 1616774
* NeTS: Small: Software-Defined Data Plane for Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Xi Wang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Many popular cloud applications that power our daily lives, such as Facebook,
Google, Amazon, and Twitter, spend a large fraction of their time performing
network operations. Even supposedly computationally intensive applications such
as parallel machine learning are often limited by communication performance.
Datacenter network designers have been racing to keep up with this increased
reliance on network usage, but they have had only limited success in achieving
desirable system properties as they are often constrained by the lack of switch
support for deploying new protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortunately,
innovation in switch and network interface card (NIC) design is now focused on
building not just faster but also more flexible packet processing devices.
Whereas traditional switches and NICs typically provide functionality to route
and forward packets, many upcoming switches have support for transforming the
packet as well as performing computations on the packet before routing it
towards its destination. These devices have the potential to revolutionize the
use of networking devices within datacenters as they provide the ability to
reconfigure packet processing and deploy new
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate flexible packet
processing functionality on NICs and switches and their potential for optimizing
high performance networked systems inside the datacenter. This work provides new
abstractions and building blocks for the use of flexible packet processing
pipelines, while respecting the hardware constraints that will be associated
with these technologies. The researchers will examine how the resulting data
plane functionality can be used to implement resource allocation mechanisms
inside the datacenter so as to enable congestion control, performance isolation,
adaptive routing, and efficient load balancing. They will also examine
implementing on the NICs and switches some of the packet processing
traditionally done in end-host software. The goal is to show how and by how much
flexible packet processing can benefit widely used datacenter applications and
also provide guidance on what features that future iterations of the hardware
should provide in order to significantly improve application
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Network-intensive datacenter
applications are used by literally billions of people around the globe on a
daily basis. By improving the efficiency of network operations, results from
this project can dramatically reduce the cost of provisioning existing public
services, like Wikipedia, as well as make it much cheaper for new public
services to be developed. By enabling the deployment of more effective resource
allocation protocols on flexible switches, this work also has the potential to
provide substantial improvements to the networking performance within
datacenters. The researchers will publicly release the developed software and
enable a rich set of network protocols and high-performance datacenter
applications.