* 1616196
* I-Corps Team: Transdermal alcohol sensor system for monitoring blood alcohol content
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Shekhar Bhansali, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed technology aims to provide law enforcement and judiciary agencies
the real time blood alcohol content data of the driving under influence
offenders. It can be used as a blood alcohol content alert system by the user
while they indulge themselves in social drinking. Drunk driving costs the United
States $199 billion a year, and 50 to 75% of convicted drunk drivers continue to
drink and drive on a suspended license. Every two minutes a person is injured in
a drunk driving crash. According to the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) 32,719 people died in traffic crashes in 2013 in the
United States, including an estimated 10,076 people who died in drunk driving
crashes, accounting for 31% of all traffic deaths that year. These adversaries
can be significantly avoided by implementing the proposed technology to
continuously monitor blood alcohol level in driving under the influence, driving
while intoxicated offenders and preventing them from driving while intoxicated.
the proposed technology aims to reduce the cost by an order of magnitude while
providing immediate data with alert system to the respective agencies. The
expected cost of the device will be less compared to other devices, and the
monitoring fee can be significantly reduced because the data will be better
calibrated, intuitive, and more user friendly, thereby minimizing the need for
analyst. Further, the proposed system can integrate with the offenders' mobile
phone for transmitting encrypted data to the server. This technology has the
potential to revolutionize the wearable alcohol monitoring market and provide
more user friendly support to law enforcement and judiciary
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a solid project
plan to transition its technology for widespread commercial usage. For market
assessment the team intends to interview social drinkers, law enforcement and
judicial agencies. Additionally, the team will explore agencies involved with
DUI/DWI offenders, for example flight medical examiners, and defense commands.
This market research will provide this team with the insights of customer needs
and product market fit along with the possible supply chain details. Meanwhile
the team will continue to refine the fuel cell sensor fabrication, optimization
and calibration to improve the sensitivity, improve the backend electronics
based on the customer needs identified in the interviews, and build a minimal
viable product for demonstration purposes. The proposed device will the designed
in such a way that the readout of alcohol concentration will be displayed both
on the watch and on the smart phone. The data transfer from the device to the
smartphone will be achieved by blue tooth communication.