* 1616339
* Insight into mitochondria function and evolution from studies of a plant pathogenic stramenopile
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 699,931.00

In eukaryotes, metabolic reactions are typically partitioned between different
cellular compartments. One set of metabolic reactions thought to occur only in
the cytoplasm is glycolysis, the chemical reactions that generate cellular
energy. In this project, the PI will investigate a deviation from this well-
accepted textbook definition of glycolysis in Oomycetes, a group of plant and
animal pathogens, in which part of glycolysis is proposed to occur in
mitochondria. The project will provide a better understanding of the origins and
diversity of these metabolic reactions in the potato pathogen Phytophthora
infestans. The novel oomycete metabolic pathways that will be studied also
represent potential targets for inhibitors that can be exploited to develop new
disease control strategies. This will yield economic and environmental benefits,
raise the sustainability of agricultural production, and increase food security.
The project also supports scientific education and the training of a diverse
workforce through the participation of graduate and undergraduate students at a
Hispanic-Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current understanding of
glycolysis is based largely on a few model organisms. This project focuses on
the role of mitochondria and metabolic compartmentalization in that organelle in
glycolysis, using as a model the potato pathogen Phytophthora infestans. This
filamentous eukaryotic microbe is a member of the oomycete group of the
stramenopile kingdom. Since the evolutionary history of stramenopiles is
distinct from that of classic model organisms, this project will shed light on
the origins of mitochondria and diversity. The first objective of the project is
to study glycolytic enzymes that are found in oomycete mitochondria. The classic
view is that glycolysis takes place in the cytosol, but enzymes representing the
payoff phase of glycolysis are predicted to also occur in oomycete mitochondria.
These novel enzymes will be studied by localizing the relevant enzymes using
fluorescent tags, silencing their genes, and assessing their activity. The
second objective of the project is to examine P. infestans mitochondria more
broadly with a goal of identifying other novel pathways in the organelle. The
research will integrate evolutionary biology, cell biology, biochemistry, and
molecular genetics.