* 1616646
* Symbiotic Stars and Citizen Science in the Age of Time-Domain Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Sokoloski, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2021
* USD 353,434.00

1. Most stars occur in systems containing two or more objects. Some pairs
include a very dense star called a ?white dwarf? ? a star with the mass of our
Sun crammed into a volume about the size of the Earth ? plus a red giant star
hundreds of times larger than the Sun. In some cases, called ?symbiotic
binaries,? the red giant can transfer matter onto the white dwarf. Such systems
provide clues about the way the evolution of one star affects the other. They
also provide clues about the types of stars that can explode as supernovae,
completely disrupting the entire star. This project will use a robotic telescope
called ?SkyMapper? in Australia to search the southern skies for large numbers
of symbiotic binaries that previous surveys may have missed. It will also
involve large numbers of amateur astronomers around the world who are members of
the American Association of Variable Star Observers. Their observations will
help professional astronomers to determine the true numbers of these systems in
the Milky Way Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Symbiotic stars are binary systems
in which a white dwarf accretes matter from a red-giant companion. Understanding
these systems may have far-reaching implications for binary stellar evolution
and may help to constrain the fraction of SNIa that originate as symbiotics.
Arguing that an important, and possibly dominant, sub-population of such systems
may have been missed in previous surveys, the Principal Investigator will mine
the data provided by the SkyMapper Southern Sky Survey based at the Siding
Spring Observatory in Australia to determine the true population of symbiotic
binaries in the Galaxy. The Intellectual Merit of the proposed research stems
from the potential for discovering large numbers of previously unknown
symbiotics, from determining the true population of such systems in the Galaxy,
and from the potential impact of these discoveries on our understanding of
binary evolution and the origins of Type Ia supernovae. The project will also
help to prepare the astronomical community to deal with the flood of data
expected from the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) when it comes into
operation early in the next decade. The project also has unique Broader Impacts:
It will foster a close collaboration between the large number of amateur
astronomers around the world who are members of the American Association of
Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) and professional astronomers to support current
and future wide-field time-domain surveys, including those involving the LSST.