* 1616467
* RUI:MCB: Glutathionylation of beta-amylase3 in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jonathan Monroe, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2020
* USD 215,088.00

This project will ultimately lead to an improved ability to predict how certain
proteins can be modified under conditions of environmental stress. Such
modifications may lead to changes in the protein's function that help organisms
respond to altered conditions, including temperature change. The research is
focused on a plant amylase, an enzyme that breaks down leaf starch and appears
to play a role in cold stress survival. This enzyme is inhibited by a mechanism
involving the reversible modification of certain amino acids that may occur
during cold stress. This type of modification is poorly understood but is
thought to be widespread in all organisms responding to environmental stress.
The modified amino acids in the amylase have been identified and this project
will characterize how these modifications affect enzyme activity and what it is
that makes these amino acids sensitive to this specific modification. The
research will be carried out at a predominantly undergraduate institution and
involve at least 10 undergraduates, helping prepare them for graduate school,
professional schools or other careers in science. The students will be involved
in all aspects of the work and be able to present their results at regional and
national conferences. In addition, the project will support a postdoctoral
scholar as she gains experience in teaching and mentoring undergraduates in
research, skills that are essential to her eventual goal of working at an
undergraduate institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glutathionylation of proteins
at specific cysteine residues is an important post-translational modification
but little is known about what makes some cysteines sensitive to
glutathionylation while others are insensitive. In addition, there are no
examples in plants where the physiological effects of protein glutathionylation
are understood. In this project the well-studied model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana will be used to investigate two members of the &amp;#946;-amylase (BAM)
gene family, one of which, BAM3, is inhibited by glutathionylation and the
other, BAM1, is not. The two objectives of the project are: 1) to characterize
the glutathionylation of BAM3 and the effects of this modification on catalytic
activity using site directed mutagenesis, mass spectrometry and homology
modeling, and 2) to identify key factors influencing the susceptibility of
cysteines to glutathionylation. A conserved Cys residue was identified that is
sensitive to glutathionylation in BAM3 but is insensitive in BAM1. Sequence
alignments and homology modeling of BAM3 and BAM1 sequences across plants
revealed a number of residues that differ between the two BAMs, but are
conserved within each type and may influence the sensitivity to
glutathionylation. A combination of computational modeling and protein
mutagenesis will be used to characterize the factors affecting this
glutathionylation event. Results from these experiments will lead to the
development of a more accurate model for predicting the sensitivity of cysteine
residues to glutathionylation in other proteins, and to a better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms involved in stress acclimation.