* 1616936
* Andromeda Variability Legacy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Eugene Magnier, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,017.00

The investigators will observe the nearby Andromeda Galaxy. They will look for
bright regions, which indicate stars are forming. As generations of stars are
born and die, they change the chemical composition of galaxies. Gas and dust
collect in spiral arms of galaxies. This dust condenses into new stars and
planets. After a time, the stars explode, sending different elements into the
space between stars. The investigator will observe this galaxy in detail. They
will map the chemistry and energy distributions. They will use this map to
measure how the birth of new stars change the shape of the galaxy. All galaxies,
including our own, change through the process of star formation. The
investigator will involve undergraduate and graduates students in this research,
training them for future careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certain types of variable stars, RR Lyrae and
Cepheids, are especially useful for measuring the age of star forming regions.
For these stars, the brightness changes over time in a way that depends on the
age and chemical compositions. These stars can then be used as probes to measure
the locations of star formation at different times and in different conditions.
This project will combine the three largest sets of observations of the
Andromeda Galaxy to study variable stars spanning a huge range of ages,
brightness, and variability periods. The observations of these variable stars
will then be used to trace the star formation history in this galaxy. The
results of their study of the Andromeda galaxy will aid in understanding the
star formation history of our own Milky Way Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator has been a part of project making repeated observations of the
Andromeda Galaxy, covering time-scales from 15 minutes to as long as 11 years.
With these observations, they will discover variable stars of different types,
ranging from faint RR Lyrae to bright Cepheids of all types. With ages ranging
from 10 million to 10 billion years, these different classes of variables will
trace different time-scales for star formation as a function of position in the
galaxy. The chemical composition of the stars can also be inferred from the
variability signatures, revealing the location of changes of the stellar
chemistry.