* 1616037
* Basis and Behavior of Cosmic Ray Feedback
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ellen Zweibel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 322,744.00

As galaxies in our Universe form and live out their lives, they exchange matter
and energy with their surroundings. Galactic winds are a key component of this
exchange of matter and energy. This project aims to study the initiation and
propagation of galactic winds with particular focus on the role of particles
moving at speeds near the speed of light. Such particles are known as cosmic
rays. (In fact, such cosmic rays from our own Milky Way Galaxy interact with
each of us every day!) The major outcome of this project will be improved and
extended models of galactic winds (1) that build insight into the nature of
galactic winds, (2) that can be used by astronomers to connect galaxy and cosmic
ray properties with wind properties, and (3) that can be adapted to advanced
computer simulations of how galaxies form and change throughout their lifetimes.
This project will also strengthen the US science workforce by directly training
graduate and undergraduate students in plasma and computational physics and by
using the project results to develop teaching materials for university courses.
In addition, the investigators will develop a new public outreach program, "The
Sun in the Park," that will offer solar viewing and participatory exercises in
urban parks in Madison and Milwaukee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
winds are detected from galaxies of many types. Simulations of galaxy formation
and evolution have shown that star formation must be limited by feedback
processes and that galactic winds driven by stellar energy and momentum output
may be a key part of this feedback. Radio and gamma-ray probes of cosmic rays in
a variety of galactic environments have greatly extended our knowledge of cosmic
ray properties and those of the underlying galaxies. Although cosmic rays
account for a small fraction of the energy output from stars, they have an
outsized role in driving galactic winds through their high mobility, long
cooling times, and strong coupling to the background through plasma waves. This
project will investigate the basis for this coupling in a variety of
interstellar environments. This part of the work will address whether cosmic
rays couple efficiently to both fully and weakly ionized outflows, how small
scale interstellar turbulence affects momentum and energy transfer, and how
extreme conditions including high gas densities and weak magnetic fields affect
the coupling. The investigators will create a versatile grid of outflow models
based on a small number of parameters to aid in interpreting observations of
winds and implementing them in galaxy simulations. They will use this work as a
basis for improved treatments of cosmic rays in collaborative advanced numerical
simulations of galaxy formation and evolution.