* 1616265
* Reversible Amyloid-Like Fibrils in Membraneless Organelles
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Feng Guo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 828,670.00

Under a variety of stressful conditions, cells develop small compartments that
are transient. These compartments are termed dynamic intracellular bodies.
Little is known about the molecular interactions that form these bodies. Many of
these bodies contain RNA-protein complexes that could protect cellular RNAs
during cell stress. The goal of this research is to illuminate the interactions
between proteins and of proteins with RNAs that lead to the formation of these
bodies. This will be achieved using a variety of analyses using structural tools
such as X-Ray crystallography and electron microscopy backed up by biochemical
studies. While the research is of a fundamental nature, some of the proteins
that are involved in the formation of these dynamic intracellular bodies are
also associated in aggregated form with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), so
the structural studies may provide the additional benefit of understanding the
connection of disease. A part of the research is also focused on developing
novel methods for structure determination, such as micro-electron diffraction.
The broader societal significance involves the recruitment into scientific
careers of students and postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented groups.
Additionally, through the UCLA Center for Global Mentoring, the project aims to
spread the American system of scientific mentoring to countries with developing
scientific infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fill the void of knowledge
about the molecular interactions in dynamic intracellular bodies, also known as
membraneless organelles, the project will discover the structural basis of a
newly recognized form of protein-protein and protein-RNA interaction. In Aim 1,
it has been discovered that the atomic structures of the adhesive segments of
reversible amyloid-like fibrils (RALFs) formed by the low complexity sequences
have both similarities and differences with disease-related amyloid. The project
will explore the full variety of interactions and assembly states found in
membraneless organelles. In other words, the human reversible amylome will be
mapped. In Aim 2, it is hypothesized that RNA binding can strongly influence
membraneless organelle and reversible amyloid formation through several parallel
mechanisms. These mechanisms will be tested using biochemical and cellular
assays. The contributions of RALFs and protein-RNA interactions will also be
compared. Both Aims will deepen understanding of cellular organization and
function, particularly mechanisms for sequestration of proteins and RNAs without
the aid of membrane encapsulation. Part of the research involves determination
of structures from miniscule amyloid-like crystals. The frontier method of
micro-electron diffraction must be further developed.