* 1616624
* The MEarth Project: An All Sky Survey of the Closest Low-mass Stars to Uncover the Very Best Terrestrial Exoplanets for Further Study
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* David Charbonneau, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,922.00

The MEarth Observatories are made up of two robotic telescope arrays that are
designed to find Earth-like planets around smaller stars. Each array has 8
identical telescopes that are 40 cm wide and equipped with cameras. MEarth-North
is located at Mt. Hopkins, Arizona, and MEarth-South is located at the Cerro
Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile. This project consists of a 3-year
survey using the MEarth arrays that will discover small exoplanets. The
investigators expect to discover 6 planets with sizes close to the Earth's size
and temperatures ranging from 300-600K. The investigators anticipate finding at
least one of these planets located at a distance from its star where life
similar to the Earth's life could survive. A second science goal of MEarth is to
aid the study of stellar astrophysics with the large amount of data the project
will collect. This project serves the national interest by promoting our
discovery and knowledge of planets beyond our Solar System that could harbor
life. Undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctorate scientists, will
be part of the MEarth science project. The principal investigator also works
with Harvard's Future Faculty Leaders program and the Banneker Institute.

This project aims to improve our understanding of small exoplanets by
identifying the optimal transiting examples of these exoplanets through a
3-year, all-sky survey of the closest low-mass stars using the dedicated MEarth
Observatories. The MEarth Observatories consists of two robotic telescope
arrays, each array having 8 40-cm charge-coupled device detector-equipped
telescopes. MEarth-North is located at Mt. Hopkins, Arizona, and MEarth-South is
located at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile. Owing to the
planets' proximities to their host stars, and their small sizes, the
investigators will be able to obtain precise limits on the densities of these
exoplanets. They will also study the exoplanets' atmospheres through
spectroscopy of the starlight that the atmospheres transmit. Six planets are
predicted to be discovered during this 3-year survey, with radii between
1.0-2.5x Earth's radius and temperatures from 300-600K, with the expectation of
at least one planet in the habitable zone. The secondary science goal of MEarth
is to advance the study of stellar astrophysics. Undergraduate and graduate
students, and post-doctorate scientists, will participate in the MEarth science
project. The principal investigator also participates in Harvard's Future
Faculty Leaders program and the Banneker Institute.