* 1616698
* Collaborative Research: A Survey for Multiplicity of Low-mass (Class M) Dwarf Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Elliott Horch, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,590.00

This collaborative project will use imaging and spectrophotometry to study 2,000
of the nearest stars. The high spatial resolution images will be capable of
revealing bound planets. The spectrophotometry will provide information about
the systems? temperatures and orbital characteristics. The work will focus on a
type of star called M-dwarfs, which are cooler and less massive than the Sun.
These stars are also considered more likely to have rocky planets habitable to
life than stars like the Sun. Observations will be made with two telescopes in
Arizona and one in California. Scientific results will be incorporated into an
outreach program with the Discovery Channel. Students from Northern Arizona
University and Southern Connecticut State University will participate in the
research.

The team will use the Differential Speckle Survey Instrument (DSSI) on Lowell
Observatory 4.5m telescope and the R=600 visible-light multi-object
spectrophotometer on Lowell?s 31-inch telescope. Through the comparison of
speckle patterns simultaneously observed at two wavelengths, DSSI can measure
separations of companions below the diffraction limit. Follow-up
spectrophotometry will provide data for stellar characterization and spectral
energy distribution fitting. The team will also use the Palomar 200-inch
telescope to assess bound companions using data from an infrared camera or
optical integral field spectrometer and isochrone modeling.