* 1616982
* NSF/MCB-BSF:Understanding Photosynthetic Energy Conversion on the Mesoscale
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Phillip Geissler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 708,414.00

The photosynthetic conversion of sunlight requires structural coordination
between nanometer-sized protein complexes embedded within the thylakoid membrane
of chloroplasts. The exact structural positioning of the energy transforming
protein complexes in the membrane on the 100 nanometer length scale (called the
mesoscopic level) is a key element for the functionality and regulation of
biological energy conversion. Missing information about mesoscopic
characteristics and their dynamic response to environmental cues represents a
significant gap in the knowledge base. In particular, it is not understood what
factors determine mesoscopic features in thylakoid membranes and what
physicochemical forces are involved. The proposed work aims to fill this
critical gap. Knowing how plants optimize and regulate photosynthetic energy
conversion on the mesoscopic length scale will not only have a direct impact on
basic photosynthesis research but also has a strong eco-physiological component
by understanding how changes in plant habitats control photosynthetic
performance via modifications in mesoscopic membrane features. The computer
model that will be developed in the proposed work has the potential to unravel
the underlying design principles of the photosynthetic machinery that can be
used for the identification of new approaches to design crop plants. The
importance of mesoscopic characteristics and dynamics of thylakoid membranes in
improving crop plants has been neglected thus far. Furthermore, the proposed
work has a strong focus on high-quality education of students and postdocs.
Based upon previous successful experiences with NSF-supported undergraduates,
six undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be recruited and offered
supported research training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to unravel the role of the lipid composition and reversible
protein phosphorylation for mesoscopic protein organization and its dynamics in
stacked grana thylakoid membranes (covers about 60% of the whole thylakoid
membrane). The central hypothesis is that physicochemical properties of the
lipid matrix and the phosphorylation of grana hosted proteins are key
determinants for the supramolecular protein arrangement in grana. The PI and his
collaborators will determine the impact of the lipid matrix for the
supramolecular protein organization in grana. The photosystem II (PSII)
arrangement in grana membranes will be mapped and mathematically analyzed for
wildtype (WT) and lipid and fatty acid mutants by cryo-scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) on freeze-fractured membranes. Next, the mesoscopic dynamics
induced by reversible protein phosphorylation will be determined by comparing
PSII maps of WT protein with those of mutants with protein hyper- or hypo-
phosphorylation. Finally, the forces that control protein ensemble behavior will
be determined by applying coarse grain computer modeling. The project will
provide unprecedented insight into structure-function relationship of
photosynthetic membranes on the mesocopic level and in addition to in-depth
structural characterizations of changes in the mesoscopic protein organization
and PSII supercomplex stability by alterations of the lipid/fatty acid
composition or protein phosphorylation pattern. This contribution is significant
because it identifies central mechanisms that control and regulate
supramolecular protein dynamics in stacked thylakoid membranes required for
efficient photosynthetic energy conversion in ever-changing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the US-Israel Binational
Science Foundation.