* 1616101
* A 3-D View into the Connection and History of Galaxies and Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marsha Wolf, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2021
* USD 603,965.00

Part 1

This proposal attempts to probe past Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) activity in
galaxies. Even if the construction of complete histories of both star formation
and AGN are not possible for individual galaxies, the large statistical sample
will place important constraints on the changing (or lack thereof) history of
galaxies and their AGN. The 3-dimensional galaxy information obtained from the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) IV's Mapping Nearby Galaxies at APO (MaNGA)
project will vastly increase our understanding of the interplay of AGN and
galaxies.

Part 2

The goal of this proposal is to better understand the relationship of central
supermassive black holes (SMBHs) and their host galaxies through the SMBHs
active phases. This analysis requires three key elements: 1) the ability to
trace a galaxy's history; 2) the ability to trace an Active Galactic Nuclei's
(AGN's) history; and 3) a spatially resolved view of these systems, since not
all relevant information about galaxies (extended vs. centrally concentrated
star formation, large-scale outflows of gas, motions of stars and gas,
ionization regions, etc.) or AGN (jets, radio lobes) is contained in the central
core. Fulfilling all three elements for more than a handful of objects is
possible only now through the confluence of two new large surveys: the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) IV's Mapping Nearby Galaxies at APO (MaNGA) project
for spatially resolved properties of 10,000 galaxies and the Tata Giant
Metrewave Radio Telescope Sky Survey (TGSS) to provide low frequency radio data
covering the entire MaNGA survey region that will reveal past radio AGN
activity. By combining data from these surveys and adding state-of-the-art
simulations of the radio AGN, we will be able to place statistical constraints
on the time histories of galaxies and their AGN. Specifically, the PIs will
investigate the following overarching questions: (1) Do the star formation
histories of galaxies, and their AGN activity histories, suggest they are
connected and change together over time? (2) Do the spatially resolved galaxy
properties show signs of AGN feedback leading to the stopping of star formation
in the galaxies?