* 1616042
* Detection of Fast Radio Bursts from Cosmic Radio Sources with Arecibo and the Green Bank Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Maura McLaughlin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 317,627.00

1. Violent, explosive events throughout the Universe often produce relatively
brief signals that astronomers detect. A huge, abrupt increase in brightness
accompanies a supernova explosion that completely destroys the star. The brief
?chirp? of gravitational radiation detected by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory in September 2015 came from the merger of two
massive black holes. And in 2007, a ?chirp? of radio emission lasting a few
thousandths of a second signaled the discovery of a previously unknown class of
astronomical object. Astronomers think that this and other so-called ?Fast Radio
Bursts? (FRBs) originate in distant galaxies far out in the Universe. To find
out what are the sources of the FRBs, astronomers need to discover many more
examples, determine their properties, and if possible identify them with events
observed in other ways. This project will deploy radio detectors at the
1000-foot-diameter radio telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and at the Green
Bank Telescope in West Virginia. The detectors will conduct automated searches
for FRBs and communicate the discoveries within minutes to enable follow-up
observations. The scientists will also share their results to the general public
through a public website, a 3D video, and planetarium programs. Even their
undergraduate students will help. They will convey the excitement of research in
radio astronomy to more than 3,600 K-12 students each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. A bright millisecond radio burst discovered in
2007 indicated the existence of a previously unknown population of radio
sources. Recent discoveries of more of these Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) has
confirmed the existence of this population, which has been hailed as one of the
most important discoveries in radio astronomy in recent decades. With typical
durations of a few milliseconds, FRBs are strongly dispersed in frequency,
suggesting an extragalactic origin. The primary goal of this project is to
deploy autonomous dedicated detectors at the Arecibo radio telescope in Puerto
Rico and at the Green Bank Telescope to search for more of these transient
events across large swaths of the sky, to make the detections rapidly available
(within minutes) for follow-up observations at other parts of the
electromagnetic spectrum and in gravitational-wave data, and to record and
characterize the properties of these detections. The Principal Investigators
anticipate finding dozens of FRBs each year as well as possibly discovering
bursting Galactic neutron stars and possibly completely new classes of transient
radio sources. The Principal Investigators also have an extensive and well-
developed plan to employ their research for broader societal impacts. These
include a public website for rapid dissemination of their results to non-
scientists, presentations about radio astronomy by undergraduates to more than
3,600 K-12 students per year, and the development of a 3D video about the
research that has strong potential to grab the public interest and teach the
public about science through astronomy.