* 1616171
* The Physics of Star Formation Feedback and Molecular Cloud Destruction
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shane Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2020
* USD 358,567.00

When stars form in clouds of interstellar gas, the starlight changes the energy
and chemistry of these clouds. Each new star can change the clouds in different
ways. Some stars destroy the clouds, while others may compress clouds to start
formation of new stars. In some cases, a chain reaction creates many new stars.
The huge energy increase leads to spectacular, large scale, outflows of material
from star forming galaxies. The investigators will model the changes to galaxies
resulting for star formation. They will use an innovative mathematical method to
analyze star forming regions in our galaxy. The investigator's primary goal is
to better understand the mechanisms through which these star-cloud interactions
occur. The results of this work will guide our understanding of star forming
galaxies. The investigator will mentor promising undergraduate students who are
participating in the Virginia-North Carolina Alliance for Minority
Participation's Summer Research Program at the University of Virginia.

The principal investigator and collaborators will use a state-of-the-art
radiation magneto-hydrodynamics code to perform numerical simulations that model
various mechanisms for star formation feedback. The numerical simulations will
focus on the role played by the radiation produced by massive stars. This will
include modeling the heating and ionization of the surrounding gas, as well as
radiation pressure forces on dust embedded in the gas. The investigators will
study how a star cluster affects its own gas supply as it forms and evolves.
Complimentary simulations will explore larger scales and attempt to constrain
what role, if any, radiation plays in supporting molecular gas clouds against
gravitational collapse. Other simulations will look at the role radiation and
supernova play in launching and accelerating galaxy scale outflows of atomic and
molecular gas.

As mentioned above, the investigator will mentor promising undergraduate
students at the University of Virginia. The students will develop skills and
gain experience in astrophysics and high performance computing by actively
participating in the proposed research. One graduate student will develop their
thesis from this project.