* 1616514
* Understanding Horizontal Gene Transfer in Bacteria and Archaea: Units of Transfer and Modes of Integration
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Johann Peter Gogarten, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Candi Phoebe Lostroh
* 07/31/2020
* USD 598,801.00

One of the most important, but poorly understood, drivers of microbial evolution
is horizontal gene transfer (HGT), when whole genes or large gene fragments are
passed along between two bacterial cells, sometimes representing different
species. Understanding how HGT occurs may shed light on the adaptation of
microbes to new ecological niches, evolution and spread of antibiotic resistance
genes, the rise of emerging pathogens, and competition between microbes. The
outcomes of the proposed research will include new computational methods and
techniques for analyzing HGT events, open-source software tools for use by
biologists, and valuable new insights into different types of HGT events in
oceanic bacteria. The project will train three PhD students and at least three
undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research skills. The project will
also introduce several high-school students to bioinformatics research and
provide training to several high-school science teachers on computational
molecular evolution. Research results will also be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate level classroom teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses
on two fundamental properties of HGTs. The first property deals with the 'mode'
of an HGT event, which defines whether the transferred gene is 'additive' or
'replacing', i.e., whether it adds itself as a new gene to the recipient genome
or replaces an existing homologous gene. The second property concerns the units
of HGT events, i.e., whether the HGT event involved a gene fragment, entire
gene, several genes, or entire operons. The project entails development of new,
broadly applicable, computational methods to infer the modes and units of HGT
events, application of these methods to microbial genome datasets to investigate
the frequencies and roles of the different modes and units of HGT events in
various evolutionary scenarios, and testing of specific hypotheses relating
these properties of HGT events to evolutionary divergence, HGT integration
mechanism, and gene function.