* 1616353
* Interfacial Mechanics of Cell Membranes: Stochastic Exterior Calculus Approaches for Curved Fluid Lipid-Protein Bilayers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Paul Atzberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2021
* USD 331,714.00

Mathematical approaches are playing an increasingly important role in the
biological sciences. This ranges from the development of new models and theories
that provide insights into biological processes, to the development of new
analytic tools and software that are useful in experimental design and in the
analysis of experimental data. In cell biology, lipid bilayer membranes can be
thought of as effectively two-dimensional materials comprising of a
heterogeneous mixture of lipids, proteins, and other small molecules. The
individual and collective dynamics of these molecules are fine-tuned to carry
out complex cellular processes ranging from signaling to synaptic transmission
to the regulation of shapes of organelles. The effective two-dimensional fluid-
elastic nature of cell membranes yields interfacial phenomena and complicated
geometric shapes effecting both molecular interactions and dynamics that can be
very distinct from their bulk three dimensional counterparts. To gain a deeper
understanding of cellular processes in curved protein-lipid bilayers, there is a
need for new approaches for incorporating the important roles played by
geometry. This research develops new mathematical approaches and software for
handling complicated geometries in investigations conducted through laboratory
experiments and computational simulations of membrane-protein systems. The
educational activities of the project will further enhance the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students in new quantitative approaches to the
biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project will
develop new mathematical approaches to capture diffusive transport of proteins
within curved membranes arising from both active collective motions and passive
thermal fluctuations, hydrodynamics and viscoelastic deformations of curved
surfaces, and discrete heterogeneous interactions between inclusions
incorporating stochastic kinetics. Mathematical approaches will be extended for
both continuum mechanics and coarse-grained molecular descriptions so as to
provide insights into the emergent mechanics and dynamics of inclusions within
bilayer membranes. To perform computational simulations, a general class of
numerical methods based on exterior calculus will be designed to address the
challenges associated with solving differential equations on curved manifolds.
The research of this project advances the next generation of theoretical models
and analysis tools for investigating membrane-protein systems. Societal impacts
of the work derive from fundamental contributions to the understanding of
membrane-protein systems in cell biology, which may give insights into processes
relevant to membrane-related technologies such as drug delivery through
permeation or design of antimicrobials such as membrane disruptors.