* 1616093
* Radiation and Dehydration Resistance of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Vincent LiCata, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 674,089.00

This research will determine the resistance of individual proteins to radiation
and dehydration, in order to understand how these properties evolve at the
molecular level, and to provide long-range guidance for designing radiation and
dehydration resistance into proteins. Radiation and dehydration are both forces
that damage biological systems. They are related to each other because both
induce the production of free radicals, which are extremely destructive chemical
species. Understanding how proteins may have evolved to resist free radical
damage adds to the fundamental understanding of the spectrum of protein
properties and capabilities, and has potential long-range impacts for food
production, bioengineering, bioremediation, and green chemistry. Conduct of this
research will result in the training of undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as postdoctoral researchers, in a broad array of biophysical techniques and
quantitative analytical methods. This project also includes development of novel
science outreach and public engagement activities, including educational based
performances and presentations for general audiences that are designed to
communicate the science of biochemistry under extreme environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically examines a suite of
DNA binding proteins from the bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans in direct
comparison with the homologous proteins from Escherichia coli. D. radiodurans is
one of the most radiation resistant organisms on Earth, surviving radiation
doses 2,000 times greater than those that would kill humans or E. coli. By
directly examining the function and stability of the irradiated isolated
proteins from this radiation resistant organism alongside the equivalent,
homologous proteins from a radiation sensitive organism, the project will answer
the question of whether intrinsic radiation resistance is an evolvable protein
property in the same way that some proteins have evolved to be heat resistant,
acid resistant, or salt resistant. The paired proteins will be examined under
increasing exposure to radiation, UV light, and dehydration for differential
effects on their DNA binding affinity, protein folding and stability, enzymatic
activity, and affinity for antioxidants. Because this project examines protein
function and stability, it does not simply ask if radiation induced free
radicals damage some proteins less frequently than others, it asks if the
primary physiological activities (i.e. the important functional parts) of some
species of proteins are less susceptible to radiation damage than others, and
how that difference originates.