* 1616316
* Integrated Molecular, Dynamic Imaging, and Modeling Analysis of Stomatal Guard Cell Walls
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Virendra Puri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2021
* USD 831,613.00

This project seeks to determine how the carbohydrate-based cell walls of guard
cells dynamically change shape to control stomatal pore size, thus allowing
plants to control carbon dioxide (CO2) uptake and water loss. Stomata are small
openings in the surfaces of plants that regulate the photosynthetic conversion
of CO2 into plant biomass, which serves as a renewable source of food,
materials, and bioenergy. A deeper understanding of cell wall structure,
mechanics, and dynamics in stomatal guard cells will help identify plants that
can more efficiently use water, a major limiting factor in global agricultural
production. The computational image analysis and modeling tools that will be
developed in this project will provide scientists with new ways of interpreting
and understanding experimental data. Because stomatal guard cells are an amazing
example of cellular engineering by plants and are accessible and observable by
scientists of all ages, a learning module will be developed and deployed that
allows 4th through 8th graders to observe stomatal dynamics first-hand and
challenges them to construct and optimize functioning macro-scale models of
stomatal guard cells, helping to inspire future scientists and engineers. This
project will also train two PhD students and a research associate in
interdisciplinary research skills that cross the boundaries of biology, computer
and information science, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants,
stomatal guard cells function as dynamic gatekeepers that control CO2 and water
flux to maintain homeostasis. To control transpiration and photosynthesis,
stomatal development, morphology, and mechanics are tightly regulated. However,
two large gaps exist in our knowledge of how stomata develop and function.
First, stomatal pores form via controlled separation of sister guard cells, but
how this is accomplished is unknown. Second, the walls of guard cells must be
highly flexible to enable repeated stomatal opening and closing, but strong
enough to withstand the enormous turgor pressure that drives their deformation.
How guard cell walls are molecularly constructed to meet these competing
requirements remains largely undefined. This project will analyze the molecular
and mechanical requirements for stomatal pore formation, and the dynamic
molecular architecture of guard cell walls that underlie their unique mechanical
properties, using a complementary set of approaches including molecular
genetics, high-resolution microscopy, and computational image analysis. The data
and insights gained from these analyses will be used to construct computational
mechanical models of guard cell walls that can be iteratively refined with new
experimental results, ultimately resulting in the ability to predict guard cell
dynamics across a range of species, wall compositions, and signaling inputs.