* 1616584
* AF: Small: Graph Routing, Vertex Sparsifiers, and Connections to Graph Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Julia Chuzhoy, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,720.00

Graphs are basic combinatorial objects that are widely used in computer science,
engineering, and beyond. Many problems, both theoretical and practical, can be
abstracted through graphs, and graphs are also used to represent data. Several
basic optimization problems on graphs naturally arise in many different
contexts, and it is important to build and expand a toolkit of algorithmic ideas
and techniques for addressing such problems. This project will focus on two
broad classes of graph optimization problems: graph routing and graph
sparsification. Graph routing problems are used as abstractions in many
applications, for example, when designing VLSI chips, in multi-robot motion
planning, and routing traffic across optical networks. Graph sparsification can
be a useful tool in analyzing large and complex networks, including social ones,
and in designing faster algorithms for a variety of graph problems. Graph
routing and sparsification problems were studied in several different areas,
such as approximation algorithms, fixed parameter tractability, and graph
theory. In addition to designing better algorithms for such problems, another
goal of the project is to increase the flow of ideas and collaboration between
these different communities, by studying problems lying in the intersection of
these areas. The project will involve graduate and possibly undergraduate
students from TTIC and University of Chicago, as well as students from other
institutions who participate in TTIC's summer internship program. The PI will
also participate in activities aimed at increasing the participation of women in
theoretical computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically in a graph routing
problem one is given a graph G and a collection of pairs of vertices, called
demand pairs, that need to be connected to each other. The goal is to connect as
many of the pairs as possible via paths, usually subject to some restrictions on
the maximum load on graph vertices or edges. These are fundamental problems that
have been studied extensively by both theoretical computer science and graph
theory communities. Unfortunately, there are still wide gaps in our
understanding of some of the most basic problems in this area, and this project
aims to make progress on them. In graph sparsification problems, one is given a
graph G and a small set T of its vertices called terminals. The goal is to
represent the graph G by a much smaller graph H (called a sparsifier), that
approximately preserves the properties of G with respect to T. The specific
types of properties one would like to preserve give rise to several types of
sparsifiers (for example, we may want to preserve cuts, flows or integral
routings between the terminals). Problems in this area naturally connect to
approximation algorithms (where sparsifiers can be used to obtain improved
approximation factors to various problems), fixed-parameter tractability (where
they give a black-box way to design faster algortihms), and to graph theory
(many sparsification problems can be cast in graph theoretic terms and have been
studied by the graph theory community). There are still many open problems in
this area, and this project will attempt to improve the state of the art on
several of them.