* 1616566
* The Search for Signatures of Supermassive Black Hole Binaries (and the Remnants of those Mergers) in the Time Domain
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Suvi Gezari, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 333,724.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Binary supermassive black holes (SMBHs) should be an
inevitable consequence of the growth of massive galaxies through mergers, and
the strongest source of gravitational waves in the universe. However,
observational evidence for this fundamental phase of changes in galaxy and black
hole has remained hard to find due to the small orbital separations of
gravitationally bound SMBHs. In this program, the proposers will exploit a
theoretically predicted signature of a SMBH binary: periodic changes of the
object's brightness over time, caused by a mass accretion rate that is linked to
the binary's orbital motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical estimates assuming reasonable values for the
galaxy merger rates, quasar lifetime, and brightness variations, predict that
the recently completed Pan-STARRS1 Medium Deep Survey (PS1 MDS) has the area (80
square degrees), cadence (3 days), baseline (4.2 years), and magnitude
sensitivity required to detect a significant number of periodic quasars during
the phase of their binary SMBHs's orbital decay cause by gravity waves. In this
project the PIs will analyze all 10 PS1 MDS fields, including over 7,000
photometrically-selected quasars. Furthermore, they will exploit the wide area
and excellent cadence of the upcoming Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) to use
difference imaging to search for active galactic nuclei spatially offset from
their host galaxy center, potentially indicative of a recoiling SMBH merger
remnant. Both searches will provide benchmark studies for the exciting
capabilities of Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), which will have orders
of magnitude larger survey power.