* 1616821
* CNH-L:  The Dynamics of Adaptation to Climate-Driven Variability in California Current Fisheries And Fishing Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Joshua Abbott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,499,962.00

The livelihoods of fishermen who work in large marine ecosystems are heavily
influenced by the variability inherent in biological and oceanic systems, as
well as by the intrinsic uncertainty of economic and management structures.
However, as fishermen adapt to these changes by moving across fisheries, their
actions may strongly impact them and their communities, as well as influence
local ecosystem dynamics. The linkages between environmental variability and
ecological, economic, and social outcomes in marine ecosystems are poorly
understood. Developing this knowledge is important so that regulators may adopt
fisheries management approaches that allow fishermen to adapt to environmental
variability while at the same time enhancing the social and economic value of
fisheries and mitigating risks to both ecosystems and livelihoods. In this
project, ecologists, economists and social scientists will collaborate and
integrate primary survey research, modeling, and outreach to: 1) understand how
environmental variability affects, and is affected by, linked social and
ecological processes; 2) investigate how more integrated fisheries management
can enhance social and ecological resilience; and 3) engage state and federal
fisheries managers and fishing communities in the development and application of
modeling approaches to better achieve ecological and social
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better operationalize ecosystem-based fisheries
management, the researchers will use time series approaches to identify the
effects of environmental variability on fish population dynamics and spatial
distributions, and to identify 'portfolios' of species whose productivity varies
synchronously or asynchronously, in the context of the fisheries of the
California Current marine ecosystem on the U.S. West Coast. To better understand
fishermen's patterns of participation across multiple fisheries, this research
will combine data from ethnographic interviews and structured surveys of
fishermen, with data on fishing participation, revenues and costs, to develop an
empirical model of fishing supply behavior that integrates economic motivations
(e.g., profits, financial risks, and outside employment opportunities) with non-
monetary considerations (e.g., psychological satisfaction from fishing or strong
social ties to the fishing community). Finally, the researchers will integrate
the model of fishing supply with models of the population dynamics of key fish
stocks under environmental variability to create a coupled ecological-economic
simulation model of West Coast fisheries. This model will be used by the
researchers, in conjunction with fishery managers and stakeholders, to consider
how alternative management approaches may enhance or hamper the resilience of
the fishery by affecting fishermen's adaptive behavior. The research from this
study would provide society benefits through providing an important tool to
operationalize ecosystem-based fishery management, a stated priority for state
and federal agencies.