* 1616828
* Mid-Infrared Observations of the Torus of Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Christopher Packham, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2020
* USD 387,214.00

A fundamental question in astrophysics is how black holes in active galactic
nuclei (AGN) are fueled, because black hole fueling affects how galaxies are
formed and evolve. The AGN themselves, lying at the very center of the galaxies,
are explained as having a torus of gas and dust that blocks light from the
inside, and can obscure the AGN central engine (the black hole). However,
astronomers don't fully understand the exact properties of the torus, and
directly viewing the torus with telescopes is extremely difficult. In this
proposal, the PI plans to address the key questions of: (a) What material makes
up the torus, and how is it connected to the rest of the gas and dust between
the stars of the host galaxy? (b) How do the torus properties, such as geometry
and thickness, depend on the brightness of the AGN? (c) Do the properties of the
dust in the torus change with the AGN brightness? and (d) What is the role of
star formation near the AGN in the centers of galaxies in feeding and/or
blocking AGN? Answers to these questions will provide insight into how the AGN
is fueled by gas in the galaxy and how that might have an impact on the
formation of the galaxy itself.

Through the PI's network of collaborators, the proposed work will aid in
furthering links in astronomy in the developing nation of Mexico, and it
promotes involvement of US Spanish-speaking team members, primarily Hispanics,
through connections with Spain and Mexico. The PI also plans to work with local
high-school teachers to enhance their understanding and teaching of astronomical
topics. In this way, he hopes to reach local school children in the San Antonio
area, an area of high diversity, providing high quality scientific content, and
encouraging the students (including underrepresented minorities) to pursue
scientific fields. The intent is to use the interesting astronomical content as
a "gateway" to STEM subjects.

Observations at mid-infrared (MIR: 7-26 microns) wavelengths are essential, as
the torus intercepts a large amount of electromagnetic radiation emitted from
near the black hole and re-radiates it in this waveband. MIR facilities such as
the 8m Subaru telescope and the Gran Telescope Canarias (GTC) offer the
possibility to probe the centers of AGN at MIR wavelengths with high spatial
resolution.

Models assuming clumpy dust distribution in AGN are making significant progress
explaining MIR emission. High-resolution observation will help constrain model
parameters and provide insight into torus physical properties. This proposal
would fund analysis of data from ~100 hours of guaranteed time (GT) on the GTC
and an additional 180 hours of ESO-GTC time (jointly ESO and GTC allocated time,
competitively awarded as part of Spain's ascension to ESO membership). This
would be combined with archival data from Gemini to tackle a key problem in AGN
research. A detailed understanding of the torus, the AGN/black hole fueling
process and its relationship to (or even creation of) the torus, the interaction
with the host galaxy, and dust chemistry in other galaxies will be constructed.
Simulations based on current data to prepare new observations for next
generation facilities (such as SOFIA, JWST, TMT, etc.) are planned.