* 1616086
* The Planet Whisperer: Toward Characterizing Low-mass Planets from Doppler Surveys in the Presence of Stellar Activity
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Debra Fischer, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,688.00

One way of detecting Earth-like planets around other stars is to look for very
small shifts in the light signal, or spectrum, of a star that change when an
exoplanet passes in front of its star. These spectra, however, are affected by
many sources of noise that block these signal changes from being detected.
Astronomers aim to develop ways of separating the signals of the exoplanets from
the sources of noise. The hardest stellar noise to identify and remove is caused
by spots that change with time on the star's surface. These investigators will
look for differences between the signals of passing planets and signals of the
surface spots on the star, and use these differences to create computer programs
that can detect the differences. The investigators will create false data that
can be used to test their programs. If successful, they will then apply these
software tools to search data from space-based and ground-based telescopes,
where they expect to find hundreds of Earth-like planets. This research serves
the national interest by developing and applying new tools to detect planets
that could harbor life. The techniques that are developed as part of this
research will be included in classes and research at the university
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomers are now searching for analogs
of the Earth. Significant progress has been made in the development of more
stable and higher resolution spectrometers with the potential to deliver
precision sufficient to detect Earth analogs. However, stellar spectra are laced
with quasi-periodic signals that arise from stellar photospheres: granulation,
oscillations, spots and plage on rotating stars, and meridional flows. The most
challenging of these stellar noise signals for exoplanet detection are spots and
plage. The investigators propose to search systematically for differences
between Doppler shifts from planets and the photospheric signals from spots and
plage. They will use blind source separation techniques with principal component
analysis, independent component analysis, dictionary learning algorithms, and
multivariate Gaussian process modeling. A large library of simulated data will
be created and used to verify the efficacy of the statistical tools for
distinguishing Doppler shifts from photospheric noise sources. After validation,
the most promising algorithms will be applied to real data from space-based and
multiple ground-based telescopes. If signals of the level detected by the
spaceborne Kepler telescope can be extracted in the presence of background noise
sources, hundreds of Earth-like planets will be detected. The statistical
techniques that are developed as part of this research will be incorporated into
classes and research at the university level.