* 1616059
* Conduits and Control of KatG Intramolecular Electron Transfer: Formation and Operation of a Novel Cofactor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Douglas Goodwin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2021
* USD 569,460.00

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates an enzyme (KatG) at the center of the chemical warfare that
rages between pathogenic microorganisms and their plant/animal hosts. Hosts
produce hydrogen peroxide as part of an elaborate microbial killing system, and
many pathogens produce this enzyme to defend themselves. KatG-producing
pathogens range from the rice-blast fungus, which annually costs billions of
dollars in crop losses, to tuberculosis, which kills millions of people each
year. Clearly, it is important to understand how KatG works. Such knowledge may
provide a foundation for future interventions that make these pathogens more
susceptible to their hosts' own defenses. This project provides research
training for graduate and undergraduate students. Most importantly, it
contributes to increasing success of at-risk students from underrepresented
groups, minimizing their attrition from STEM majors and maximizing the
likelihood they will complete their degrees. Finally, this research helps
generate new STEM learning opportunities for Alabama prisoners by contributing
material that excites interest and engages future participation of prisoners in
STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intramolecular electron transfer is central
to all aspects of KatG catalysis, including formation of its methionine-
tyrosine-tryptophan (MYW) cofactor, the use of the cofactor for catalysis, the
accumulation of inactive intermediates, and return of those intermediates to
activity by exogenous electron donors. However, the intermediates of these
processes and their mechanisms of control are poorly defined. To address these
unknowns, this project is divided into two parts. The first evaluates KatG
already containing its MYW cofactor, and the second evaluates KatG prior to
cofactor formation. The former will elucidate the intermediates necessary for
active catalysis as well as those that lead to inactivation, whereas the latter
will address the intermediates that lead to and detract from de novo MYW
cofactor synthesis. In both cases, the mechanisms by which the KatG protein
itself controls the routes of electron transfer will be addressed, as will the
ability of exogenous electron donors to restore inactive intermediates. As such,
a broad suite of paired kinetic and spectroscopic methods, from chemical-quench
peptide mapping to freeze-quench Mossbauer spectroscopy, will be applied to KatG
variants targeting the proximal tryptophan and/or the arginine switch.