* 1616195
* Consortium Study of Organic Matter in Mars Meteorites
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* George Flynn, Jacobs Technology Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 09/30/2021
* USD 493,232.00

Many spacecraft have gone to Mars; none has returned samples to the Earth. The
only samples of material from Mars that we can study here on Earth are the Mars
meteorites. Organic matter has been found in some of the Mars meteorites, but
scientists cannot agree on when, where, and how the organic matter formed. The
investigators will study a sample of six Mars meteorites to learn about the
composition and structure of the organics. This research will provide answers on
how carbon in the young Mars formed and changed with time. These answers can
then be used to address questions about how organic material formed on the young
Earth, which places in the Solar System can host life, and what processes lead
to the formation of life. This research serves the national interest by
advancing our understanding of the processes that create life in and beyond the
Solar System. The investigators will give at least two lessons on this study
every year though NASA's Johnson Space Center's Classroom Connection Webinars,
reaching 500 - 1700 students for each lesson. These lessons are also recorded.
The investigators also interact with visiting educators through tours of the
laboratory facilities.

Mars meteorites are the only samples of the Martian crust currently available
for laboratory analysis. This study will investigate the nature and origin of
organic matter present within a suite of Mars meteorites. Although the presence
of likely indigenous organic matter has been established in some Mars
meteorites, scientists do not agree on when, where or how such matter formed.
The answers to these questions are critical to understanding the Martian carbon
cycle, the abiotic organic evolution of the early Mars (and by inference the
early Earth), the identification of potentially habitable environments in the
Solar System, and the processes leading to the origins of life. A selected group
of six Mars meteorites will be studied systematically with the objectives of
determining: [1] the molecular composition and abundance of organic phases and,
where applicable, the texture and morphology of any discrete organic assemblage;
and, [2] the spatial distribution of organics in relation to the underlying
mineralogy. The investigators have pioneered these procedures and techniques in
the analysis of extraterrestrial samples, and bring their collective expertise
to the study. The investigators will give at least two lessons annually though
NASA JSC ARES' Classroom Connection Webinars, reaching 500 - 1700 students live,
with the lectures archived as recordings. The investigators also interact with
visiting educators through tours of the laboratory facilities.