* 1616947
* CSR: Small: Improving Cloud Services by Exploiting Synchronized Clocks and Software Defined Flash
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Alvin Lebeck, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2021
* USD 506,175.00

Large-scale data centers provide the computational infrastructure that underlies
the increasing use of cloud services (Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure, etc.).
Today's data centers exhibit properties of both loosely coupled distributed
systems and tightly coupled supercomputers. For example, networking
infrastructure now mimics early supercomputers with low lantency and high
bandwidth per link, high bisection bandwidth Fat-Tree topologies, and remote
memory operations (e.g., RoCE). The rapid increase in cloud computing motivates
the desire to invest in increasing capabilities, and that the trend is to move
further toward supercomputing-like capabilities. Nonetheless, the scale of
today's systems and services necessitates that many distributed systems
properties remain, such as relatively high failure rates and the need for
integrated reliable storage systems for transaction
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve cloud services
through the combined use of the IEEE Precision Time Protocol and Software
Defined Flash to develop a high performance, reliable, cost-effective,
transactional storage system. A key aspect of this project is the development of
a prototype distributed transactional system built on-top of a multi-version
key-value Flash-based storage system. The storage system exploits SSD write
behavior to efficiently maintain multiple key versions that are time ordered
based on a globally (within the data center) unique timestamp for each request
and enables clients to make a local commit or abort decision. The proposed
approach exploits both tightly synchronized clocks with &lt; 1 microsecond skew
and Software Defined Flash to eliminate or reduce overheads relative to other
systems.