* 1616437
* An ion-based pacemaker at the pollen tube tip: mechanism and functions in apical growth, guidance and cell-cell communication
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jose Feijo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2019
* USD 862,952.00

An ion-based pacemaker at the pollen tube tip: mechanism and functions in apical
growth, guidance and cell-cell communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will study the role of ion and electric signals generated within the pollen
tube, a highly specialized cell involved in the reproduction of flowering
plants. These cells are representative of apical growing cells, a group that in
addition to pollen tubes, includes fungal hyphae and developing neurons of the
mammalian nervous system. Specifically these ion signals are needed to
coordinate pollen tube growth and function required for fertilization. The
results will not only contribute to predicting and manipulating cellular
behavior leading to seed production, with potential agricultural impacts, but
also to discovering new principles by which electric signals can define cell
shape, guidance and communication extending beyond plant cells. This
investigation will entail the development and integration of different STEM
areas, including cell biology, genetics, computational methods and mathematical
modeling. A data analysis pipeline and novel algorithms developed from the
research will be made publicly available in R, an open-source statistical
programming language, allowing analysis of complex oscillations and cell growth
imaging. Educational and societal impacts include professional development of
two postdoctoral researchers, undergraduate student training, and mentoring of
local high school students. In addition, a number of outreach and educational
activities are expected outcomes of the project, where the results and original
approaches appealing to broader interests will be presented to a wide variety of
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fertilization in higher plants requires the male
gametophyte (pollen tubes) to grow into the female tissues and locate available
ovules, finally bursting to deliver the sperm cells. Pollen tubes are highly
polarized cells and in some species have the fastest cellular growth rates known
in nature. This vigorous growth is sustained by specific spatial and temporal
choreographies, often involving stable oscillations, of intracellular ion
concentrations focused at the tip, which in turn are generated by extracellular
ion fluxes. The main hypothesis to be tested in this project poses the existence
of an ion-based central pacemaker responsible for minute-range oscillations in
pollen tubes, which (1) are generated by a negative feedback loop between
channel activity and membrane potential, (2) coordinate macroscopic processes at
the cellular level (e.g. cell polarity, apical growth, guidance), (3) are
involved in cell-cell competition/cooperation between growing pollen tubes and
(4) impact cell-cell communication with the female gametophyte. The first goal
is to characterize oscillations in all parameters using custom-made
electrophysiology tools and live imaging with genetically encoded probes (Ca2+,
H+, Cl- and membrane potential). These will allow comparison between signatures
of different species/ ecotypes and single and multiple mutants of gene families
coding for channels and transporters in Arabidopsis. The features of the
oscillations will be determined with data-analysis tools developed for the
project, allowing the formulation of mathematical models. Specific predictions
will then be derived from differential equation models in varying levels of
detail, whereas experimental validation will be achieved by testing the
predictions with mutations, pharmacology and in vivo fertilization protocols,
among others.