* 1616345
* Collective Dynamics of Mechanical Systems with Applications to Bridge Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Igor Belykh, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 271,229.00

Modern pedestrian and suspension bridges and other large mechanical structures
are designed using industry-standard packages, yet disastrous resonant
vibrations are observed, necessitating multi-million dollar repairs. The main
objective of this research project is to contribute to mathematical modeling of
resonant vibrations caused by collective behavior of pedestrians or wind-induced
coherent oscillations of load-bearing elements of bridges. This synergistic
project aims to develop experimentally-validated nonlinear theory that will help
engineers to estimate (i) the dynamical impact of pedestrian loads and (ii) a
range of dangerous frequencies due to induced collective oscillations in a
bridge's suspension/supporting systems. Such frequencies, which cannot be
identified through the conventional linear calculations of natural frequencies,
can lead to faulty, collapsing designs. Results from this research may lead to
improved safety and economic benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on an area of nonlinear science entailing mathematical analysis and
modeling of mechanical networks, including bidirectional interactions between
walking pedestrians and lively bridges and wind-induced oscillations of load-
bearing elements of bridges. The first part of this project seeks to develop
bio-mechanically inspired models of pedestrians' responses to bridge motion and
detailed, yet analytically tractable, models of crowd dynamics and phase-
locking. This project also seeks to verify a hypothesis that the balance control
of pedestrians based on the lateral position of foot placement can initiate
bridge wobbling, without crowd synchronization. The second part of this project
aims at better understanding the cause of dangerous vibrations and bridges
collapsing as a result of wind-induced oscillations at a frequency different
from the natural frequencies of a bridge. The interdisciplinary research
utilizes methods from applied mathematics and engineering, including stability
and bifurcation theory, piecewise smooth and stochastic dynamical systems, graph
theory, classical mechanics, and bio-mechanics.