* 1616674
* Control of Na+ and H+  transport in bacterial adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Blanca Barquera, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand the mechanism by which
bacteria survive and proliferate in many different environments. Transport
proteins in the membrane of bacteria are largely responsible for these
adaptations. The aim of this project is to understand how these proteins allow
bacteria to adjust their metabolism to different environmental conditions. This
knowledge will contribute to the field of bacterial ecology. This knowledge will
also contribute to many areas of biotechnology. For example, engineering
bacteria that are capable of specific adaptive responses is important for waste
remediation, metabolic engineering, and bacterial production of natural and
artificial products. This project will expose high school students and
undergraduate students to research. Efforts to broaden participation in the
sciences are a major component of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the project is to
understand bacterial adaptation at the molecular level. The goal is to
understand the mechanism by which Pseudomonas aeruginosa adapts to different
environments through the operation of its proton and sodium transporters, and
through changes in expression patterns of the various branches of its
respiratory chain and its sodium/proton antiporters. There are two goals in the
project: 1) defining which of these enzymes are expressed as Pseudomonas
aeruginosa adapts to a range of culture conditions and growth phases; 2)
defining the roles of the component enzymes by constructing strains in which one
or more of these enzymes have been deleted. Sodium/proton antiporter deletion
strains will be used as backgrounds for studying the role of the NADH
dehydrogenases and their deletions, by disconnecting the sodium and proton
gradients. The role of the three NADH dehydrogenases and the antiporters, and
how changes in their expression support adaptation, will be defined. The project
will contribute to the basic understanding of how bacteria adapt to different
environments. This knowledge is essential for almost any application involving
bacteria including biological waste remediation and the use of bacteria to
synthesize natural and artificial products. It will also contribute to
development of new ways to fight bacterial diseases including those caused by
antibiotic resistant strains.