* 1616974
* Large Scale Structure Studies on a Value Added Galaxy Catalog
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Istvan Szapudi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 10/31/2022
* USD 660,209.00

New statistical and machine learning techniques will create a better catalog of
galaxies. This catalog will combine information from several existing surveys. A
technique called "photometric redshifts" will give speed and distance
information from study of the galaxy colors. The result will be the widest area
and deepest catalog yet available. It will be ideal for comparing to other large
area surveys, especially of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). Those studies
will shed light on cosmology and dark energy. They may even show whether a more
exotic theory of gravity is needed. Education is included through special topic
courses. There are connections to national laboratories. The methods will be
introduced to students from other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will create a combined value-added galaxy catalog to be called PS1*, for
statistical studies of large-scale structure (LSS). Building on experience
developing a star-galaxy separation algorithm for the first PanSTARRS catalog
(PS1) using Support Vector Machines (SVM) and training sets from Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (SDSS) data, the work will proceed by matching Wide-field Infrared
Survey Explorer (WISE) data, PS1, and where available, SDSS and Two Micron All
Sky Survey (2MASS) objects. The SVM algorithm will extend over the output
catalog. The resulting galaxy maps will be several times larger than SDSS, with
less stellar contamination than PS1 alone, and will be deeper than WISE or
2MASS. Previously demonstrated machine learning tools will then be used to
estimate photometric redshifts for the combined sample. The new PS1* will be the
widest area, deepest photometric redshift catalog, and will be optimal for cross
correlation studies with other wide data sets, such as the CMB, X-ray surveys,
the cosmic infrared background, and maps of gravitational
lensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific questions that will be studied include
whether CMB anomalies are caused by LSS, whether superstructures that will be
found in PS1* have any effect on the CMB, how the map of the Integrated Sachs-
Wolfe (ISW) effect to be created from PS1* relates to the CMB map from the
Planck satellite, and how well LSS statistics and cosmological parameters can be
extracted. The project will explore novel machine learning techniques for both
star-galaxy separation and photometric redshifts and apply state of the art
statistical techniques, shedding light on cosmological parameters and dark
energy. It will investigate any connection between LSS and CMB anomalies, and
whether this is consistent with ISW or requires a more exotic theory. The
catalog will be publicly available for a variety of cross-correlation studies,
and the algorithms and open source software developed will be disseminated
widely. This study promotes the integration of research into teaching through
courses, internships, and including cross-disciplinary students.