* 1616216
* Collaborative Research: Productivity Prediction of Microbial Cell Factories using Machine Learning and Knowledge Engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Forrest Sheng Bao, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 09/30/2018
* USD 232,523.00

Over the past decade, systems and synthetic biology approaches provided novel
mechanism to enhance the production of diverse chemicals and biofuels from
renewable resources in laboratory settings. However, it is still rare for
synthetically modified strains to meet the production requirement for
commercialization. Strain development falls into the tedious and costly design-
build-test-learn cycle because existing modeling approaches failed to capture
the complicated metabolic responses in such engineered cells. This proposal will
explore an alternate, data-driven approach that has the potential to predict the
productivity of synthetic organisms by leveraging the vast array of microbial
cell factory publications. Using Artificial Intelligence approaches such as
Machine Learning and Knowledge Representation, one can abstract "previous
lessons'' hidden in published data to facilitate a priori estimations of the
metabolic output by engineered hosts given a set of specific genetic
instructions and fermentation growth conditions. The resulting platform can
assist current constraint-based models to design the most effective strategies
for producing value-added chemicals. On the educational front, this proposal
will offer educational and research training opportunities in synthetic biology,
computer programming, and artificial intelligence for graduate students to
provide them with a non-conventional career pathway.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology relies on extensive genetic modification
and pathway engineering, which often result in unexpected physiological changes
or metabolic shifts that reduce the productivity and stability of the hosts. The
investigators conceived of a creative, multidisciplinary approach that relies on
artificial intelligence-inspired methods for predicting the performance of two
distinct unicellular cell factories (Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae). These platforms can be used to quantify the factors that govern
microbial productivity (yield, titer, and growth rate), including the type and
availability of metabolic precursors; the elements that constitute a
biosynthetic pathway; fermentation conditions; and the specific genetic
modification to optimize the system. By extracting and classifying information
derived from referenced publications within the last 20 years, one can construct
a ''knowledge base'' containing sufficient samples of bio-production assemblies.
This information will then inform the building of cellular factories using
supervised machine learning and non-monotonic logic programming to estimate the
productivity of hosts. The data-driven platform will also be integrated into
genome scale models to project physiological changes of specific mutant strains.
This novel approach will reduce the need for costly design-build-test bench
work. Key outcomes from this project include: (1) a database to standardize
synthetic biology studies, (2) machine learning models to recognize lessons and
patterns hidden in published data, and (3) integration of machine learning with
flux balance models, leading to the design of strains with high chances of
success in industry settings.