* 1616157
* Gamma-Ray Bursts and Magnetars:  Astrophysical Connections and Probes of Fundamental Physics
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Rosalba Perna, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2021
* USD 405,000.00

This is a theoretical study about neutron stars, which are formed from the death
of very massive stars that collapse and produce supernovae. Some neutron stars
have very strong magnetic fields and are called "magnetars." Their extreme
density makes them a great laboratory for studying fundamental physics,
including the effects of Einstein's theory of general relativity. Magnetars may
also have a connection to Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs), which are extremely energetic
explosions in the universe. The PI will simulate merging neutron stars to see if
she can create black holes and GRBs. She will also explore the neutron star
equation-of-state (EOS), which is a mathematical relationship between
temperature, pressure, and energy. The PI will train and mentor a postdoctoral
scholar and several undergraduate students, including women. The team will also
carry out an outreach program with grade school children in the New York City
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science goals will be carried out through a
theoretical and computational investigation of GRBs. They will computationally
investigate the regime of hyper-accretion on magnetars that might form after
core-collapse of the stellar progenitor and explain the presence of precursors
on emission in GRBs. They will carry out fully general relativistic simulations
of the merger of binary neutron stars as a possible cause of short duration
GRBs. They will explore the role of the EOS in the formation of the accretion
torus and jet needed to produce the GRBs, and whether there exists EOS that can
lead to black hole formation after binary merger.