* 1616677
* RUI: Functional characterization of gold responsive genes and development of plant based system for efficient synthesis of gold nano-particles
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Shivendra Sahi, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 10/31/2018
* USD 497,882.00

Nanotechnology is a fast emerging area that is attracting immense research
interest. Gold nanoparticles, which are the focus of this project, have
properties that are very different than bulk metal and have applications in a
variety of areas, including medicine, heavy industry, and information and
communication technologies. The aim of this project is to understand the
mechanism of gold uptake and gold nanoparticle production in plants. Once the
molecular mechanism of gold nanoparticle biosynthesis is deciphered, a plant-
based system can be easily manipulated for efficient production of these
nanoparticles for downstream applications. In contrast to conventional methods,
which generate tons of hazardous materials, this eco-friendly method of gold
nanoparticle production will generate minimal wastes, and thus have a minimal
impact on the environment. Many undergraduate student researchers will be active
participants on this project and will gain hands-on experience of this cutting-
edge nano-biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to gain a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of gold uptake
and assimilation in plants by identifying the genes involved in gold
nanoparticle biosynthesis. A combination of molecular, biochemical and
physiological approaches will be used for this project. The long-term goal of
this project is to develop transgenic approaches to further enhance the
biosynthesis of gold nanoparticle of different shapes and sizes for potential
downstream applications. This project will also extend an international research
collaboration with scientists from the Indian Agricultural Research Institute
(IARI) in New Delhi, India. This research project will: (i) train and mentor at
least 15 undergraduate students for independent research and critical thinking
skills, and (ii) provide opportunities for oral and written communication of
research findings through presentations, and peer-reviewed publications. Through
close mentoring and careful monitoring of progress, we will motivate and prepare
students to pursue graduate degrees and to build careers in STEM discipline.
Students will also have opportunity to visit IARI laboratories, where they will
have an opportunity to perform research, interact and collaborate with foreign
students, post-docs and scientists. Finally, it is anticipated that the study
will take the field of nanogold technology a step closer to commercial realism.