* 1616299
* Mathematical Models to Study the Effects of Drugs of Abuse on HIV Infection and Neurocognitive Disorder
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Naveen Vaidya, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 115,943.00

This project develops and uses mathematical models and computational methods to
study human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection dynamics under conditioning
of drugs of abuse. Drug-addicted HIV patients often suffer from enhanced HIV-
associated pathogenic consequences, such as reduced host defenses against
infection and development of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND).
Despite being a critical problem for both science and society, the HIV infection
dynamics in the context of drug abuse currently remains one of the least
understood areas of HIV biology. In the absence of such knowledge, the ability
to devise effective strategies to properly manage the virus infection under
drug-abuse conditioning remains one of the biggest challenging efforts. In this
project, mathematical and computational models are developed to study HIV
dynamics in the circulation and in the brain under drug-abuse conditioning, such
as the presence of morphine within the host. Further complex models are
developed to study the effects of pharmacodynamic properties of morphine on HIV
infection in the circulation and in the brain. The developed models are also
used for formulating optimal control problems in order to identify ideal
antiretroviral treatment as pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV-infected drug
abusers. In addition to improving our current knowledge of HIV dynamics,
pathogenesis and development of HAND under conditioning of drugs of abuse, this
research endures a significant positive and practical impact on developing
therapies and vaccines to control the burden of HIV among drug abusers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project produces autonomous models of the HIV
dynamics under conditioning of drugs of abuse in the circulation and in the
brain, as well as nonautonomous models incorporating the effects of
pharmacodynamic properties of drugs of abuse on HIV infection dynamics. The
models are parameterized using experimental data from simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV) infections of morphine-addicted macaques (animal model of HIV). The
developed models are extensively analyzed using the tools of mathematical
modeling, dynamical systems theory, bifurcation theory, asymptotic analysis,
theory of periodic systems, stability and persistence theory, as well as
statistical and numerical methods. Mathematical challenges anticipated in this
research offer opportunities to develop new mathematical theories that advance
the field of applied differential equations and optimal control theory. Results,
including optimal antiretroviral therapy treatment protocols, help healthcare
professionals to mitigate burdens from HIV infection and HAND in drug abusers,
thereby, providing the quality of life to drug-addicted HIV infected patients
and their families. In addition, this project provides extensive
interdisciplinary collaborative research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from mathematics and biology departments, as
well as the School of Pharmacy at University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC). The
research opportunities will be especially extended to a variety of undergraduate
research programs that place priority on involving underrepresented students,
particularly, undergraduate rural students from Missouri and Kansas. The
research will be incorporated into an interdisciplinary mathematical biology
course, cross-listed between graduate and undergraduate levels.