* 1616273
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Fine-Grained Cloud Monitoring for Empowering IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Muhammad Shahzad, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 257,996.00

We are in the age of unprecedented connectivity, where everything from
computers, buildings, vehicles, medical devices, to even animals is being
equipped to interact with each other by exchanging data over the Internet. This
massively connected world, referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT), will
play a crucial role in enabling never-before-seen computing services such as
self-driving cars and personalized health care, consequently improving the
quality of life. A key enabler for IoT is the cloud computing model that is
already transforming computing in academia, enterprise, and the IT industry by
enabling easy and on-demand access to computing resources and services at
reasonable cost. Most current and future IoT applications cannot function
without the infrastructure provided by cloud computing serving as the brain for
controlling and processing the data from the IoT network. Thus, there is an
urgent need for ensuring that the data centers that support the cloud services
can sustain the ever-growing IoT needs, while maintaining high quality of
services and meeting service level agreements. To this end, this project aims to
undertake the fundamental task of collecting and detailed fine-grained
monitoring of the health and usage statistics of rapidly growing data centers,
and addresses the challenges therein.

Fine-grained data center monitoring entails that the cloud providers have to
acquire, transport, store, and process exponentially increasing amount of
management and monitoring data. With the amount of such data increasing at an
unexampled rate of over 10 billion+ records per day, conventional acquisition
and transportation schemes are no longer sufficient and efficient to handle the
data tsunami. This project aims to address the problem of efficiently acquiring
and transporting cloud management and monitoring data. For data it will focus on
efficiently moving the data from the points it is collected inside the data
center to the points where it needs to be stored for processing. Successful
completion will result in tools that cloud providers can use to monitor their
data centers and obtain measurements useful to predict and/or localize
performance bottlenecks. Finally, the educational and outreach goals of this
project include training the next-generation computer scientists with skills to
manage and design innovative IoT applications and systems.