* 1616635
* Radio Survey for Ammonia in the Mid-Plane of the Milky Way Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* James Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2021
* USD 392,764.00

Stars form in dark dusty clouds. These stellar nurseries are literally shrouded
in mystery. Dark, cold star-forming clouds pervade our Milky Way Galaxy. The
investigators seek to understand how these clouds transform into clumps of
stars. Some clouds collapse into clusters of hundreds of stars. The
investigators will map a large swath of the Milky Way Galaxy, which contains
thousands of these giant clouds. This map will reveal the location of these
clouds, and establish their distance, structure, temperature, and internal
motions. All of these measurements will be compared with theories to learn which
of our ideas about star formation should be supported. By comparing younger
clouds with older clouds, the investigators will learn how the clouds change as
they form stars. Since our sun formed in this way, this study will shed light on
the origin of the sun and the earth. The PI and a graduate student also will
volunteer two weeks each summer to participate in the K-12 educational outreach
programs (one day workshops and extended overnight "science camps") for students
and teachers in West Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use
the Green Bank Telescope, a large radio telescope in West Virginia. They will
measure radio emission with a wavelength near 1.3 centimeters (about half an
inch) from ammonia molecules within the dense star-forming clouds. Ammonia
emission is an excellent tracer of cold, dense gas. Unlike other molecular
tracers, ammonia emission can be used to simultaneously measure distance,
structure, temperature, and gas motions. They will capitalize on a novel radio
"camera?, which makes the Green Bank Telescope the best telescope in the world
for ammonia mapping over large swaths of sky. The investigators will detect
thousands of star forming clouds. With such a large number of clouds, the
investigators will how star clusters change over time, and which theories about
star-formation are best. The images will be available to the astronomical
community and to the public via a dedicated web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
noted above, the PI and a graduate student will volunteer two weeks each summer
to participate in the K-12 educational outreach programs for students and
teachers. Having a high-tech, state of the art telescope in West Virginia
provides an important opportunity to promote STEM education where it is most
sorely needed. By showing the results of the research done in West Virginia they
hope to inspire students and teachers about the importance of STEM education.