* 1616311
* Functional and bioinformatic analysis of unconventional DNA replication programs in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Geoffrey Kapler, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

Research on the model eukaryote, Tetrahymena thermophila, a single-cell ciliate,
has provided a wealth of information on the functional organization of
chromosomes and the requirements for their proper transmission. Chromosomes must
be duplicated once and only once per cell division, otherwise the progeny may
not survive. Yet, many thousands of sites on a chromosome may be chosen to start
DNA replication, and we do not know much about how replication initiation sites
are chosen and regulated. New DNA sequencing technologies will be exploited in
this project to determine where replication initiates in the ~200 chromosomes in
the Tetrahymena macronucleus. This project will provide extensive training in
bioinformatics to undergraduate and graduate researchers, as well as offer
opportunities for high school students to get a taste for research, through
computer-based and wet bench lab experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central
dogma in the eukaryotic DNA replication field is that replication initiation
sites are dictated by the recruitment of the Origin Recognition Complex to
specific sites in chromosomes (origins of replication). Previous studies in
Tetrahymena demonstrated that ORC is rapidly depleted following exposure to the
genotoxic agent, hydroxyurea. Known origins are bypassed and novel backup
pathways replicate the entire genome prior to ORC replenishment. This project
will determine where and how DNA replication initiates by mapping replication
initiation sites on a genome-wide scale under normal and ORC-depleted
conditions. High throughput sequencing of nascent strand DNA libraries will be
used to identify segments of the genome that encompass constitutive and
differentially regulated replication origins. Reverse genetic approaches will be
used to validate origin activity using plasmid-based assays. Mutational studies
will determine which DNA sequences are important and whether they require ORC or
initiate DNA replication through an ORC-independent mechanism. These studies may
reveal conserved pathways that are shared between protists and higher
eukaryotes, such as plants, mice and humans.