* 1616529
* Impact of Collective Motions on Protein Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Andrea Markelz, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 615,646.00

Title: Impact of Collective Motions on Protein Function&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are
molecular machines responsible for nearly all of life's processes. Proteins
often must change their shape in order to do their work. How certain proteins
can change shape so efficiently, and why others cannot, is not known. A possible
answer lies in vibrations of these molecules. This project provides necessary
data to improve calculations to predict protein shape changes. The work uses a
unique experimental setup to measure protein vibrations, as well as a
collaborative approach to improve the predictive power of calculations based on
the experimental measurements. The research will train graduate students and
undergraduates in interdisciplinary research (optical physics, molecular
biology, materials science and computational chemistry). In addition, a large
number of undergraduates and high school students will participate in
experiential learning, with hands-on measurements and calculations on proteins
that respond to light such as light harvesting proteins involved in
photosynthesis. To increase international and cultural awareness, students,
supported by a collaborator in Mexico, will participate in the research and
produce instructional media in Spanish.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will investigate the role of intramolecular motions in protein function by
applying a unique tool developed to directly measure protein intramolecular
vibrational motions: anisotropy terahertz microscopy (ATM). The work will focus
on several bench marking proteins which have been extensively studied by other
techniques to characterize structure and dynamics. Combined with molecular
modeling, ATM measurements of photoactive yellow protein (PYP), chicken egg
white lysozyme (CEWL) and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and their mutants will
identify long range structural motions that impact function. The measurements on
PYP will examine if vibrations within the protein backbone enhance chromophore
isomerization for photoactive proteins, such as light sensing protein in the
eye, rhodopsin. The proposed measurements will determine if collective
vibrations overlap the oscillations of the PYP chromophore, and if photocycling
is impacted by detuning the frequencies. The measurements will also examine if
remote mutations of CEWL and DHFR affect catalytic rates by perturbing the
intramolecular dynamics. The PI and co-PI will refine approaches for calculating
the isotropic and anisotropic terahertz absorbance of protein solutions and
crystals, and develop methods for analysis of the motions corresponding to the
observed resonances.