* 1616926
* Modeling Transport in Complex Intracellular Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Ajay Gopinathan, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2021
* USD 259,998.00

A unique trait shared by almost all living entities, apart from the capacity to
reproduce, is the ability to transport material in a directed, regulated and
timely fashion. Cells actively transport cargo in membrane enclosed sacs between
different regions of the cell and to the cellular periphery and back. This is
accomplished in large part by teams of molecular motors that can attach to the
cargo and use chemical energy to power mechanical motion along a road network
that is an assembly of protein filaments called the cytoskeleton. Remarkably,
while intracellular transport is typically robust, it occurs in an extremely
hostile environment where cargo undergo constant collisions from surrounding
molecules and the cytoskeletal networks continually change in time. This project
will produce a comprehensive mathematical model of intracellular transport that
integrates features at the level of single molecular motors, teams of motors and
also at the level of the cytoskeleton which spans the cell. This model will
provide understanding of how cells maintain robust transport in highly noisy
environments and will also help ascertain how the parameters governing transport
can be tuned for minimizing variability and promoting efficient transport. Since
intracellular transport is essential for cellular function and its breakdown can
lead to multiple neurodegenerative and cardiac diseases, results from this
project can potentially inform the optimal design of drug and gene delivery
systems as well as therapeutic interventions to repair transport. This project
will also produce new teaching and training materials and aid in their
dissemination to the local community colleges in the historically underserved
and economically disadvantaged California Central Valley region. This project is
also aimed at providing training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, including women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the cellular scale, motion is governed by
molecular-level events and is inherently stochastic. In addition, the
environment in which the transport takes place is typically structurally complex
as well as dynamic, either due to thermal noise or via regulation by the cell
itself. Intracellular transport of cargo between different cell organelles and
to the surface and back, occurs by a combination of diffusion and active motor-
driven transport along the cytoskeleton which is a hierarchically assembled,
oriented, interconnected network of multiple filament types that are inherently
dynamic. While there has been considerable work addressing the mechanistic
details of molecular motors, much less is known about actual transport
properties in naturally occurring complex and dynamic settings. Current
approaches to transport at a large scale usually sweep molecular details into
effective parameters though it is becoming clear that collective transport can
sensitively depend on these details. Furthermore, in virtually all cases, the
explicit structure and dynamics of the cytoskeletal network is ignored. This
project takes a multi-scale approach that incorporates the various microscopic
processes at the level of a single motor, the mesoscopic properties of
collections of motors and the macroscopic features of the cytoskeletal network
which all conspire to give rise to robust transport. This work will provide
fundamental insight into the role of microscopic stochastic motion and
environmental dynamics on experimental observations of in vivo transport. The
project results will also help with ascertaining what regions of
parameter/design space are best for minimizing variability and promoting
efficient transport. This project's results are therefore likely to have a
significant impact on the optimal design and control of transport processes for
general application in therapeutics and biotechnology.