* 1616779
* The role of regulated degradation in controlling cytoplasmic mRNA levels
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Leslie Sieburth, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 880,000.00

This project will provide novel insights into how messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules
are degraded. In cells, mRNA levels reflect a balance between synthesis and
degradation. Whereas, many studies have focused on mRNA synthesis, not many yet
have centered on degradation. This research seeks to fill this gap as a way to
obtain a more complete picture of how gene expression levels are controlled. The
experimental approaches will include analysis of large genomics data sets using
statistical and mathematical modeling methods carried out in collaboration
between biologists and mathematicians. Therefore the project will offer
opportunities for both biology and math students to receive training in areas
that are important for the workforce of tomorrow. The project will include
individuals at many career stages, including postdoctoral scholars, graduate
students, undergraduates, and a small team of high school students. The high
school students will work to develop apps that will allow the project data to be
easily accessed by scientists, thus enhancing learning of high school students
and making the obtained data easily accessible to the broader scientific
community. Laboratory personnel will also contribute to the REFUGES program at
the University of Utah, which provides training to middle school students from
the diverse refugee communities that live in Salt Lake City, Utah.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses mechanisms, specificity, and
regulatory roles of cytoplasmic mRNA degradation (also known as decay). Using
the plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model eukaryote, preliminary genome-wide
studies revealed two intriguing findings that form the foundation of this
project. First, a study of mRNA decay rates, showed that mRNAs have half-lives
ranging from less than four minutes to more than 24 hours. The mRNAs with the
shortest half-lives tend to encode regulatory proteins, like transcription
factors, and proteins that function in signaling, like protein kinases.
Moreover, the half-lives of these mRNAs are longer than normal in mutants that
lack functional components of the RNA decay machinery. These results led to the
hypothesis that mRNAs with high turnover rates might be regulated by a selective
stabilization mechanism, perhaps modulated by phosphorylation of proteins
involved in the decay machinery. Experiments will address this hypothesis by
analyzing decay rates under different environmental conditions that induce rapid
changes in phosphorylation, and testing whether phosphorylation of proteins
known to participate in mRNA decay affects decay rates or association with other
decay-associated protein subunits. The second preliminary observation to be
pursued in this project is that the presence of specific codons in mRNAs affects
the mRNA decay rates. This suggested that mRNA decay might occur in association
with the process of protein synthesis, or translation. This idea will be tested
by analyzing the effect of altered tRNA levels and by testing decay rates of
mRNAs with altered codon use. In addition, a direct search for mutants impaired
in this process will be conducted to identify components of this translation-
coupled decay pathway. Together, the results of the research are expected to
reveal novel insights into the process of mRNA decay and thereby provide a more
comprehensive view of the factors that help balance mRNA levels in the cellular
cytoplasm.