* 1616851
* Synthesis of Glycogen in Bacteria and Starch in Plants: Evolution and Mechanism of Allosteric Control
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Miguel Ballicora, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 639,998.00

ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase is central to starch synthesis in plants and
glycogen synthesis in bacteria and other organisms, serving as carbon storage
polymers. It is a common biotechnology target and an informed understanding of
its regulation has implications for starch/glycogen synthesis in a host of
organisms. Allosteric control of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity is an
important but poorly understood regulatory mechanism. Presently it is unclear
how the enzyme is allosterically activated and how that activation signal is
transmitted structurally within the enzyme. The goal of this project is to
perform computational, structural and biochemical studies to understand and
characterize the allosteric signals and the interaction of the allosteric
effectors on ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity in bacteria as a model for
plants. The PIs predict the presence of a common structural element that works
as a switch but also the presence of an alternative allosteric signal binding
site. This project will also contribute to education by training undergraduate
and graduate students, establish international collaborations, and foster
participation of underrepresented minorities in research by supporting programs
such as McNair-SROP. This project will also support an international course on
protein science that includes elements of the research, providing a unique
training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant starch and bacterial glycogen biosynthetic pathways
provide models for the structure and evolution of allosteric regulatory
functions of the enzyme ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Despite the importance of
these pathways, the allosteric mechanism that controls the activity of this
enzyme is largely unknown. The project comprises computational, structural, and
biochemical studies to understand and characterize the transmission of the
allosteric signal and the interaction of the allosteric effectors in the ADP-
glucose pyrophosphorylase family. It is predicted there is both a common
structural element that works as a switch and an alternative allosteric signal
guided by a secondary site. Three main research objectives will be pursued: 1)
screen several enzyme forms from diverse branches of the phylogenetic tree for
the presence of a dual allosteric mechanism; 2) obtain crystal structures of
allosteric mutants ("switched off") in several different conditions with
different ligands to test the hypothesis that certain residues form a conserved
allosteric switch in ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylases; and 3) perform
computational studies (molecular dynamics, correlated movement analysis, and
network pathway analysis) to predict the signaling pathways of activation from
each putative allosteric site.