* 1616818
* START Lipid/Sterol Binding Domains in Homeodomain Transcription Factors from Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* Kathrin Schrick, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2024
* USD 385,150.00

In all multicellular organisms, key regulatory proteins orchestrate the
developmental program that defines how specific cell types and tissues are
formed. This project will investigate how the regulatory proteins themselves are
controlled by interactions with fat molecules. Plants produce a multitude of
different fat molecules and other natural products whose molecular functions are
not yet understood. The regulatory proteins and fats to be studied in this
project are suspected to participate in plant growth control, along with traits
that contribute to drought tolerance. Broader impacts of this research will
include training of a postdoctoral scholar and several undergraduate students
through programs for McNair Scholars, Kansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation, and the REU program on Ecology and Evolution in Changing
Environments. Public outreach will be accomplished through an educational
workshop for teenage girls with interests in STEM careers. The information
gained from this research will foster discovery of renewable and sustainable
plant-derived products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between lipid
metabolites and proteins are dynamic in all life forms, yet the full extent and
biological significance of these interactions is underexplored. Steroidogenic
Acute Regulatory (StAR) protein-related lipid Transfer (START) domains belong to
an ancient clan of protein motifs characterized by binding to hydrophobic
ligands. In plants, START domains occur in homeodomain leucine-zipper (HD-Zip)
transcription factors that are master regulators of cell-type differentiation
during development. This project addresses the hypothesis that the START domain
controls transcription factor activity via ligand binding to a lipid metabolite,
linking cell metabolism to gene expression. The overall goal is to identify the
natural ligands of HD-Zip-derived START domains. This research will utilize the
Arabidopsis model system focusing on class IV HD-Zip transcription factors that
are critical for differentiation of the epidermis. Candidate ligands will be
identified by protein-metabolite immunoisolation from plant tissues followed by
mass spectrometry. Biochemical approaches will be utilized to validate and
further characterize protein-metabolite interactions. This project is poised to
uncover novel mechanistic insights in understanding the dynamic interplay
between metabolic pathways and the regulation of gene expression in the
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.