* 1616337
* Elucidate Chromatin Folding at the Mesoscale
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Xiangyun Qiu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 397,093.00

Cells orchestrate many essential biological processes around their genome, such
as retrieval of genetic information for protein synthesis, DNA duplication for
propagation, and DNA repair for damage remediation. However, it remains an open
question what roles the genome itself plays in such fundamental DNA-directed
processes. One critical barrier to answering this question is the lack of
quantitative knowledge of how chromatin, the material form of the genome that
consists of a complex assembly of nucleic acid and protein, is organized in
three dimensional space and how the chromatin organization changes in response
to various biological, chemical and physical factors in the cellular
environment. This project will develop and use state-of-the-art experimental
techniques combined with extensive data-driven computational modeling, with the
goal to reconstruct three dimensional structures of chromatin. Through
systematic studies of model chromatin systems in wide-ranging solution
conditions, this project further aims to elucidate the governing principles of
chromatin organization. Along with the research effort, this project will enrich
educational experiences for broadly represented student groups, particularly in
response to the current challenge of engaging and retaining students in STEM
education. Specific emphasis will be placed on incorporating underrepresented
groups in research and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to gain systematic, mechanistic understandings of
the conformation and dynamics of chromatin modulated by solution conditions,
genetic and epigenetic variations, and chromatin-architectural proteins. Folding
of chromatin from its open structure of 'beads-on-a-string' is an intricate
process that has challenged researchers for decades, in part due to the complex
set of governing physical and biochemical factors, and in part due to the lack
of experimental approaches at the pertinent length scales above the mono-
nucleosome level (i.e., one to tens of nanometers). This project addresses both
challenges by applying solution small angle x-ray and neutron scattering
(SAXS/SANS) to the biochemically defined system of recombinant nucleosome
arrays. The use of strong positioning DNA sequences yields regularly spaced and
stable arrays of nucleosomes, and SAXS/SANS measures the distribution of inter-
nucleosome mesoscale distances as the array folds. SAXS/SANS further has unique
advantages of probing array native structures directly in solution and
decomposing protein and DNA components via contrast variation. Significant
efforts will be directed towards applying and developing data-driven
computational modeling methods to reconstruct the three dimensional structures
of nucleosome arrays. To dissect the multifactorial determinants of folding,
arrays of increasing lengths (2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 nucleosomes) will be analyzed
under relevant conditions of ions, molecular crowding, linker DNAs, histone
variations, and chromatin architectural proteins. Completion of this project is
expected to elucidate detailed mesoscale structures of nucleosome arrays in
solution and the molecular mechanisms of chromatin folding, and to shed light on
the genetics/epigenetics-structure-function relationship of chromatin in vivo.
This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.