* 1616105
* Structure and mechanism of the red beta recombineering enzyme
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Charles Bell, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 674,790.00

The goal of this project is to understand the mechanism of the protein behind
powerful new methods for bacterial genome engineering. These methods show
promise for developing new strains of bacteria for use as factories for making
compounds for therapeutic and industrial purposes. The protein, called red beta,
binds to synthetic DNA and recombines it into the bacterial genome to make
desired alterations. Remarkably, the protein can modify multiple target sites in
the genome simultaneously, using libraries of DNA molecules for each site, while
selecting for a desired functional output. Thus, the protein can drive rapid
(but controlled) evolution of bacterial genomes in the laboratory. The specific
goals of the project are to map out the regions of the protein that contact and
manipulate the DNA, to understand how the protein works, and to isolate variants
of the protein that work more efficiently. The desired outcome is to develop new
proteins that can be used to improve and expand the current methods for
bacterial genome engineering. The project will also provide training for
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. A particular emphasis will be
to provide extended, in-depth training opportunities for students from a nearby
high school that implements an innovative, STEM-focused
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The beta protein of bacteriophage lambda is a
key component of the red recombination system that promotes the repair of DNA
breaks by a mechanism called single-strand annealing. Due to its efficiency and
its ability to work at relatively short regions of homology, the protein has
been exploited in powerful new methods for bacterial genome engineering known as
recombineering and MAGE (Multiplex Automated Genome Engineering). However, the
molecular mechanism by which red beta operates is poorly understood. This
project will increase our understanding of red beta by (1) using chemical
footprinting and mass spectrometry to map out specific residues of the protein
that contact the DNA in the different complexes that are relevant to reaction,
(2) performing mutational analyses to determine the importance of these residues
in DNA binding and single strand annealing in vivo, and (3) performing a genetic
screen to isolate variants of the protein with increased activity for single
strand annealing in vivo. A particular emphasis is to understand how changes in
the relative affinity of the protein for DNA in the different complexes that are
relevant to the reaction impact its functional output in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems, Directorate for Engineering.