* 1616866
* Singular solutions in gels:  Cavitation and debodning
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,980.00

This award supports the ongoing research program of the Principal Investigator
on modeling, analysis, and simulation of material failure in gels. Engineering
devices generally consist of more than one material. Their interconnections, as
well as the binding of the device to substrates, are susceptible to
environmental agents that ultimately cause them to break down, leading to device
failure. It is estimated that the cost of product recall in the medical device
industry alone ranges between $2.5 and $5 billion annually, 50% of which is
attributed to material failure. This project will investigate material fracture
in polymeric materials, with a main focus on gels. The mechanism of failure in
gels as well as the mathematical methods to address it are very different from
those in crystalline materials. Upon placement of a polymeric material in a
fluid-rich environment, such as an implanted medical device in the body, it
tends to swell by absorbing water. Different materials have different swelling
ratios, which cause stress to build up at the bonding interfaces and substrates.
Upon reaching the stress threshold of the adhesive, the device may experience
debonding. The research activities will consist of modeling, analysis, and
numerical simulation of the phenomena that causes a gel to break apart from its
substrate. There will be a strong and clear connection with laboratory
experiments and industrial applications, especially those related to the medical
device industry. Several graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding material fracture, its
initiation and evolution, remains one of the main challenges in materials
science. From the mathematical point of view, the study of debonding requires
dealing with singular solutions, in cases when standard mechanical assumptions
fail. This project will develop and apply combined tools from calculus of
variations, geometric measure theory, asymptotic analysis, and free boundary
problems for partial differential equations to provide a mathematical
description of how microdefects present in the material may evolve into cavities
that grow and cause the material to detach from a substrate. The main
mathematical difficulty in the study of cavitation is the loss of injectivity of
the deformation map that transforms a point in the reference configuration into
a cavity surface. The application of tools from measure theory, such as the
distributional determinant, allows validation of the governing equations in the
singular frameworks. The research will provide a unified framework to study
cavitation and debonding, and the evolution from the former to the latter. The
project will focus on studying singularities that form in gels, assumed to be
mixtures of polymer and fluid. Swelling of a gel sample attached to a substrate
may produce the necessary force for singularities to form. The analysis of
delamination will be based on the conjecture that there are two relevant
parameters, geometric and material, able to describe the optimal energy of the
body in terms of the length of detachment from the substrate. One goal is to
show that stress concentrations at interfaces correspond to shearing.