* 1616040
* Probing Element Abundance Changes in Galactic Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Christopher Sneden, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 79,569.00

The compositions of stars in our Milky Way Galaxy hold vital clues to its birth
and history of forming stars. Stars make elements in their interiors. At their
deaths, stars return the new elements into the gas of the Galaxy. The
investigators seek to use abundances of stars, derived from their spectra, to
understand how the buildup of elements led to the complex Periodic Table of
today. The investigators have three goals. Their first goal is improving the
quality of chemical composition analyses. They will obtain basic laboratory data
that go into the spectrum analyses. Second, they will significantly augment the
number of stars studied in important groups of stars. Through this they will
study members of various Galactic star populations. Thirdly, they will provide
service to the research and educational communities. They will make the new lab
data, and abundance analysis software freely available to all. They will also
work with a group of Texas science educators to link astronomical research with
their teaching efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will provide very
accurate measurements of iron-group element abundances in many metal-poor stars
of the halo of our Galaxy. They will derive abundances of carbon, nitrogen,
oxygen, and lithium, as well as carbon isotopic ratios in large samples of about
20 open clusters of the Galactic disk. This work will uniquely take advantage of
newly-acquired high resolution spectra covering broad regions of both optical
and infrared spectral domains. They will search for star streams in the Galaxy
by mating optical spectra with kinematics to be provided by the Gaia astrometric
satellite. They will also explore this issue with new infrared spectra of warm
red giant stars in clusters and in the general field of the Galactic disk. The
investigators will continue to release major updates of lab atomic and molecular
spectral line data, and to improve our publicly-available spectrum analysis
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will continue their long-standing
effort to improve the quality of science education in the state of Texas. They
will work with a highly-motivated group of secondary science educators. They
give talks on the latest astronomical research, and to engage teachers in
projects that can be carried back to use in their classrooms. They will also
provide opportunities for teachers to participate in telescope usage, to have
workshops at McDonald Observatory, and to attend meetings of the American
Astronomical Society.