* 1616847
* Collaborative Research: Controls on along-strike variations in locked and creeping megathrust behavior at the Hikuran convergent margin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* David Okaya, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2022
* USD 889,027.00

Collaborative Research: Controls on along-strike variations in locked and
creeping megathrust behavior at the Hikurangi convergent
margin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical processes dictating the spectrum of
fault slip modes (spanning destructive earthquakes to slow slip events and
aseismic creep) and the links between these behaviors and long-term
morphotectonic evolution of subduction systems are not understood. There is a
fundamental need to address this important problem with an integrated, system-
level approach combining geodynamical modeling with high-quality geophysical and
geological constraints on subduction margin
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct an
interdisciplinary, multinational collaborative program involving the USA, New
Zealand, Japan and the UK to evaluate system-level controls on processes that
govern both slip behavior and long-term deformation at subduction zones. The
focus is on the Hikurangi margin in New Zealand, where GPS data show a
transition in slip behavior from predominantly stick-slip in the south to
aseismic creep in the northern North Island, and where a wide range of
subduction-related processes and characteristics vary along-strike. The aim is
to rigorously investigate the feedbacks between plate interface slip behavior,
solid and fluid mass fluxes, and manifestations of plate boundary mechanics in
the long-term geological record that likely reflect common driving processes
linking forearc uplift, sediment transfer and underplating, plate boundary
strength, and seismogenesis. The Principal Investigators will address this
important problem through an integrated approach combining large-scale seismic
imaging, paleoseismology, and geomorphology, focused through the lens of state-
of-the-art numerical modelling.