* 1616807
* RUI:  Chemical Abundances of Galactic Compact Planetary Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Ting-Hui Lee, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2021
* USD 127,808.00

The investigators study the elements produced in stars in our galaxy. All stars
generate energy in their cores by fusing light elements into heavier ones. When
the core of a star runs out of light elements to fuse, its contracts under its
own weight. The collapse reheats the outer layers, turning the star into a red
giant. This phase is unstable and ends with the outer layers being thrown off
entirely. These elements are released from the stars at the end of their life
cycle. The investigators will use optical telescopes to measure the element
abundances. The elements are visible in planetary nebulae, which are beautiful
ionized gaseous shells ejected by such stars. Undergraduate students will help
with the research. The students will be introduced to the techniques of
scientific and engineering research.

From images of the elements created by the stars, the investigators learn the
types of nuclear reactions that went on in these stars. From the reactions, the
investigator learns how massive the stars were and how long they lived. Some
elements pass through the star's nuclear fires unchanged. By matching these
elements, they can trace the type of molecular clouds where the stars were born.

Using new methods combining high-precision optical and infrared spectra of
planetary nebulae with newer, more accurate distance measurements, they will
examine the history of star formation and chemical enrichment throughout our
Galaxy. Undergraduate students at Western Kentucky University will take active
roles in all aspects of this work. The students will become better prepared for
careers in scientific and technical fields. The investigator is working in a
region of the country where such jobs are most needed.