* 1616087
* NeTS: Small: Exploring the Design Space of Bandwidth Estimation Methods Using Packet Sequence Information
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Lisong Xu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 498,878.00

The goal of this project is to design and develop, for the first time, a novel
class of sequence-based bandwidth comparison and estimation methods for network
environments with faulty receiver-side timestamping. The proposed work is
fundamentally different from the current time-based bandwidth estimation
methods, because this work is based on the packet sequence information at a
receiver (i.e., the arriving order of packets) instead of the packet time
information at the receiver (e.g., the exact arrival time of each
packet).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation consists of the following three
major components.&lt;br/&gt;1) Relative Bandwidth Comparison: Design and develop
a class of sequence-based bandwidth comparison methods, which relatively compare
the bandwidth information of multiple paths instead of accurately estimating the
bandwidth information of each individual path. The proposed bandwidth comparison
methods can determine not only which path is faster but also how much faster
using only the packet sequence information.&lt;br/&gt;2) Absolute Bandwidth
Estimation: Design and develop a class of sequence-based bandwidth estimation
methods, which can accurately estimate the bandwidth information of an
individual path using only the packet sequence information.&lt;br/&gt;3) Multi-
Path Congestion Control: Design and develop bandwidth comparison based multi-
path congestion control algorithms to support emerging multi-homed
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the bandwidth comparison and
estimation methods to be developed in this project will be useful not only for
networking researchers but also for the large number of users of cloud computing
applications. To achieve an even broader impact, the investigator plans to
actively work with open source cloud monitoring projects and add the developed
tools into their applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will
continue to actively recruit undergraduate, female, and minority students into
the research projects, and to be committed to teaching and curriculum
development. Several networking related courses and the undergraduate senior
design course offered in the department will be enhanced with more recent cloud
network topics and cloud-based hand-on projects, and research results obtained
from this project will be incorporated into the courses.