* 1616928
* Studying Jupiter's magnetospheric response to Io's volcanic activity
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Sanlyn Buxner, Planetary Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2023
* USD 496,571.00

Jupiter's innermost satellite, Io, is the most volcanic body in the solar
system. Volcanic activity on Io helps to maintain a tenuous atmosphere that
consists of neutral and ionized gas. The ionized component of Io's atmosphere
interacts strongly with Jupiter's powerful magnetic field. This interaction
causes some of the gas from Io's atmosphere to be transferred to Jupiter's
magnetosphere. This research project will study how the volcanic output of Io
affects Jupiter's magnetosphere. Results from the study will shed light on the
physical processes that control mass transfer between planets and their
satellites; and on planetary magnetospheres in general. The project will also
support a teacher training workshop that broadens participation in science by
reaching elementary and middle school science teachers in low-income and
underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
study variations in Io's volcanic output to identify the mechanisms that drive
radial transport in Jupiter's magnetosphere. The research team will use a 35-cm
robotically controlled telescope equipped with a coronagraph to record images of
sulfur-ion emission in the Io plasma torus (IPT) every fifteen minutes for
several months a year for five years. They will use the same telescope to record
coronagraphic images of the Jovian sodium nebula, which is a proxy for Io's
volcanic activity. In addition, they will use the Infrared Red Telescope
Facility to periodically conduct infrared observations of the Jovian sodium
nebula, which are a more direct proxy of volcanic activity. The high quality,
high temporal resolution, and long duration of the observations would maximize
the chance of recording a response of Jupiter's magnetosphere to a large
volcanic outburst on Io. By measuring the temporal relationships between Io's
volcanic activity and the IPT, as well as the IPT's overall brightness and east-
west extent, the team will be able to distinguish between the two main
mechanisms that are thought to drive mass loading and radial transport in
Jupiter's magnetosphere. The project will also provide new content on Io's
volcanism and Jupiter's magnetism to a teacher training workshop.