* 1617290
* Conference Grant: Student Travel Awards for 2016 IEEE Radar Conference. To be   held in Philadelphia, PA from May 2 to 6, 2016.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2016,10/31/2016
* Fauzia Ahmad, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2016
* USD 7,500.00

The IEEE Radar Conference is an annual flagship conference on radar sponsored by
the IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society. The 2016 IEEE Radar
Conference will be held in Philadelphia, PA from May 2 to May 6, 2016.
Approximately 500 attendees are expected. This NSF grant will provide partial
travel support for graduate students to present their work at the conference,
network with colleagues, and gain exposure to the latest research activities in
radar signal processing and radar system development. The travel grants will be
awarded competitively to graduate students from US universities who will be
presenting papers at the conference. The conference organizing committee has
pledged to match NSF support on a one-to-one basis using funds from corporate
sponsors. This NSF grant will benefit early-career US researchers by enabling
them to gain experience in presenting their work at a top-tier conference, to
learn about the latest developments in radar research and emerging applications,
and to network with the international radar community that can lead to future
collaboration opportunities. Encouraging graduate student participation could
have a significant impact on radar research in US institutions in not only
traditional defense-related applications, but also emerging civil and commercial
applications, including automotive collision avoidance, medical diagnostics, and
non-invasive patient monitoring.