* 1617185
* CNH-L: Pastoral Territory as a Dynamic Coupled System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Joy McCorriston, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,600,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the environmental
conditions that lead to human territorial behavior in the pastoral ecosystems as
well as how territoriality shapes the environment. The project will provide new
insights into whether the dynamics of woodland-grassland-woodland cycling are
coupled with pulses in human social behavior. Through their examination of
archaeological and paleoecological data, the investigators will provide new
insights regarding the degree to which such long-term cycling-and-coupling
provides alternative perspectives about human-environmental interaction. The
project will challenge paradigm characterizations of a linear history of
progressive human degradation of pasture lands by refining and testing a new
theoretical model that explains pastoral territoriality as a dynamic coupled
system. By focusing attention on the nonlinear dynamics of change and continuity
in coupled human and natural systems, the project will provide a new conceptual
approach for examining change and continuity in prehistoric societies.
Assessment of dynamic, interlocked cycles of human territorial behavior and
rangeland ecology have broader implications for development and sustainability
of human environments as coupled systems. The project will provide education and
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
the transdisciplinary study of complex social-ecological systems, and it will
further collaborations between researchers in the U.S. and the Middle
East.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using archaeological, ecological, geochemical,
paleoclimate, and botanical methods in fieldwork, the investigators will recover
and study proxy data as the material residues from ancient environments and
human societies that have been engaged in pastoralism. The research team, which
includes researchers from the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, and Oman,
will use agent-based models to examine the interactions of human and natural
systems and to test the model of coupled dynamics with data from the field. They
will employ an integrative and reiterative research approach, tuning models with
data and generating expected patterns from models. They will address a general
hypothesis that dynamic feedbacks among pastoralist demography, mobility,
territoriality, and processes of succession in past vegetation regimes account
for the observed pattern of chronological pulses in building stone territorial
markers. Although this project will be based in the narrow plateau pasturelands
of southern Oman because that region exhibits 8,000 years of exclusively
pastoral economy and a rich archaeological and paleoecological record, project
findings will have significant implications for examining interactions between
people and pastoral environments over time in the U.S. and elsewhere. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.