* 1617087
* RI: Small: RUI: Synthesis of Robust Artificial Systems by Adaptive Genetic Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Lee Spector, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 418,897.00

Computer-based problem-solving systems are revolutionizing many areas of science
and engineering, with pervasive impacts on economic activity, human health,
national security, and the advancement of science. Several of the most powerful
and promising approaches to the development of these systems borrow ideas from
biology, for example, when artificial neural networks are used to enable
computer systems to learn. The processes of random variation and fitness-based
selection motivated by biology have been particularly useful in several
applications, but they have not yet produced the kind of radical innovations
that are characteristic of living systems. In this project, key elements of
genetic programming, such as the processes governing variation, will themselves
be allowed to adapt, with the aim of producing more powerful problem-solving
computer systems. These systems may have applications in several areas of
science and engineering. The project will be conducted in the context of
educational activities that integrate research and education across
undergraduate and graduate levels, thereby providing training to a new
generation of computational scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of the proposed project is to enhance genetic programming technologies in ways
that will allow them to more routinely produce more innovative solutions to
difficult problems, and to produce systems that perform well in complex
environments. The central hypothesis underlying this effort is that the
innovating power of biology, and the power of biology to produce robust systems,
stems in part from the fact that the adaptive mechanisms of biology themselves
adapt. Self-adaptive genetic programming systems, in which the algorithms for
variation and selection are themselves subject to variation and selection, have
been explored for decades but have only recently begun to show practical promise
for solving difficult problems. The proposed project will begin with a promising
system of this type and will test it systematically, in order to elucidate
general principles that will then be used to develop and apply more refined,
adaptive algorithms. Applications ranging from the automatic programming of
exercises in a first-semester programming textbook to the development of
multicellular organisms in a virtual ecosystem will be used to test and
demonstrate the systems developed in this project.