* 1617761
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: A Theory of Human Microstrategy Selection and Integration in Human-Computer Interaction.
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* David Kieras, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 76,815.00

Better science is needed to predict how people will interact with new computer
systems in dual-task settings, such to operate on board navigation systems while
driving. Existing psychological theory can inform the problem but does not
adequately address many issues such as that, in many dual-task circumstances,
two subtasks become so interleaved that they become an altogether new third
task. This project will investigate the cognitive strategies that people form,
sometimes subconsciously, to integrate human information processes (such eye
movements and hand movements). The project will provide scientific theory that
can be used to analyze and improve the usability of a broad range of user
interfaces that are used multitasking settings, including commonly-used handheld
devices and in-vehicle interfaces, as well as specialized interfaces in mission
control centers, nuclear power plants, and emergency
rooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will (a) develop a theory of Human
Microstrategy Selection and Integration (HMSI) that will predict how two tasks
would be interleaved, with a special emphasis on the formation of complex
cognitive strategies, (b) apply the HMSI theory as the foundation for a new
methodology that analysts can use to transform two conventional hierarchical
task analysis (HTA) diagrams, one for each of the two tasks, into an interleaved
set of microstrategies, and (c) evaluate the HMSI theory and methodology with
human experiments, including the analysis of the eye movements that people make
when interacting with an on board navigation system in a driving simulator. The
project will advance a theory of cognitive psychology and provide a scientific
approach for solving human-computer interaction problems.