* 1617729
* NeTS: Small: Diverse and Resilient Beyond Paths
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,981.00

With advances in Internet applications and their insatiable demands for
bandwidth, today's networks have grown rapidly both in scale and complexity. The
growing scale and complexity also drastically increase the probability of
failures. This is particularly the case in today's huge data centers. It is thus
imperative that networks be designed with high capacity and with built-in
resiliency. Routing is central to networking, as it determines whether and where
packets are to be forwarded. It is therefore essential in ensuring network
resiliency. Conventional routing protocols in IP/MPLS (Internet
Protocol/Multiple Protocol Label Switching) networks that underpin much of
today's networking infrastructure are primarily path-based and reactive. Various
IP/MPLS (proactive) fast rerouting mechanisms have also been proposed; but most
of them can only handle a single link failure. The combinatorial nature of
multiple link failures renders most existing path-based fast rerouting
approaches ineffectual; and their complexity grows rapidly, as the number of
link/node failures increases. In order to achieve high network capacity,
availability and reliability, new paradigm-shifting approaches are needed for
the development of future diverse and resilient routing systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Going beyond paths, this project advocates a novel routing paradigm
-- dubbed routing via preorders -- which circumvents the limitations of
conventional path-based routing schemes to effectively take advantage of
topological diversity inherent in a network with rich topology for diverse and
resilient routing, while at the same time meeting the quality-of-service
requirements (e.g., bandwidth and latency) of applications or flows. Unlike
conventional path-based routing, under the proposed routing via preorders
paradigm no paths are explicitly specified for routing or forwarding; instead
any sequence of connected nodes contained in the routing preorder can be used,
thereby circumventing the rigidity and fragility limitations of paths while also
avoiding the "combinatorial curse" challenge posed by path enumeration. Hence by
design, routing via preorders has built-in resiliency and load-balancing
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: If successful, the
paradigm-shifting new routing framework advanced in this research project will
provide the high diversity and resiliency demanded by the Internet services and
critical physical infrastructures. All of these will bring significant benefits
to users, service providers and society at large. The PI will actively involve
undergraduate students -- especially female students and underrepresented
minorities in the research project, e.g., via NSF REU grants as well as senior
design courses and the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP) at the
PI's institution. The PI will release the implementation of routing via
preorders using the software-defined networking (SDN) platform in public domains
for wide distribution and adoption, and engage in other outreach activities.