* 1617253
* CHS: Small: Game for Cleft Speech Therapy
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Su-hua Wang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 548,000.00

Orofacial clefts (i.e., cleft lip, cleft lip and palate, and isolated cleft
palate, as well as the rare median, lateral [transversal], and oblique facial
clefts) are among the most common congenital anomalies. Approximately 20 infants
are born in the United States with orofacial clefts on an average day, or 7500
every year. With a cleft palate, one is unable to stop airflow through the nose
using normal mechanisms; cleft palate speech therefore contains sounds with air
leaking out of the nose, referred to as "nasal escape." In the world of trial-
and-error that governs speech learning, the child uses the only tool s/he has
available to keep air from escaping out of the nose; s/he holds it back at the
level of the glottis or larynx. This mechanism is used by the normal voice to
make a hard 'g' as in 'go.' The child uses this "glottal stop" as a substitute
for a variety of sounds that s/he cannot create normally. Cleft palate speech
thus becomes a collection of sounds characterized by glottal stops and
inappropriate nasal escape; these anomalous articulation patterns are usually
referred to as compensatory articulation disorder (CAD), and they severely
affect speech intelligibility. For this reason, corrective surgery is commonly
performed around 10-12 months of age, with the goal of providing a more normal
anatomical framework by the time the child begins practicing speech. The
repaired palate continues, however, to be variably impaired by the less-than-
normal muscle bulk typical of cleft palates and by the stiffness of normal post-
surgical scar tissue. Over perhaps one year following surgical repair, palatal
function spontaneously improves to the point where in the majority of children
it is adequate to selectively prevent nasal escape. Speech therapy after surgery
to correct CAD begins at the age of two years and often continues for many
years. Correcting cleft speech is important for the child's future ability to
live independently and to participate fully in society. Despite the documented
benefits, it is a challenge for speech pathologists to train children in proper
speech production at an early age when the likelihood of success is highest,
because young children are typically less cooperative, sometimes do not fully
comprehend what they are being asked to do, and are often unwilling to do
unrewarding speech homework, typically under the guidance of inexperienced
parents who are unable to assess subtle progress (or lack thereof). The PI's
goal in this research is to understand the best strategy for helping children
with corrected cleft palate produce normalized speech, and to facilitate this
process through games that children can use at home with minimal help from
parents while allowing data relating to the child's progress to be delivered to
speech pathologists in real time. Project outcomes will especially benefit
children from underserved populations. A cleft speech corpus will benefit
researchers working on speech recognition algorithms for cleft speech detection,
and new speech engine algorithms will benefit speech therapy at large. The work
will also spur development of a new research focus at UCSC and UCD in human-
centered games for health and healthy living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
scientific contribution of this project will be a deeper understanding of the
determining characteristics of children with cleft palate and how these relate
to the phonetic and phonological rule causes of cleft speech. The technological
contributions will be the games and speech engines that are procedurally
generated to support in-home and independently administered speech therapy for
children with corrected cleft palate, and an algorithm that enables longitudinal
voice data curation and analysis to be carried out in real time over the
intervention history for every participant as well as across participants.
Methodological contribution will include a measure of error rates when a speech
recognition system is designed to pick up cleft-specific mispronunciations, and
a method for conducting participatory design of games for speech therapy
involving computer scientists, engineers, developmental psychologists, speech
and language pathologists, plastic surgeons, and children with corrected cleft
palate and their parents.