* 1617443
* SHF: Small: Exploiting the Negative Capacitance in a new Ferroelectric Device to Explore Innovative Design Solutions beyond the Fundamental Thermionic Limit of CMOS Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Masud Chowdhury, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 461,111.00

Over the last sixty years silicon based integrated circuit technologies have
been successfully meeting the demands of higher performance and lower energy
consumption through the miniaturization of the transistor and circuit
dimensions. As the conventional devices and materials are now approaching their
fundamental physical limits, new devices and circuits and materials need to be
investigated for the next generation logic, memory, sensor and energy harvesting
applications. Within this framework, the proposed research on a new nanoscale
ultra-low-power electronic device makes use of convergence of technologies in
advanced computing, electronic engineering, mathematics, physics, chemistry and
information-theory. This EPSCoR initiative would directly or indirectly impact a
large number of students of the PI's institution, and an even larger number of
local high school and pre-collegiate students through the Kansas City STEM
Alliance, for which the PI plans to develop a summer bridge program to promote
nanotechnology education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint the
project plans to develop a new field effect transistor (FET) technology to
achieve an effective negative capacitance (NC) inside the transistor structure
by utilizing ferroelectric materials. It has recently been reported that
ferroelectric materials can provide a negative capacitance that can be the
solutions to many of the challenges of nanoelectronics. While many contemporary
researchers are investigating ways to exploit this NC effect to break the
performance and energy efficiency barriers of the existing silicon based
transistors, the proposed effort combines the concept of the emerging negative
capacitance based field effect transistor (NCFET) and the conventional silicon-
on-insulator (SOI) technologies.