* 1617487
* CSR: Small: Operating Systems Kernels in High-Level Languages
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* M. Frans Kaashoek, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Most software depends on the correctness and efficiency of the underlying
operating system kernel, since the kernel mediates access to resources such as
storage, network, and memory. Kernels are typically implemented in low-level
languages, for example, the Linux kernel is written in the C language; such
languages are efficient but difficult to use correctly. In contrast,
implementing kernels in high-level languages could in principle result in both
reduced programmer effort and reduced incidence of bugs. This research will
explore the costs and benefits of implementing kernels in high-level
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main reason kernels use C is performance. C
allows a kernel to define its own high-performance mechanisms for memory
management, thread scheduling, interrupts, etc. In contrast, high-level
languages tend to prescribe specific particular mechanisms in these areas, which
are difficult to change. One potential problem is that high-level languages are
often garbage-collected to improve safety, but garbage collection is widely
viewed as too slow to use in kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
first investigate performance: whether a kernel written in a high-level language
can be as fast as a kernel written in C. The project will implement a kernel
using the Go language, a type-safe, garbage-collected language with good support
for threads. Then, the plan is to compare performance with existing C kernels
such as Linux, OpenBSD, and FreeBSD. It is expected there will be a need to face
efficiency and functionality challenges, particularly in the use of garbage
collection for large kernel data structures such as file and page
caches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's second area of focus will be to
exploit the high-level language to achieve multi-core in-kernel parallelism in
situations that are not practical when using C. C impedes flexible use of
transient threads, since the programmer must supply the logic to decide when the
last thread has finished using each shared object, which can then be freed.
Extensive use of threads is much easier when a garbage collector automates this
task. The plan is to exploit Go's garbage collection by implementing complex
system calls such as fork and exec using internal worker threads on multiple
cores. The team will evaluate whether the resulting performance and scalability
improvement can be made to outweigh the costs of garbage collection and thread
overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;This work will shed
quantitative light on the effect of language choice on kernel performance, a
question that is currently understood mostly anecdotally. The interaction of
garbage collection with the specific ways kernels use memory is particularly
worth understanding. The investigation of in-kernel parallelism will exploit
high-level language support to harness techniques that are impractical in C
kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;The work has the
potential for broad impact because most software depends critically on services
provided by the operating system kernel. Using a better language for the kernel
would likely reduce the prevalence of bugs and increase the ease with which
kernel developers can provide desirable new features. Providing solid evidence
to support an eventual switch to language technology which ought to make kernels
more reliable and easier to develop is the intended outcome.