* 1617611
* CHS: Small: Applying Intergroup Psychology to Overcome Barriers in Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Eliot Smith, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 514,905.00

Robots are projected to become ubiquitous in homes, hospitals, schools, and
other everyday spaces, where they will have to interact not with experts but
rather with ordinary people - adults, the elderly, and children, from different
cultural backgrounds. But untrained users may have negative beliefs, emotions,
and attitudes about robots, due to lack of familiarity, which present potential
challenges to their acceptance. Furthermore, multiple people will interact with
multiple robots. Interaction between human and robot groups may be especially
problematic, because intergroup interactions among humans are generally more
negative, uncooperative, and aggressive than interactions between individuals,
and human reactions to technological artifacts often resemble their reactions to
other humans. In this project the PI will draw upon research from social
psychology that has examined stereotyping, prejudice, and intergroup conflict,
and will apply established and validated theories and methods to develop: (a)
measures that can be used to understand the extent, nature, and bases of
people's negative reactions to robots; (b) theoretical models of the causes and
consequences of these negative reactions; and (c) interventions that
demonstrably reduce negative beliefs, attitudes, and behavior in intergroup
human-robot interaction (HRI). Project outcomes will suggest ways to reduce or
eliminate crucial barriers to future robotics applications that are due to
people's beliefs, attitudes, and emotions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nine studies
will be conducted over three years. In Year 1, online and in-person measures
will be administered to understand participant attitudes toward robots, and
investigate fundamental factors that contribute to negative reactions. In Year
2, group contact, perspective taking, and long term exposure will be explored as
ways to reduce prejudice toward robots. In Year 3, two more approaches to
prejudice reduction in HRI will be tested: recategorization and norm-based
intervention. A final study will evaluate the interaction and design strategies
found to be most successful in fostering positive intergroup HRI by implementing
them in robots interacting with people in a naturalistic setting. The studies
will involve participants of different ages, socio-economic status, and cultural
background (including four studies in Japan). Because HRI has mostly focused to
date on one-on-one interactions between people and robots, this application of
psychological theory to HRI in groups has vast transformative potential.