* 1617545
* CIF: Small: Circumventing Present-Day Frequency Synthesis Limitations in Digital PLLs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ian Galton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

High-performance Phase Locked Loops (PLLs) for frequency synthesis are critical
and are often performance-limiting components in nearly all modern electronic
communication systems. Despite their many advantages, digital PLLs have not
replaced analog PLLs in present-day high-end frequency synthesis applications
such as in 4G mobile systems, and fall far short of anticipated 5G requirements.
The new generation of mobile communication systems will require PLLs to have
higher accuracy, lower power dissipation, greater re-configurability, greater
immunity to interference, and lower costs. Towards this goal, this project will
explore novel techniques for development and design of Digital PLLs. Successful
completion of the project will not only have a strong technical impact on the
communications industry, but will also educate the next generation of design
engineers for the industry by training them to join the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research focus of this
project is theoretical and is the development and optimization of enabling new
signal processing techniques and their rigorous mathematical analyses.
Additionally, a digital PLL prototype IC enabled by the new techniques will be
developed that targets best-of-class 5G RF frequency synthesis performance. This
experimental work will provide feedback that will guide the theoretical work as
well as a definitive means of evaluating the success of the project in achieving
its objective.