* 1617934
* CIF: Small: Designing Secure, Reliable, and Resilient Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Virgil Gligor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are distributed collection of small sensor nodes
that gather security-sensitive data and control security-critical operations in
a wide range of industrial, home, and business applications. Their numerous
applications, including those that concern the nation?s security, the health
care system, and monitoring and protecting natural landscapes, clearly put the
robust operation of WSNs at the core of technologies that are vital to our
society. Using advanced tools from the theory of random graphs, this project
develops methods for designing WSNs that are i) secure; ii) reliable against
sensor and link failures; and iii) resilient against adversarial attacks. The
research program is supported by several education and outreach activities
including development of new courses, K-12 outreach, and dissemination of
research results to academic and industrial audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to ensure a secure, reliable, and resilient WSN operation, investigators
consider WSNs that employ a randomized key predistribution scheme and develop
conditions so that the network i) is k-connected; and ii) is resilient against
node capture attacks in the sense of unassailability and unsplittability. This
is done by developing realistic models of secure WSNs constructed by
intersecting two random graphs: a cryptographic graph induced by the random key
predistribution scheme and a communication graph induced by the wireless
communication media and random deployment of sensors. For several classical
random key predistribution schemes and wireless communication models,
investigators develop (i) zero-one laws for k-connectivity; (ii) Poisson
approximation results to obtain the asymptotic probability of k-connectivity;
and (iii) conditions on network parameters (e.g., number of nodes, link failure
probability, number of keys per node, key pool size) that ensure the
unassailability and unsplittability of the network.