* 1617953
* RI: Small: Supervised Descent Method and its Applications to Computer Vision (and Beyond)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Fernando De la Torre, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,715.00

This project develops a fast optimization strategy for continuous and possibly
combinatorial optimization problems. Optimization is a fundamental problem in
many scientific disciplines from biology, physics and statistics to computer
graphics and computer vision. This project focuses on solving 2 dimensional (2D)
and 3 dimensional (3D) image alignment problems in computer vision. Solving the
correspondence between 2D and 3D images is an open research problem and it is a
fundamental component in most computer vision systems for medical imaging,
surveillance, advanced driver assistance systems, mobile robots, augmented
reality, object recognition and aerial video exploration, among other
applications. The project integrates the research with education, and involves
undergraduate/graduate students in the research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses two main issues with second order descent methods in
optimization: (1) the objective function to optimize might not be analytically
differentiable and numerical approximations are impractical, and (2) the Hessian
might be large and not positive definite. The research team advocates the
concept of learning generic descent maps (i.e., average "descent directions") in
a supervised manner. Using generic descent maps, the research team derives a
practical algorithm, Supervised Descent Method (SDM), for minimizing Nonlinear
Least Squares (NLS) problems with continuous parameters. During training, SDM
learns a sequence of decent maps that minimize the NLS objective. During
testing, these learned descent maps are used to minimize the NLS objective
without requiring computation of the expensive Jacobian or Hessian. Beyond NLS,
the research team explores the use of SDM to optimize combinatorial optimization
problems such as finding 2D and 3D correspondences in images and point-clouds.