* 1617822
* Interdisciplinary Study of Chemical and Transport Processes at a Plasma-Liquid Interface
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Douglas Bohl, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project focuses on improving the understanding of the fundamental processes
that occur at or near interfaces of a plasma, a cloud of ionized gas composed of
electrons, ions and neutral particles, and a liquid. A plasma that is created
above or within a liquid can have a number of uses. For example, plasma
discharges have been used to sterilize water, fruit juices, and milk, to remove
harmful chemicals from water, to create new materials, and for medical
applications. Some cancer-causing pollutants found in the environment can only
be treated using plasmas. In material processing technologies plasmas formed
directly in liquids that do not contain water, such as alcohols, can transform
these liquids into different useful products including carbon nanotubes, a
material with unique properties that is currently used in a wide variety of
electronics. A better understanding of the physical and chemical processes near
the plasma-liquid interface will not only help to improve the existing plasma-
based processes, but will also open new applications in biomedicine,
agriculture, energy, green chemistry and pollutant mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The region near the plasma-liquid interface exhibits complex dynamics
that depend on the formation of reactive radicals, ions and high energy
electrons, their transport across the interface, and the physics of the bulk
fluid motion for mixing and transport. These processes are interrelated and
incorporate both physical and chemical dynamics. The overall goal of this
research project is to determine relationships between the physical and chemical
processes occurring at the plasma-liquid interface in a system where the plasma
discharge contacts the liquid surface. Two specific goals of this study are to:
(1) Correlate the bulk liquid transport processes with the plasma-liquid
interface dynamics and (2) Determine the significance of the plasma excited
species transport in the kinetics of interfacial processes. The approach for
achieving the goals of this multidisciplinary study is to identify degradation
mechanisms of several compounds of interest and apply quantitative optical
diagnostic tools (i.e. Particle Image Velocimetry and Laser-Induced
Fluorescence) to understand the physics at the interface as well as the role
bulk liquid transport plays in the dynamics of the degradation process. Further,
molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to develop a quantitative
understanding of the microstructure of the studied compounds at the gas-liquid
interface.