* 1617157
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: New Directions in Spectral Learning with Applications to Comparative Epigenomics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kamalika Chaudhuri, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 273,000.00

The goal of this project is to design algorithms and statistical tools to build
complex probabilistic models from massive quantities of data in a
computationally efficient manner. This work is motivated by an important current
problem in genomics, namely comparative epigenetics. While every cell in an
organism has the same DNA sequence, epigenetic marks on the genome are known to
be highly correlated with variation between cells. A pressing question in
biology is to compare the epigenetic marks across different cell types to
understand these differences. While massive amounts of data has been generated
for this purpose, there is a great need for computational tools that can operate
on this data and provide biologically meaningful solutions. This work will thus
advance the state-of-the-art in the analysis of large complex data sets and
advance the field of epigenomics. The broader impact of the work includes
organizing workshops and tutorials at machine learning and bioinformatics
venues, involving undergraduate students in research, and releasing open source
software for the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will focus on spectral learning, which has recently provided principled and
computationally efficient methods for learning parameters of probabilistic
graphical models. While spectral learning methods are known for some simple
latent variable models, a major barrier to realizing the potential of spectral
learning in real-world applications is the lack of associated statistical tools
such as regularization and hypothesis testing that connect these methods in a
principled manner to end-to-end application frameworks. This project proposes to
develop such statistical tools by integrating modern spectral learning with the
classical statistical literature in econometrics on Generalized Method of
Moments. The project proposes to formulate the statistical generalized method of
moment procedures for complex graphical models in the context of spectral
learning as constrained optimization problems and proposes ways of solving these
problems. Finally, the novel algorithms developed will be directly applied to
model epigenomics data sets from the ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics Projects to
yield methods that can operate on the massive quantities of data and provide
biologically meaningful solutions. These algorithms and software have the
potential to have a widespread impact on the understanding of complex human
diseases such as cancer and mental disorders. This will provide a basis for
designing therapeutics for these diseases and advance society towards a future
of Personalized Medicine.