* 1617243
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: The Presentation of Self in Networked Life
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Hancock, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,003.00

The objective of this project is to use cyber-human systems as a lens for
understanding self-presentation as it occurs in a complex environment. This lens
will be used to develop and validate theoretical and computational frameworks
for understanding self-presentation in a networked world by focusing on how
people conceptualize the operation of social media platforms, especially the
algorithms that govern the visibility of content. Information about oneself that
is shared by others, for example, can spread rapidly to unexpected audiences or
contexts. Once a largely interpersonal process, self-presentation now occurs in
a complex cyber-human system in which people generate content about themselves
and others on media platforms, each with opaque algorithmic mechanisms that
govern the visibility of content to various audiences. Facing this complexity,
people develop folk theories of how social media platforms work. These
conceptualizations drive people's understanding and behavior, and as such they
have important social consequences, but they are currently not well understood
or represented by extant theories of self-
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be accomplished through
a series of novel empirical studies, combined with computational models that
infer a user's conceptualization of a social media platform and that allow users
to reflect on their understanding of the platform. This work builds on and
integrates substantial research in the areas of self-presentation and impression
management, the concept of folk theories from psychology and anthropology, and
the role of platforms and algorithms in people's online experience. It provides
three unique contributions: 1) empirical data on how people conceptualize and
understand the role of algorithms and other visibility mechanisms, and how these
folk theories influence self-presentation behavior; 2) novel computational
models to aid in analysis, prediction and reflection on how information that
contributes to self-presentation in online contexts is generated, shared and
viewed online; 3) an empirical and computational foundation for advancing our
understanding of the complex cyber-human system in which self-presentation now
occurs.