* 1617708
* SHF: Small: Word-level Abstraction of Arithmetic Gate-level Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Maciej Ciesielski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

With an ever-increasing complexity of integrated circuits, hardware verification
has become the dominating factor of the overall electronic design flow.
Particularly critical and challenging is the verification of complex arithmetic
components present in almost every design, from microprocessors to medical
devices to a communication equipment. In contrast to logic circuits, for which
effective Boolean methods have been developed, the difficulty of arithmetic
hardware verification lies in the size and the amount of data that needs to be
analyzed. Different mathematical models, based on higher abstraction level than
logic bits need to be developed to deal with this complexity. This project
addresses this problem by developing new techniques for abstracting arithmetic
structures from physical circuit implementations. In addition to verification,
abstracting higher-level information from a design is important in hardware
trust and security applications, where it can be used to analyze the design to
isolate malicious hardware. Successful implementation of this work will
contribute to the development of the state-of-the-art tools for electronic
design automation and will increase design productivity. The project will also
train undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs for future workforce in this
technical area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a new method to
abstract high-level information from arithmetic circuits using computer algebra
approach. In this approach, circuit components, such as logic gates, are modeled
in algebraic domain as pseudo-Boolean polynomials. Rewriting polynomials from
circuit outputs to inputs makes it possible to extract arithmetic function
embedded in the circuit. During the rewriting, the intermediate pseudo-Boolean
expressions are examined in order to identify possible arithmetic structures.
The identification is done using a novel "spectral analysis" technique, which
matches the polynomial expressions against the reference "spectra" of basic
arithmetic blocks, such as multipliers, adders, and multiply-and-accumulate
operators. This approach will abstract word components from polynomial
expressions to reason about the word-level structure from the internal
expressions. By representing logic and arithmetic functions as pseudo-Boolean
polynomials, it is possible to mitigate the size explosion typically encountered
in Boolean based methods.