* 1617473
* CNH-L: Adaptation, Mitigation, and Biophysical Feedbacks in the Changing Bonneville Salt Flats
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Brenda Bowen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,499,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bonneville Salt Flats is a vast perennial salt
pan in northwest Utah that is changing rapidly. The system is sensitive to
variations in rain, wind, evaporation, and groundwater flux, and it is known
world-wide as the location where land-speed racing records are set. It has also
supported potash mining and other recreational activities. Recent environmental
changes are limiting these historic uses, and land managers are actively making
decisions about ways to preserve this environment for the continuation of land-
speed racing, while still maintaining opportunities for natural resource
extraction and ecosystem function. This project will look closely at how the
physical environment and the human population around it are linked; how the
changing environment influences decisions and policy changes regarding the
maintenance and use of the Bonneville Salt Flats; and how ongoing human
activities and interventions are altering the conditions of this important
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify the linkages among
management decisions, stakeholder perception and use, and the natural
biophysical and hydrological system of the Bonneville Salt Flats. Examining the
salt flats as a coupled natural and human system will help determine: how
environmental, hydrological, and microbiological conditions regulate the
dissolution and precipitation of the salt crust; the nature of the relationships
among various stakeholders and their motivations for maintaining specific
conditions at the Bonneville Salt Flats; the influence of the salt flats on
culture and land use over time; and the effects of human activities, decisions,
and mitigation efforts on the biophysical system. This project will quantify
rates and characteristics of environmental change and evaluate the feedbacks
between the biophysical changes and the stakeholder communities.