* 1617513
* TWC: Small: Enhancing the Security and Performance of GPU Access in Web Browsers
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Ardalan Amiri Sani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 05/31/2020
* USD 515,805.00

Modern personal computers have embraced increasingly powerful Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs), hardware components that enable high performance
graphics. The software that controls the programming of these GPUs in today's
computers (i.e., the graphics stack) was designed to be used by applications
acquired from trustworthy developers and installed directly by the user.
However, web applications (i.e., applications running inside a web browser) are
gaining in popularity and WebGL is a recent industry effort to provide GPU-based
graphics for web applications. However, WebGL has posed serious security
concerns as malicious web applications have used WebGL to accomplish attacks on
user's systems. Unfortunately, web browser-based protection techniques have not
solved the security concerns and have significantly worsened WebGL performance.
This project is developing techniques to improve the security of GPU-based
graphics for web applications, without worsening
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is proceeding in two research
thrusts. In the first thrust, the researchers are using GPU virtualization
technology to sandbox a web application's access to the GPU, providing hardware-
level isolation for sharing a GPU. In this design, each web application uses a
dedicated virtual GPU (or vGPU) allowing the web application to achieve high
graphics performance, while isolating it from the rest of the system. The
project is developing a new operating system compositor to control and schedule
the shared resources between the vGPUs. Unfortunately, the vGPU-based
architecture cannot prevent all possible GPU-based security attacks, including
some forms of information leakage, denials-of-service, and memory integrity
attacks. In the second thrust, the researchers are studying these remaining
attack vectors and developing complementary solutions.