* 1617630
* RI: Small: Incremental Sampling-Based Algorithms and Stochastic Optimal Control on Random Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 12/31/2020
* USD 335,757.00

Autonomous and semi-autonomous vehicles and systems have become indispensable
both for civil (fire-fighting, nuclear waste handling, law-enforcement, deep
ocean exploration and drilling, weather forecasting, transportation) and
military (guided missiles, spacecraft, unmanned drones) applications.
Automation, when coupled with information technology, will continue to permeate
our society at ever increasing levels. Autonomous systems, which, thus far, have
been a crucial component in homeland security applications (e.g., border patrol,
persistent monitoring, etc), are now seen as a key factor of empowering people
in their daily lives across work, leisure, and domestic tasks. The next
generation of autonomous systems will operate and interact with humans in the
household or the office. The recent investment of information technology
companies such as Amazon and Google in robotics technology is likely to
accelerate the adoption of these new technologies by the general public. The
safe and reliable operation of all these autonomous systems hinges crucially on
their ability to reason and navigate about their environment. The theory and
methodologies developed in this research will make it possible to run highly
sophisticated algorithms inside the "brain" of these autonomous systems to
enable optimal decision-making, thus increasing their reliability,
predictability, performance and fail-safe operation. Self-driving vehicles,
anthropomorphic robots, aerial drones, manufacturing automation systems, and
precision surgical instruments among others, will all benefit from the results
of this research.

The proposed research tackles a fundamental problem in the area of motion
planning and trajectory generation for robotic and intelligent autonomous
systems. A serious bottleneck in solving such problems under limited resource
constraints (e.g., computer memory, time) is their high dimensionality that
precludes the na√Øve use of discretizing the (continuous) state space. In this
research it is proposed to develop new incremental, optimal sampling-based
motion planning algorithms with improved convergence rates over existing
methods, so as to enable close-to-real-time trajectory generation for autonomous
vehicles operating in an uncertain and dynamically changing environment. To
achieve this objective, this research will build on recent results and ideas
from Rapidly-exploring Random Graphs (RRG), along with relaxation methods
borrowed from the areas of Asynchronous Dynamic Programming (ADP) and Machine
Learning (ML). Specifically, recent advances from machine learning can be used
to address the three main issues hindering the broader applicability of
probabilistic sampling based motion planners to a wider variety of problems:
collision checking, efficient sampling, and local steering. One main tenet of
the proposed research is the exploitation of the inherent parallelism of the
proposed algorithms, which -- coupled with the recent advances in multi-core
computer architectures and GPUs -- will enable real-time computations.