* 1617628
* TWC: Small: Physiological Information Leakage: A New Front on Health Information Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

With the growing use of implantable and wearable medical devices, information
security for such devices has become a major concern. Prior work in this area
mostly focuses on attacks on the wireless communication channel among these
devices and health data stored in online databases. The proposed work is a
departure from this line of research and is motivated by acoustic and
electromagnetic physiological information leakage from the medical devices. This
type of information leakage can also directly occur from the human body, thus
raising privacy concerns. This proposal will investigate physiological
information from both the medical devices and the body itself and find
countermeasures against this form of information leakage. This research will be
accompanied with rapid dissemination of results, placement of software tools on
the web for other researchers to take advantage of, and inclusion of the newly
discovered material in a course that the PI teaches. In addition to graduate
students, undergraduates and high school students will also take part in this
research, with emphasis on participation by students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates privacy attacks on human
health by targeting physiological signals that continuously emanate from the
human body due to the normal functioning of its organs., as well as the signals
that emanate from implantable and wearable medical devices. It will also
investigate metadata (frequency of communication, time between consecutive
transmissions, communication protocol, packet size, detection range, modulation
protocol, etc.) collected from such devices to see how they leak vital health
information. Finally, it will develop countermeasures against health information
leakage from these devices. A comprehensive evaluation of data leakage from the
human heart, lungs, skin, devices like insulin pumps and blood pressure monitors
would follow.