* 1617678
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Cell Signaling Hypergraphs: Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* T Murali, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 303,993.00

Proteins in the living cell interact with each other in complex ways. Graphs
have emerged as a natural way to represent these interactions. In a conventional
graph representation, a node represents a protein and an edge represents an
interaction between two proteins. Although such graphs have been in widespread
use for many years, they do not accurately capture important features of protein
interactions, such as proteins that operate in groups called complexes,
reactions involving such complexes that may have more than two reactants and
products, as well as the influence of other proteins whose presence can regulate
reactions. This project will develop a new representation called signaling
hypergraphs that naturally describes the relationships between multiple groups
of proteins as complexes, reactants, products, and regulators. Furthermore, the
project will develop novel algorithms for fundamental computational challenges
in the analysis of signaling hypergraphs, and apply this new representation and
these algorithms to widely-used databases of cellular reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will actively involve undergraduate students
in research by recruiting them through the Virginia Tech Initiative to Maximize
Student Diversity, and the Virginia Tech Undergraduate Research in Computer
Science program. Students will engage in multiple semesters of research with the
goal of ultimately leading their own individual projects, and obtaining co-
authorship in publications. In this way the project will expose students to how
computational thinking plays a major role in modern molecular biology, thereby
meeting an important goal of STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on developing algorithms for the analysis of cell signaling hypergraphs.
Aim 1 focuses on methods for generating products efficiently by finding short
paths through signaling hypergraphs, while accounting for feedback loops and
reaction regulators. Aim 2 develops algorithms for discovering missing proteins,
complexes, and reactions in a signaling pathway. Finally, Aim 3 will release
open-source software implementing the algorithms for signaling hypergraphs
developed in this project.