* 1617665
* SHF:Small: Reducing Test Time and Improving Diagnosis for Increasingly Dense ICs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Nur Touba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

The amount of data required to test and diagnose integrated circuits continues
to grow dramatically as technology scales, not only because of larger designs,
but also the need for additional tests to target new defects. The density of ICs
continues to grow faster than the test data bandwidth between automatic test
equipment (ATE) and the chip-under-test, which is constrained by the number of
channels on the tester and pins on the chip. This project involves developing
new approaches for compression and extraction of data that are fundamentally
different from existing techniques and capable of more efficiently reducing the
amount of data and significantly improving test time and diagnosis accuracy. The
project will provide advanced training to both graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups, in the latest design and
test technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several new research
directions for improving compression and extraction of test data will be
investigated in this project. A fundamentally new approach for extracting
information from linear signatures using symbolic canceling will be studied for
finding error locations to aid in diagnosis. By combining information from the
signature together with structural information from the circuit, much greater
diagnostic precision is possible. Improvements in test compression will be
pursued through new concepts including (i) bandwidth sharing between test
stimulus decompression and output response compaction, (ii) combining linear and
non-linear encoding, (iii) low fan-out response compaction architectures, and
(iv) dynamic extraction from linear compactors. The new techniques and
architectures developed in this project will be implemented and their
performance evaluated.