* 1617626
* AF:Small:Algorithmic Foundations for Evolutionary Tree Comparison and Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Oliver Eulenstein, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 429,998.00

Synthesizing evolutionary trees for thousands of species from an ever-increasing
pool of evolutionary information is not only beneficial throughout biology, but
also holds enormous promise for science and society at large. For instance, the
predictive power of large-scale evolutionary trees plays an important role in
leading advances in human health, increasing agricultural production, and to
inform decisions about natural resource management. Despite these promises,
inferring such large trees from genetic data is confronting the computational
biology community with the most challenging and complex computational problems
in evolutionary biology today. Tree assembly problems have emerged as a powerful
tool to address these challenges. The project investigates such problems that,
given a collection of typically smaller evolutionary trees, seek an assembled
tree that reconciles the overall conflict in these input trees. This conflict is
often measured by a problem-specific tree comparison measure. Mathematical and
computational properties of such measures play a critical role in the efficient
computation, credibility, and analysis of assembled trees, and therefore, are
the focal research point of the project. Scalability and accuracy of the methods
developed in the project will be analyzed in practice using data provided by
phylogenetic databases.

Research results will be widely disseminated within the computational biology
and evolutionary biology communities. Graduate and undergraduate training
opportunities offered through the project will enrich the educational experience
of students through extensive interdisciplinary collaborations by acquiring a
balanced perspective of biological, mathematical, and algorithmic challenges in
evolutionary biology. Underrepresented minorities will be engaged through
presentations in the bioinformatics programs at Iowa State University dedicated
to such minorities, incorporating minority students into the project through
rotations and research assistantships, and by attracting minority students to
the field of computational biology and bioinformatics through public events at
Iowa State University, like Major Fairs, or the student organized Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology Symposia. The project will also engage in
computational thinking workshops at Iowa State University for K-12 students by
involving topics in computational biology and bioinformatics.

The developed methods will enable biologists to assemble larger and more
credible evolutionary trees. The ability of these methods to handle unrooted and
possibly erroneous evolutionary trees will largely extend on their applicability
in practice. Evolutionary tree assembly often relies on comparison metrics and
their largest possible distances, called diameters. Identifying diameters for
tree comparison measures and computing these diameters efficiently will allow
for compensation of shape-biases that can radically alter the outcome of tree
assembly methods. For several comparison measures only weak upper bounds on
their diameters are known, and the research will investigate into tightening
these bounds. Identified properties of assembly methods will support biologists
in their difficult choice of appropriate assembly methods. Such properties will
also lead to mathematical characterizations and parameterizations of efficiently
solvable instances of tree assembly methods. Novel linear time algorithms that
provide evaluations of all possible rootings under various tree comparison
measures will support biologists in their challenging task of identifying such
rootings accurately. Finally, the theoretical results of the research will
advance the algorithmic foundations of tree assembly and comparative
phylogenetics.