* 1617475
* SHF: Small: Visual Architectures: Engaging Crowds in Design and Discovery for Custom Reconfigurable Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Gayatri Mehta, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 290,000.00

Custom reconfigurable computing platforms offer low power, high performance,
high efficiency, and increased redundancy tailored to the needs of a specific
application domain. The ability to successfully create these highly customized
domain-specific architectures offers tremendous advantages, including orders of
magnitude power savings, longer battery lives, smaller, faster, more robust
devices, and a shorter time to market. However, making extreme customization an
integral part of the design process requires design to be significantly simpler
to create novel, out of the box architectures that directly address the
requirements of a specific domain. This challenge can be divided into three
specific areas: (1) discover fast, efficient algorithms that allow for rapid
design space exploration; (2) increase participation and widen the community by
promoting computational thinking among non-scientists and non-engineers; and (3)
educate the next generation of custom chip designers through innovative visual
frameworks. Effective multiplayer and cooperative games will be developed in
this project that allow teams of players to collaboratively solve mapping and
design problems of much larger scope and complexity. In this respect the project
also involves members if underrepresented groups in a major way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is centered around the idea of developing
Visual Architectures to address the challenges outlined above. More
specifically, the project involves: (a) creating a highly visual, game-like
design environment, thus making complex architecture and mapping problems
accessible leading to greater engagement and significantly increasing
participation; (b) analyze the vast amounts of data generated through the
widening player community to discover better, more efficient automated
algorithms; (c) employ the interactive platforms thus created to educate the
next generation of chip designers and build their skills and intuitions.