* 1617884
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Analysis and Design of Repair-Efficient Cloud Storage Systems: a Linear Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Soheil Mohajer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 499,618.00

Cloud storage systems are increasingly being adopted by a wide spectrum of data
intensive applications such as web search, cloud computing, distributed file
sharing, and various types of data networks with high access demand, including
social networks, health and medical databases, and banking system. A cloud
storage system consists of several data centers and computer servers that are
connected through Internet. While individual components of the system are
subject to several types of failure, reliability, in the sense of data
availability, and ability of regenerating failed storage nodes are two key
features to design cloud storage systems. As the size of stored data and the
number of users accessing the data continues to increase, designing robust,
efficient, and scalable systems is a challenging and yet critically important
problem. This research will develop a solid theoretical foundation for design
and analysis of efficient cloud storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
technical side, this research will focus on (1) studying the tradeoff between
storage overhead and repair requirements in cloud storage systems, and (2)
development of efficient coding schemes with guarantees on data recovery and
failed node regeneration. While characterizing the general information-theoretic
tradeoff appears to be intractable, progress can be made by limiting the problem
to the class of practically relevant and low-complexity linear codes, and
exploiting the duality between linear codes and multi-dimensional subspaces over
finite fields. An optimization problem is formulated for this question, where an
intelligent interpretation of the optimum solution provides insightful
guidelines to devise code construction mechanisms. Lastly, a unified framework
is proposed for code construction, to not only encompass several ad-hoc designs,
but also generalize construction to all optimum operating points of the system.