* 1617627
* CSR: Small: RF-Wear: Enabling RF Sensing on Wearable Devices for Non-Intrusive Human Activity, Vital Sign and Context Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Prem Chahal, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2020
* USD 496,271.00

Wearable devices are growing in popularity at a tremendous rate. Today, millions
of people wear fitness trackers and smart watches on a daily basis to track
steps, heart rates and sleep. However, the constraints of the built-in sensors
in existing wearable devices act as key bottlenecks that limit the broader
impact of wearable devices. In particular, accelerometers and gyroscopes can
only sense motion and rotation of body parts to which they are attached.
Microphones and cameras can capture rich information but come with severe
privacy concerns. Many physiological sensors such as respiration and
electrocardiogram sensors are intrusive in that they must be placed at certain
body locations and require tight skin contact to function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on pushing the boundaries of wearable
devices by exploring wireless radio as a new sensing modality on wearable
devices for human physical activity, vital sign, and context sensing. Compared
to existing sensing modalities in wearable devices, radio provides a contactless
and privacy-preserving approach to capture rich information about users and
their context. The underpinning principle is that movements of different parts
of human body caused by different human activities (physical, physiological and
contextual) generate different changes on radio signals. By analyzing these
changes, the activity that causes the changes can be recognized. Based on this
principle, this project aims to pursue five tightly coupled research tasks
associated with the goal of exploring radio based sensing on wearable devices:
(1) investigating radio as a whole-body motion sensor for recognizing activities
of daily living (ADLs); (2) investigating radio as a contact-less physiological
sensor for monitoring vital signs; (3) investigating radio as a context sensor
for identifying the object a user is interacting with; (4) putting everything
together to use a single radio sensing modality for recognizing ADLs, monitoring
vital signs, and identifying context simultaneously; and (5) developing power-
aware schemes to minimize the power consumption of the wearable
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the knowledge and
understanding of radio based sensing on wearable devices. It has the potential
to fundamentally transform wearable devices as they are currently known. If
successful, this project will not only make a theoretical contribution to radio
based sensing on wearable devices but also yield a prototype platform, opening
up a new world of applications in domains such as healthcare, entertainment,
social computing and education.