* 1617744
* RI: Small: Taming Combinatorial Challenges in Multi-Object Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kostas Bekris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2020
* USD 468,390.00

A key challenge in many autonomous robot manipulation applications
is&lt;br/&gt;the rearrangement of multiple objects. There are two situations
where&lt;br/&gt;such needs arise: (i) the manipulation task itself is to
rearrange&lt;br/&gt;objects, and (ii) occluding items must be rearranged to
allow the&lt;br/&gt;robot access to the target object(s). Examples of such
scenarios can&lt;br/&gt;arise in warehouses and industrial setups, where a robot
has to&lt;br/&gt;frequently select, pick and transfer products, packages and
pallets in&lt;br/&gt;the presence of many other similar objects. Another example
comes from&lt;br/&gt;service robotics, where a robotic assistant that operates
in a human&lt;br/&gt;space has to frequently retrieve or rearrange multiple
items placed in&lt;br/&gt;narrow spaces, such as objects in
shelves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates which classes of multi-
object manipulation&lt;br/&gt;planning can be efficiently addressed given
progress in multi-body&lt;br/&gt;motion planning and develops a powerful suite
of novel computational&lt;br/&gt;solutions. The key insight is that for many
real-world rearrangement&lt;br/&gt;tasks the sequence of object motions to solve
the problem, ignoring&lt;br/&gt;grasping aspects, look similar to solutions of
multi-body motion&lt;br/&gt;planning, especially for similar sized objects. The
study of this link&lt;br/&gt;reveals it is possible to cast certain multi-object
manipulation&lt;br/&gt;problems as a "pebble motion problem on a graph", which
is well&lt;br/&gt;studied in algorithmic theory and multi-body motion planning.
The&lt;br/&gt;overall objective is to provide rigorous methods with
desirable&lt;br/&gt;completeness and optimality guarantees for multi-object
manipulation,&lt;br/&gt;which exhibit good scalability and efficiency for
problems where&lt;br/&gt;current methods face issues with the inherent
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;complexity. Such methods could also be used as guiding
heuristics for&lt;br/&gt;tasks with additional constraints, such as non-trivial
dynamics and&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty.