* 1617234
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Detailed Shape and Reflectance Capture with Light Field Cameras
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ravi Ramamoorthi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

A major transformation is occurring in the way we sense the visual world.
Traditional 2D photography is increasingly being replaced with light-field
sensors that capture the full spatial and angular variation of the incoming
light field, rather than simply pixels that integrate over incoming directions.
This development opens up the possibility of ubiquitous 3D imaging of our visual
world. Light-field sensors are particularly attractive as a depth acquisition
device, since they are completely passive without needing to project light into
the scene, and they do not experience a reduction in performance outdoors.
Moreover, the rich ray-space of light fields provides significant cues for
recovering fine-scale depth. However, current RGBD and light-field systems
produce only coarse depth; while useful for tasks like refocusing images, the
depth channel offers little benefit for photography beyond conventional 2D RGB
images. This research seeks to address these challenges, by developing practical
algorithms for detailed 3D shape and reflectance capture with light-field
cameras, coupled with a theoretical and experimental analysis of the achievable
accuracy. Project outcomes will have broad impact on diverse fields including
computer graphics and virtual/augmented reality, enabling acquisition of high-
quality detailed 3D shape and the subsequent use of the 3D geometry with
computer-generated synthetic objects. Methods to acquire 3D images, including on
mobile sensors, will transform the photographic process from 2D to 3D, with
immense industrial and societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
address four important problems in light-field shape acquisition. First, they
will exploit the rich nature of light-field data, combining multiple cues
(defocus, correspondence, shading, specularity) in a unified way to obtain the
overall global 3D shape. Moreover, they will seek to go beyond the common
Lambertian reflectance assumption, developing a novel BRDF-invariant framework
for surface reconstruction with general glossy materials like metals, plastics,
or ceramics, while supporting textures and spatially-varying reflectance.
Another key objective will be to ground the practical results in a theoretical
framework that can establish the limits of light-field camera shape resolution,
and the signal-to-noise accuracy, and how this relates to novel designs for
light-field cameras to obtain the best achievable resolution in 3D shape
capture. Finally, the PIs will move from overall shape to fine-scale surface
detail, proposing new methods for shape/reflectance capture for fine-scale
geometry like hair. The ultimate goal is to enable a full 3D processing pipeline
for photography, computer graphics and applications like virtual and augmented
reality.