* 1617309
* CNH-L: Scale-Dependent Feedbacks Among Protected Areas and Surrounding Socioecological Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Sikes, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,305,006.00

Administrative boundaries that establish land management jurisdictions affect
both ecological and social processes. In the US, undeveloped lands occur in
mosaics of public and private jurisdictions with varying management. These
mosaics thus support varying regional cultures as well as natural-resources-
based economies. These mosaic landscapes also support many species and are
sources of ecosystem services such as pollination, carbon fixation, water supply
and purification, and pest control. For differences in these mosaics, this
research will determine (1) how social and ecological boundaries, fragmentation,
and connectedness are related; and (2) how such partitioning affects management
priorities and outcomes, including social relationships, management decision-
making, landscape-scale management challenges, and ecological functioning.
Results will enhance regional land management and decision making through a
decision-support system shared with stakeholders so as to enhance the scientific
basis of land management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how
administrative partitioning affects feedbacks within and between social and
ecological systems. Five mosaics comprising US National Parks and adjacent
parcels in the western US will be analyzed. How complexity and differences in
management across the administrative landscape affect processes and outcomes in
terms of connectivity, well-being, decision-making, and cooperation in the
social landscape; connectivity of habitat and processes in the ecological
landscape; and feedback pathways between social and ecological landscapes will
be modeled. Research activities will include (a) a focus on the influence of the
management mosaic on decision-making by managers; (b) soil/vegetation/remote
sensing assessment to delineate ecological boundaries; (c) novel development of
landscape scale social decision-making and ecological connectivity models; (d)
integration of social and ecological data into a generalizable spatial coupled
systems model; and (e) an analysis of factors contributing to the success or
failure of participatory processes. This research will improve understanding of
how management challenges are affected by collaboration and connectivity across
boundaries, the scale at which ecological divergence occurs, and factors
facilitating attainment of diverse management objectives.