* 1617129
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Pathways to Community Success: Advancing a Comparative Science of Online Collaborative Organization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Mako Hill, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 305,359.00

This research project seeks to understand the factors that encourage success in
computer-supported peer production - the form of online collaborative
organization used to create public information goods like Wikipedia and Linux.
Why do some peer production systems mobilize large communities of contributors
and create valuable information goods while most do not? One answer for this
challenging question is that success-related factors may change significantly as
a collaborative organization grows, such that conditions that encouraged
explosive growth in the beginning may prevent further growth later on. This work
will provide actionable insights for initiators and managers of online
collaborative organizations, informing the design and management of distributed
collaboration across different topic domains at different stages of project
development. It will also produce freely licensed and publicly available
computational research systems and datasets that will enable reproducible
research and the dissemination of the new techniques developed by the research.
Peer production and related forms of online collaboration in virtual communities
have diffused widely in software production, knowledge management, cultural
production, and education. Another sign of its significance is the fact that a
growing number of organizations look to distributed collaboration managed
through virtual and volunteer communities as a source of innovation and customer
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses longitudinal comparative
analysis of populations of peer production communities to elaborate a novel and
transformative science of pathways to effective collaborative organization. In
doing so, it will extend the rich traditions of sociotechnical systems research
and organization science on these topics. This empirical work will explore three
central facets of peer production: (1) the relationship between participation
equality and growth; (2) the extent to which community effectiveness is limited
by competition for volunteer resources; and (3) the role of social interaction
and coordination in productive collaboration. In every case, empirical
predictions will be developed from prior work and tested using trace data from a
large population of peer production wikis. The research will then explore how
the observed relationships may diminish or even reverse as communities grow. The
findings will become the basis for a broader theory of collaborative
organization that explains how key drivers of mobilization in nascent groups
differ systematically from those in established communities.