* 1617815
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Nonconvex Optimization with Statistical Guarantees for Information Computing in High Dimensions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Dapeng Wu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 215,000.00

The data explosion in all fields of science recently creates an urgent need for
methodologies for analyzing high dimensional data with low-dimensional
structure. The research, devoted to developing transformative theory and methods
for scalable nonconvex optimization with statistical guarantees in noisy
settings, has applications in a wide range of disciplines such as signal
processing, machine learning, operations research, and computer vision. The
investigators propose methodologies of statistics-guided nonconvex optimization
and optimization-assisted statistical analysis to study convergence rate,
acceleration, and statistical accuracy of iterative nonconvex algorithms for
signals with mixed types of structural parsimony. The project cross-fertilizes
ideas from statistics, operations research, engineering, and computer science
and has education tightly coupled with research. The integrated research and
education help students develop critical thinking through cross-disciplinary
training, and assist students in becoming life-long learners. The investigators
use the rich topics in this project to inspire the learning and discovery
interest of the public and students of all ages; in addition, the outreach
activities help attract minority and female students to careers in science.

The research performs statistical-accuracy guided algorithmic analysis of
general majorization-minorization algorithms for fast and stable signal
recovery. Scalable and randomized acceleration schemes are proposed and studied
in big-data applications. The investigators develop an innovative optimization-
based statistical methodology for analyzing multi-regularized sparse estimators
in high dimensions. The project applies the techniques to robust principle
component estimation, hierarchical modeling, network learning, among others. The
research creates a fusion of optimization and statistics for information
computing in high dimensions, and deepens and broadens existing compressed
sensing and nonconvex optimization theories and methods.