* 1617498
* AF: Small: Dynamic Reasoning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Neil Immerman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 407,034.00

Descriptive Complexity measures the richness of a language needed to describe a
given property. The languages are variants of first-order logic describing
finite structures. All major complexity classes have been shown to have natural
descriptive characterizations, providing a deep and profound relationship
between the traditional computational complexity of a problem and the
descriptive complexity of the problem. Thus complexity can be understood
entirely from a logical point of view. Important new understandings about
complexity have arisen from the descriptive point of view. In particular, the
trade-off between parallel time and amount of hardware, a fundamental issue in
computation, has been characterized as the trade-off between formula size and
number of variables. There are four broader impacts from the above work. (1)
This project will extend knowledge concerning the complexity of problems as well
as providing new methods to automatically check the correctness of programs.
This work will lead to tools useful for teaching logic and complexity. (2) The
project will improve the understanding of the fundamental nature of computation.
(3) Results from this project will be widely distributed and will be presented
at conferences, published in journals, and taught in seminars. (4) The PI will
also train graduate students to do research in this combination of pure and
applied theory.

In this project, the PI will continue to extend the understanding of
computational complexity using descriptive complexity. The PI will also expand
the recent use of modern SAT solvers to automatically prove that programs meet
their correctness conditions or find runs on which they do not. The intellectual
merit of this project is that it will extend the understanding of computational
complexity and it will improve the ability and understanding of how to
automatically reason about the correctness of programs. The research in this
project has several specific thrusts: (1) The PI will extend the methodology for
automatically generating correctness conditions for programs in simple languages
which are automatically checkable, (2) The PI will extend the current
understanding of dynamic complexity, especially for reachability properties, (3)
The PI will develop a theory of dynamic reasoning, identifying when it is
possible to reason about program states in an essentially propositional way and
when it is not, (4) The PI will study the dichotomy phenomon from a descriptive
point of view. In particular, starting with binary Constraint Satisfaction
Problems, the PI will explain where dichotomies lie and in particular why
natural computational problems tend to be complete for a small number of
important complexity classes.