* 1617728
* NeTS: Small: A Principled Approach to Enabling Policy Transparency for Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Alan Mislove, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 307,625.00

The rise in popularity of bandwidth-hungry applications such as video streaming,
and the popularity of resource-constrained mobile networks has reignited
discussions about how network traffic associated with different applications is
treated by Internet Service Providers (ISPs). To manage scarce network
resources, ISPs use middleboxes to selectively enforce network policies (e.g.,
limit transfer rates for video streaming). This study will explore the impact of
middleboxes on network traffic, and lead network users, policymakers, and
regulators to a deeper understanding of policies deployed in operational
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three key challenges that
limit researchers' understanding of network policies imposed by middleboxes.
First, researchers struggle to characterize policies because they have limited
or no access to middleboxes for experimentation. Second, researchers lack models
of how middleboxes classify and interact with network traffic, making it
difficult to reason about them. Finally, identifying and understanding middlebox
behavior often requires measurements from vantage points inside the network.
This investigation entails black-box and grey-box experiments on commercial
middleboxes to build accurate models of how they operate, and using these
observations to build a scalable, flexible and realistic testbed for evaluating
methods to detect and isolate network policies. This project will incorporate
trace-based analysis to design efficient, resilient algorithms to detect these
properties from end systems, and optimizations to make this detection system
scale. To generalize our results, the PIs will develop a theory of how
middleboxes can impact traffic, how to detect these middleboxes from endpoints,
potentially with limited visibility into the network. &lt;br/&gt;