* 1617838
* RI: Small: RUI: Fission-Fusion Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ingo Schlupp, Southern Nazarene University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 09/30/2020
* USD 192,557.00

The ability to use teams of robots in real-world tasks, such as exploration,
reconnaissance and search and rescue, depends on their ability to effectively
cooperate in complex and dynamic environments. Unfortunately, determining the
most effective team size for a given task depends on a variety of factors, often
requires information not readily available, and can be computationally
impractical. Observations from nature show that some animal societies exhibit
frequent splits (fission) and merges (fusion) of subgroups without the
coordination overhead frequently found in multi-robot systems. The goal of this
research project is to use these insights from fission-fusion societies in
nature as inspiration to implement similar behavior in multi-robot systems.

This project will investigate the motivations and mechanisms that contribute to
the fission of a team of robots into smaller groups and the fusion of smaller
groups into a larger group, into sizes appropriate to a given task. Potential
biological and environmental factors that contribute to individual decisions
that result in the fission and fusion of groups and that have artificial
analogues relevant to multi-robot systems will be identified using agent-based
simulations. An emphasis will be placed on factors that contribute to an
adaptive task-specific preferred group size. Once identified, these factors will
be implemented on physical robots to evaluate the performance of the decision-
making system within the constraints of physical robots. The decision-making
system used will be implemented using an adaptive fuzzy behavior hierarchy and a
collective decision-making model developed using observations of natural
systems.