* 1617969
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Schema-Based Event Extraction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Niranjan Balasubramanian, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 391,188.00

One of the major bottlenecks in current language understanding algorithms is the
lack of commonsense knowledge about how the world works. When we communicate
through language, we implicitly assume that the readers will use this common
sense knowledge and make the necessary inferences. Computers, on the other hand,
do not have access to this shared common knowledge, and as a result are often
unable to understand text well enough to perform important tasks such as
question answering. This project will study methods to learn one type of common
sense knowledge about event scenarios: the series of events (actions) and the
types of entities involved. For example, an arrest scenario typically involves a
crime event, and an arrest event, with an arresting agent (say police), a
suspect, and possibly a victim of the crime. Language understanding algorithms
need to be explicitly told to look for these specific types of events and
entities. This approach does not scale to the many possible real world event
scenarios. This project will develop machine learning algorithms that
automatically acquire this type of knowledge covering a broad range of domains
in large text collections. Such algorithms can form the basis of a wide variety
of assistive technology that enables public access to information. Examples
include the generation of schemas from historical documents to assist students
in targeted learning about historical events, or extraction of events and actors
involved in current world events from streaming news sources. More generally,
access to the event structure of documents will enable better question answering
capabilities that, embedded appropriately into search engines, can lead to a
more informed public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue three central
research thrusts to learning commonsense event schemas. The first thrust
develops new probabilistic algorithms for inducing event schemas that represent
real-world scenarios (e.g., a Suspect is arrested by Police, pleads to a Judge,
and is later convicted). The second thrust will develop new models that extract
instances of these learned schemas from text (e.g., John is the Suspect). This
project is unique to previous work by formalizing these as separate tasks, and
thus enabling deeper research into knowledge learning apart from traditional
relation extraction. Finally, the third thrust will standardize potential
evaluation frameworks for event schema research. Due to the young nature of this
research area, formal evaluation and analysis is inconsistent across previous
work. This project will produce the largest and most diverse set of event
schemas through crowd-sourcing, enabling consistent and clear evaluation of
future models.