* 1617676
* NSFSaTC-BSF: TWC: Small: Practical Succinct Proof Systems without Trusted Setup
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Rafael Pass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,578.00

Succinct non-interactive proofs are a powerful cryptographic building block with
many promising applications in secure cloud outsourcing and in domains such as
Internet of Things, medical, and financial applications where computation over
privacy sensitive data is desired. Existing implementations of succinct proofs
all rely on a trusted setup phase, commonly known as preprocessing. This
preprocessing phase can be problematic since the system loses all security
guarantees if the secret trapdoor generated during preprocessing is compromised.
To make matters worse, the preprocessing is often not a one-time operation, and
must be repeated for each application or, even worse, for different input sizes
of the very same application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates ways
to circumvent this major drawback by exploring succinct proof systems without
trusted setup. This project creates a programming framework and compiler
toolchain called Lunaria which compiles general programs, written in high-level
languages, into succinct zero-knowledge proofs without trusted setup. Lunaria
aims to combine algebraic-, compiler-, and implementation-level improvements in
non-trivial ways, and enable orders of magnitude speedup over a straightforward
implementation of state-of-the-art theoretical results. Expected impacts include
new, open-source frameworks for succinct proofs without trusted setup, thus
giving research and industry access to the power of succinct proofs.