* 1617505
* AF: Small: New Directions in Algorithmic Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Shuchi Chawla, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project employs mechanism design theory to address resource allocation
problems arising in the context of large computational systems with many
participants. Mechanism design deals with economic systems from the viewpoint of
an optimizing designer: the designer would like to design a system or protocol
whereby the selfish optimization of individual participants leads to a desirable
aggregate behavior. In the context of resource allocation, for example,
mechanism design theory specifies how a seller or owner of resources should
allocate these resources to buyers so as to achieve the maximum possible revenue
or economic efficiency. However, optimal mechanisms prescribed by the theory are
often hard to compute, complex to implement, and over-sensitive to fine details
of the input. These challenges are exacerbated in settings that are
combinatorial, dynamic or online (as opposed to one-shot), or involve
informational dependencies among different buyers. The PI will investigate
solution concepts that are simultaneously near-optimal as well as practical;
this would bring the theory of mechanism design closer to practice. Over the
last decade new electronic marketplaces-for example, cloud platforms, platforms
for a sharing economy, and digital goods stores-have arisen in a largely ad hoc
manner. This project aims to establish strong theoretical underpinnings for the
design of such marketplaces, thereby guiding the next wave of development in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address applications such as
allocation of cloud services, as well as resource allocation in dynamic settings
where buyers repeatedly request resources (e.g. digital goods such as music,
apps, and games), and their value for a resource varies stochastically over
time. One challenge in these contexts is that buyers may strategize about how
their current actions affect their future payoffs and the mechanism designer
must take such strategizing into account. Another challenge is in dealing with
the combinatorial nature of resource requests owing to the multiple kinds of
resources available (e.g., CPU, storage). This project will employ pricing-based
mechanisms as a solution concept that simultaneously achieves near-optimality,
simplicity, detail-freeness, and robustness to noise in the input.