* 1617429
* CNH-S: Andes Bofedales and Cattle: The Impacts of Changing  Hydrology and Glacial Retreat on Community Livelihoods in Peru's Cordillera  Blanca
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Randall Boone, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,992.00

Mountainous regions are undergoing rapid changes due to changing climate, while
human livelihoods are shifting with further consequences for mountain
landscapes. Andean glaciers are especially sensitive to climate change with
accelerating melting rates influencing downslope ecosystems through hydrologic
changes. The people that depend on these ecosystems for their livelihoods are
also impacted. In turn, farmers are altering grazing regimes by increasing herd
sizes and expanding pastures, processes that are negatively affecting wetlands.
The broader impacts of this project relate to climate change and associated
glacial recession, which represent the most important threats to pastoral
livelihoods in tropical mountains like the Andes. In Peru, threats to
pastoralists are exacerbated by growing demands for water and other mountain-
based natural resources. Under business as usual scenarios, problems over water
resources in mountain regions will likely intensify. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address the intersection of mountain ranges, wetlands, and cattle with changing
environments, partner institutions will conduct a series of five workshops to
bring researchers, community leaders and non-governmental organizations
together. The workshops will be a mixture of formal presentations, technical
discussions and a field-based practicum for scientists and community members.
This research focuses on the high Andean ecosystems around Huaraz, Peru in
Huascarán National Park, recognized as a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve in 1977, and
will have implications for mountainous regions around the world. Workshop 1 will
present a novel coupling of an agent-based model using socioeconomic indicators
and an ecosystem model that creates scenarios from remotely sensed images and
ecological sampling. Workshop 2, hosted by a community-based NGO (The Mountain
Institute), will provide the background for developing socioeconomic indicators
needed to inform the models. Workshop 3 will use the identified scenarios from
Workshops 1 and 2 to provide the foundation of natural processes affecting human
livelihood from local wetlands. Workshop 4 focuses on human impacts,
specifically non-native livestock grazing on the wetlands, and how these
ecosystems respond when affected by glacial retreat. A concluding meeting will
encompass an integration of all previous workshops across the different
components of a high elevation coupled human natural system to create a
community knowledge framework that will inform similar mountain systems
worldwide. By using a workshop approach with a field practicum, this project is
designed to introduce local communities and institutions to the leading research
questions on environmental change and interactions with wetland habitat and
impacts on local livelihoods. This novel approach will have implications for
conducting future research coordination networks.