* 1617488
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:   ALETHEIA: A Framework for Automatic Detection/Correction of Corruptions in Extreme Scale Scientific Executions
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Marc Snir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Trusting scientific applications requires guaranteeing the validity of computed
results. Unfortunately, many examples of scientific computations have led to
incorrect results, sometimes with catastrophic consequences. Currently known
validation techniques cover only a fraction of the possible corruptions that
numerical simulation and data analytics applications may suffer during
execution. As science processes grow in size and complexity, the reliability and
validity of their constituent steps is increasingly difficult to ascertain.
Assessing validity in the presence of potential data corruptions is a serious
and insufficiently recognized problem. Corruption may occur at all levels of
computing, from the hardware to the application. An important aspect of these
corruptions is that until they are discovered, all executions are at risk of
being corrupted silently. In some documented cases, months have elapsed between
the discovery of a corruption and notification to users. In the meantime, a
potentially large number of executions may be corrupted, and incorrect
conclusions may result. It may be difficult, after the fact, to check whether
executions have actually been corrupted or not, so that even if corruptions do
not lead to mistakes, they may lead to significant productivity losses.
Virtually all simulations producing very large results need to reduce their data
volume in some way before saving it --one technique is called lossy compression.
&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to validate the end result of the simulation
coupled with lossy compression. This approach is useful for scientific
simulations in such diverse areas as climate, cosmology, fluid dynamics,
weather, and astrophysics --the drivers of this project. &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project applies the principle of an external algorithmic observer
(EAO), where the product of a scientific application is compared with that of a
surrogate function of much lower complexity. Corruptions are corrected using a
variation of triple modular redundancy: if a corruption is detected, a second
surrogate function is executed, and the correct value is chosen from the two
results that are most in agreement. This new online detection/correction
approach involves approximate comparison of the lossy compressed results of the
scientific application and the surrogate function. The project explores the
detection performance of surrogate functions, lossy compressors, and approximate
comparison techniques. The project also explores how to select the surrogate,
lossy compression, and approximate functions to optimize objectives and
constraints set by the users. The evaluation considers a set of five
applications spanning different computational methods, producing large datasets
with I/O bottlenecks, and covering a variety of science problem domains relevant
to the NSF. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to serving the needs of scientists working in
the fields listed above, this project will enhance the research experience of
undergraduate students. A summer school focused on resilience is planned for
summer 2016, and corruption detection/correction will be a major topic. The
project is also organizing tutorials in major science conferences that include
online detection/correction of numerical simulations.