* 1617730
* AF: SMALL: Frontiers in Algorithmic Game Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Constantinos Daskalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Recent years have seen much of the world's economic activity transferred to the
Internet through old markets that obtained online presence and new markets that
are directly inspired and enabled by the Internet, such as sponsored search and
ad auctions. Driven by the increasing importance of online economic activity,
there has been much interest in investigating its joint computational and
economic characteristics through research at the interface of Computer Science
and Economics. Economics brought to the table quantitative models and
methodology for studying economic systems. But it soon became clear that these
models and methodology required adaptation, since the intention was to study
systems that are computational while involving thousands or millions of
participants. This thinking gave rise to the field of Algorithmic Game Theory
(AGT), which has in the past fifteen years grown into a mature research
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify and investigate new
frontiers of research in this field, focusing on the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Furthering our understanding of multi-item
mechanisms by (i) weakening the distributional assumptions required for
optimizing important objectives such as revenue; (ii) overcoming well-
established computational intractability barriers for welfare maximization by
moving away from truthful mechanisms to mechanisms solvable via online learning;
and (iii) using optimal transport theory to characterize the structure of
optimal mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Discerning the role of learning and
signaling in auction settings, by understanding how to (i) learn a revenue-
optimal auction from weak forms of sample access to the bidders' distributions,
(ii) test the near-optimality of a given auction from samples, and (iii) further
a line of research going back to classical works of Akerlof and Milgrom-Weber by
investigating how to design optimal signaling schemes for the auctioneer to use
in common settings, such as sponsored search, where the auctioneer owns
information about the properties of the items that the bidders do not
have.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Finally, revisiting the computational foundations
of the field, investigating the relation between Factoring and Nash
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in Algorithmic Game Theory is
inherently interdisciplinary. This project will further the interaction between
Computer Science and Economics through the publication of the research outcomes
in high-impact Economics journals, organization of interdisciplinary research
meetings, interdisciplinary research collaborations, and research surveys. The
educational component of the project will involve the mentoring and education of
researchers who intend to pursue their own careers in research or industry, and
the design of pioneering classes in the interface of Computer Science and
Economics. Furthering the educational and outreach impact of the project, the PI
will be mentoring high school students in Computer Science research through the
MIT PRIMES program, will be engaged in Computer Science Unplugged activities at
local elementary schools, and will engage with the broader public through public
lectures.