* 1617820
* CHS: Small: Large-Scale Examination of the Impact of Shocks on Crowd Attributes and Performance in Collaborative Volunteering Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Romero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2020
* USD 515,463.00

This project will advance understanding of how groups of volunteer contributors
to online resources perform in the face of sudden, unexpected events related to
their work. These volunteer contributors (collectively, "crowds") produce
valuable resources such as Wikipedia articles, data for citizen science
projects, and open source software. However, though there has been prior
research on what aspects of crowds and situations lead to high quality
resources, such research normally assumes that the people, groups, and
especially situations are relatively stable. In practice, situations often
encounter sudden changes, or "shocks": the death of a celebrity or a world event
can affect Wikipedia articles related to it, while a software project might
release a new version or discover a critical bug. In this project, the
investigators will use the public history of Wikipedia articles and open source
projects stored on the GitHub website to analyze how crowds react to shocks, and
how that affects the resources they create. To do this they will use theories of
individual and group behavior to measure meaningful attributes of both the
crowds and the resources they work on, then use data analysis techniques to
understand (1) how crowds change during shocks; (2) what attributes of crowds
predict high resilience and resource quality in the face of shocks; and (3) how
these effects change depending on the type of shock that is experienced. The
insights gained from the work will also lead to design recommendations for
people who manage the software and communities that enable crowds to create
these socially valuable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will start by
constructing features of crowds and the resources they produce. The focus will
be on features that prior empirical work in Wikipedia and work from organization
theory suggest will be relevant to performance in collaborative crowdsourcing
systems. For crowds, these include elements about team composition and
participation behavior including experience, diversity, and work balance; about
the amount and tone of team coordination around creating the resources; and
about the inferred network structure of the collaborators based on individuals'
communication patterns with each other. In the case of resources, it includes
attributes including their internal and external popularity, and rated or
estimated current quality. The investigators will use these features to analyze
how the crowds perform when facing a variety of kinds of shocks, including
changes in resource quality, worker status, and relevant external events. To do
this, the investigators will develop algorithms to detect times when a crowd has
experienced a shock, then use propensity score matching on attributes such as
resource quality and crowd size to find comparison sets of similar crowds that
have not experienced a shock. They will then use machine learning classifiers
and segmented regression analysis techniques to analyze changes in the
composition and behavior of the crowd around resources after shocks occur,
relative to how the crowd behaves around the comparison resources. Once these
models have been developed, the team will apply them to questions of predicting
both the anticipated resilience of a crowd to a shock and the potential
occurrence of shocks internal to the collaboration system.