* 1617967
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploring Portable Data Placement on Massively Parallel Platforms with Heterogeneous Memory Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Dong Li, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 02/28/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Heterogeneous computing is becoming crucial for many computational fields,
including simulations of the galaxy, analysis of social networks, modeling of
stock transactions, and so on. Programming heterogeneous memory systems is a
grand challenge, and creates a major obstacle between heterogeneous hardware and
applications because of the programming complexity and fast hardware evolution.
This project aims to address this obstacle, and is expected to significantly
relieve programmers from handling the underlying memory system heterogeneity.
The outcome from this research will also enable continuous enhancement of the
computing efficiency of a number of applications on future heterogeneous
systems, which is a critical condition for sustained advancement of science,
health, security and other aspects of humanity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
the programming challenges on heterogeneous memory systems, the project
investigates a software framework, consisting of a hardware specification
language, a set of novel compiler and runtime techniques, and advanced memory
performance modeling. The goal is to develop a systematic solution to
automatically place data given a complex heterogeneous memory system, especially
on massively parallel platforms. With the proposed framework, programmers are
relieved from tailoring their programs to different memory systems, and at the
same time, the sophisticated memory systems can get fully translated into high
computing efficiency. The framework transforms the programs such that they are
customized - in terms of where data are placed in memory, when and how to
migrate, etc. - to the underlying heterogeneous memory system at runtime and
attain a near optimal memory usage.