* 1617198
* III: Small: Reducing The Graphical User Interface's Consumption of Power on Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Bradley Vander Zanden, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 384,297.00

Mobile devices have increased their energy demand as they have acquired new
capabilities. A decade ago, users might have had to re-charge their mobile
devices once a week; now it is common to have to re-charge them daily. This
increased energy demand is in part due to the constant polling that a mobile
device performs to determine whether an input, such as a gesture, an email
message, or a cellular call, has been received. The polling, even when the
device is idle and in the user's pocket, constantly rouses the CPU and prevents
it from being put into low power, energy-conserving states. This energy
inefficient 'pull' model has been necessitated by the fact that input devices
traditionally have been 'mute' when they receive an input. Thus in order to
ensure that an input is promptly processed, the CPU is forced to query each
input device multiple times per second to determine if the device is holding an
input. Recent technological advances now enable input devices to immediately
notify the CPU when an input has arrived. This advance allows us to investigate
an alternative 'push' model that puts the CPU to sleep while no inputs are
present and awakens the CPU only when an input is actually received. Hence the
CPU no longer needs to consume power while the mobile device sits idle in the
user's pocket. Additionally, newer mobile devices have multiple CPU cores, some
of which are slower, lower power consuming cores that awaken faster when the CPU
has been asleep. We can place the software that directs inputs to apps on one of
these lower power consuming cores and the apps themselves on the faster, higher
power consuming cores. This placement has two benefits. First, some inputs can
be ignored, and if an input can be handled and discarded on the lower power
core, then the higher power consuming cores do not need to be awakened. Second,
if the input must be handled by an app, the higher power core can be warmed up
while information about the input is gathered and staged for the app on the
lower power core.

In order to realize this push model, the locus of control for event handling
will move from the application into the kernel. This new placement will
necessitate 1) the development of kernel routines for event dispatching, 2) the
development of a kernel-level display server that allows the process scheduler
to know which processes are input driven, and 3) the modification of the process
scheduler so that it can de-schedule input-driven processes as needed. We will
first develop a push model for inputs received by graphical user interfaces and
then extend it to generic system I/O such as sensors and GPS signals. We plan to
modify the Android runtime (ART) to work with the push model in order to profile
actual apps to determine how much power savings, and potentially reduced
latency, can be achieved with our proposed model. Our research should have the
desirable broader impact of both reducing the frequency with which mobile
devices need to be recharged and reducing the environmental impact of mobile
devices by reducing the amount of energy they consume. Another broader impact is
that the proposed techniques should work for cellular and Wi-Fi handling apps
and for desktop computers as well.