* 1617673
* CIF: Small: Harnessing Network Compression Gains: Fundamental Limits and Practical Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Aaron Wagner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Past increases in information consumption have been fueled mainly by increasing
the bit-carrying capacity of our telecommunications infrastructure, including
capital improvements such as laying fiber as well as technological advances that
enable this infrastructure to carry more bits. This approach of simply moving
more bits now appears to be facing diminishing returns, however. In contrast,
there has been less attention paid to how data compression can reduce the number
of bits that must be communicated. Thus future increases in per-capita
information consumption could be driven by improvements in compression. This
project will also contribute to improved STEM education through the development
of adoptable course materials for a dedicated graduate-level course on
information theory and data compression.

This research examines how to harness gains in compression, especially network
gains. The work will focus on lossy compression for two simple networks that are
not well understood: (1) the problem in which several encoders observe separate
sources and send compressed versions to a centralized decoder, who seeks to
reproduce the sources, and (2) the problem in which a single encoder broadcasts
a compressed version of a source to multiple decoders, who reproduce the source
with the benefit of side information. For both problems the PIs seek to
determine the information-theoretic rate-distortion tradeoffs for a practically-
important class of instances. For the first problem, the PIs will also measure
the network gains that can be obtained in practice by constructing a system to
compress synchrophasor data obtained from the power grid.