* 1617924
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Coexistence of Directional Communications within 5G Networks: The Case for Visible Light Enhanced Small-Cells
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Abdallah Khreishah, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 196,688.00

Mobile devices are realizing a profound impact on commerce and society today and
their success continues to provide rich new applications in all facets of life.
This continued expansion is due to rapid advancements in speed and capacity of
the devices themselves and the increased capacity of mobile networks. However,
mobile devices have now reached performance levels in which they are effectively
'data starved' since their ability to produce or consume data far exceeds the
capabilities of the networks which feed them. Next generation, or 5G, wireless
networks hold promise to meet this growing demand coupled with the use of
smaller wireless cells. Offloading data traffic to small cells is already an
established technique for adding capacity to dense environments where macro-
cells are overloaded. This project expands the offloading concept onto small
cells using optical wireless techniques, providing an additional tier of ultra-
dense optical cells in multi-user indoor environments. These Coexisting Radio
and Optical Wireless small cell Deployment (CROWD) networks, will enable
continued enhancement in-network performance that is essential to maintain the
growth and momentum of new applications of mobile devices including connected
health, augmented reality, cognitive computing, and the internet of everything.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use the untapped optical wireless
(OW) spectrum and the high areal spectral efficiency of OW cells to augment
existing Radio Frequency Small Cells (RF-SCs) and realize new levels of
performance offered by future ultra-dense networks. In the proposed CROWD
networks, the OW cells are used to intelligently offload high-speed downlink
traffic from the RF-SC when a reliable OW cell exists. While small coverage area
and dense distribution of directional OW cells improves area spectral efficiency
and aggregate wireless capacity; smallness also increases the difficulty of
maintaining seamless connectivity. Accordingly, the RF-SC provides coverage for
highly mobile devices and devices without a reliable OW connection. CROWD
networks are intended to realize performance gains in wireless throughput,
latency, and streaming performance within dense multi-user environments.
Outcomes of the work include: (1) analysis and simulation of heterogeneous CROWD
networks under varying user traffic and mobility models, (2) a design framework
and methodology for the creation and adoption of CROWD networks for future 5G
systems, and (3) a functional proof-of-concept implementation suitable for
validation of the analytic and simulation results and as a blueprint for scaling
up to larger CROWD networks.