* 1617583
* III: Small: A New Approach to Latent Space Learning with Diversity-Inducing Regularization and Applications to Healthcare Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,361.00

Latent variable models (LVMs), which extract hidden information, such as topics,
themes, or disease patterns, from raw data, play an important role in electronic
health record (EHR) management and applications. With the dramatic increase of
the volume and complexity of EHR data, current LVMs face several new challenges,
including inadequacy in capturing rare patterns existing in only small number of
patients in a population (also known as long tail patterns), redundancy amongst
patterns being discovered, and low computational efficiency, which all seriously
impair the value of EHR data in driving high-quality personalized medicine.
There is a critical need in developing new methods to transform conventional
LVMs to ones that can circumvent such limitations so that the EHR data can be
more effectively and reliably used for healthcare applications. This project
addresses this need and develops a new technique known as "diversity-inducing
machine learning models", which promote rare patterns and condense redundant
patterns, at high computational efficiency, to enable more effective pattern
discovery and knowledge extraction from complex and heterogeneous (e.g.,
textual, image, and time series) EHR data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project contains the following research components: 1. Develop a new
regularized LVM learning framework that allows the basis of the latent space to
favor a more diversity-inducing geometry and less redundancy, thereby accomplish
long-tail pattern coverage and better interpretability for both Euclidean and
Hilbert space settings. 2. Develop a diversity-promoting Bayesian LVM learning
framework that enables efficient inference of posteriors probability
distributions to facilitate quantization of uncertainty and alleviate over
fitting. 3. Theoretically analyze the diversity-inducing techniques proposed in
1 and 2 to understand how these techniques affect the generalization errors in
supervised LVMs, posterior contraction rate in unsupervised LVMs, and the
information geometry of the distributions induced by LVMs. 4. Apply the
diversified LVMs to healthcare applications. This project also provides rich
opportunities for multi-disciplinary education and research training, at both
undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels.