* 1617028
* The Role of Shelterin-Mediated Telomere Remodeling in Chromosome End Protection
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ahmet Yildiz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2020
* USD 655,000.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanism of protection and
maintenance of telomeres at the ends of human chromosomes. The ends of
eukaryotic chromosomes need to be protected against inappropriate DNA damage
repair reactions (DDR), DNA degradation and incomplete DNA replication in order
to maintain genomic stability and proper functioning. The solution to these
challenges is to form a protective telomere cap structure that consists of
specialized repeat DNA sequences and associated factors that together form the
shelterin complex. Gradual shortening of telomeres in dividing cells triggers
DDR and cell cycle arrest. Thus telomeres are referred to as internal biological
clocks that determine the proliferative lifespan of an organism and function as
major anticancer barriers. Detailed knowledge of how telomeres form a protective
cap at the chromosome end and how progressive telomere shortening leads to
replicative senescence is needed to better understand aging and cancer. This
project will also help to establish educational outreach programs for high
school students from underprivileged areas of Oakland, CA. To attract high
school and undergraduate students to scientific research, summer research
opportunities, seminars and science fairs will be organized in local public
schools. The results of the research will be integrated into a new curriculum
that will be developed for Physics undergraduates wishing to pursue a graduate
career in the life sciences.

How shelterin prevents the DDR machinery from gaining access to chromosome ends,
particularly the single-stranded telomeric overhang, remains unclear. Recently,
it has been suggested that shelterin remodels telomeric chromatin into a highly
compact structure that reduces the accessibility of DDR proteins to telomere
ends. Using super-resolution imaging in vivo, the project aims to reveal the
role of shelterin in safeguarding the telomeric overhang within telomeric
chromatin. The changes in organization of telomeric chromatin will be determined
as telomeres shorten in dividing cells to understand the mechanism that triggers
DDR accumulation at chromosome ends before senescence. Additionally, to
determine whether compaction of telomeric tracts is required and sufficient to
antagonize binding of DDR proteins to telomeric overhangs, the structure of
shelterin-bound telomeric DNA will be solved using cryoelectron tomography and
its structure-function properties will be investigated by single molecule
experiments in vitro.