* 1617408
* III: Small: Interactive Construction of Complex Query Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* James Allan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 06/30/2020
* USD 515,994.00

This research program will investigate and implement SearchIE, a search-based
approach to information "extraction." SearchIE will allow rapid, personalized,
situational identification of types of objects or actions in text, where those
types are likely to be useful for a complex search task. Modern search engines
often provide some mechanism to indicate that a query keyword matches a document
only if it occurs in the name of a person or in a location. To make that
possible, annotators found and marked a large number of people names (for
example) in text, a machine learning algorithm was applied to learn which low-
level features are indicative of the name type, and then a resulting classifier
for that type is run across the collection of documents. It is then possible to
write a query that means "paris used as a person's name rather than a location."
Unfortunately, the existing approaches do not serve searchers interested in
novel, unanticipated types - for example, names of whaling ships, officers in
Queen Victoria's navy, local watering holes. Such examples cannot be handled
currently because the classifiers need to be trained and run ahead of time, an
expensive data labeling process that is too daunting for many search tasks.
Since on-line information gathering almost always starts with search and
frequently involves identifying items of interest in the found text, bringing
these two together has the potential to change both substantially. The SearchIE
approach makes it possible for someone to build personalized extractors
contextualized by their topical interests. The result is that the technology can
radically improve online searching for lay persons as well as professionals by
significantly reducing the time needed to focus queries into relevant
information.

It does not appear that the information extraction task has ever been approached
directly as a search task. SearchIE is unique in bringing an information
retrieval (search) mindset to the extraction problem, providing new capabilities
that are either impossible or extremely difficult in the traditional "annotate
then detect" model of the problem. This project will investigate the fundamental
issues raised by the SearchIE approach. What models can best integrate
extraction and search in new settings where they can truly happen
simultaneously? How can a searcher describe and edit a model for the types of
interest? Can an interactively developed model be a springboard into a machine
learned model and when is there enough information to do that? Does using
topical context to limit the scope of extraction provide the expected accuracy
gains using SearchIE's approach? What data structure modifications are needed to
fully implement SearchIE so that it is efficient as well as effective? How well
does this approach fare on additional standard test collections? Addressing the
systems and algorithmic issues are fundamental problems that have the potential
to greatly impact both search and extraction. For further information, see the
project's web site at http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/research/searchie.