* 1617041
* DNA Computation in Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Alexander Deiters, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

DNA logic gates are powerful computation devices because the outputs are
chemically equivalent to the inputs, and the output of one gate can act as the
input for a subsequent gate - similar to electronic gates. This enables serial
connections of gates, generating signaling cascades that can be assembled into
complex molecular circuits based on nucleic acid hybridization where both the
encoded program and the machinery that runs the program are composed of DNA. The
use of synthetic DNA as a material for biocomputing in human cells has several
advantages: DNA circuits rely on fully programmable Watson-Crick base-pairing
interactions and thus can be rationally designed at the molecular level,
delivering a high degree of control. New components, such as gates, amplifiers,
and sub-networks can be readily encoded in DNA sequences, which provides
modularity and adaptability. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The completion of the
research objectives will lead to broadly applicable approaches to programmable
biological computation devices that are functional in human cells. The developed
methodologies will be of interest to scientists who are developing or applying
DNA-programmable algorithms or assemblies to biological systems; furthermore,
they will facilitate interactions with the field of microRNA biology. The
outputs of the DNA computation process can be readily interfaced with cellular
and organismal systems, thus extending the impact of this methodology into
broader applications. In addition, the proposed biocomputing circuitry is
inexpensive to manufacture and easy to assemble - in contrast to traditional
techniques for the analysis of microRNA patterns. Due to its multidisciplinary
nature, this project will train the next generation of students in the
programming in oligonucleotides, oligonucleotide chemistry, and cell biology.
Based on developed expertise, outreach activities with museums and schools will
be conducted in order to excite children at a young age (and their parents)
about STEM, specifically at the interface of computer science, biology, and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test if cellular microRNA
pattern detection, analysis, and response functions of devices can be combined
in DNA-based computation circuitry. This will represent an innovative approach
to the analysis of microRNA patterns directly inside of live cells. Output
signals of DNA-based circuits are not restricted to electrical or optical
outputs (as in case of traditional detection and analysis methods), but can be
designed as oligonucleotides, fluorophores, dyes, and other molecules. An
innovative DNA-analog based biocomputing system will be developed in order to
protect the encoded oligonucleotide programs from biological environments and
highly specific self-assembly capabilities will provide flexible designs for
next-generation molecular computation devices in living systems. The following
research objectives will be pursued: (1) demonstrate DNA computing of increasing
complexity in live cells, (2) interface cellular DNA computing with signal
amplification, (3) engineer cellular DNA computing to provide molecular outputs,
and (4) use new materials to encode oligonucleotide programs in order to protect
the DNA devices from cellular environments.