* 1617577
* AF: Small: New Perspectives on Mathematical Programming Relaxations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Moses Charikar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The project will study methods for designing efficient heuristics with provable
guarantees for hard optimization problems. Optimization problems arise in many
different contexts (e.g. finding the best routes for delivery trucks, finding
clusters in a social network, etc). We now know that for many such problems, we
do not expect to design algorithms that are efficient (i.e. run in polynomial
time) that produce optimal solutions. The field of approximation algorithms
develops principled methods to design algorithms for such hard optimization
problems. This project will advance our knowledge of mathematical programming
relaxations ? a widely used tool in the design of such approximation algorithms.
The idea here is as follows: First, express the problem in terms of integer
variables with constraints on them. Next relax the problem by allowing variables
to take on fractional values. The relaxed version can be solved exactly in
polynomial time. Finally, map solutions to the fractional version back to
integers, while attempting to maintain the quality of the solution as far as
possible. The project will attempt to advance our understanding of the power of
this technique and its limitations for fundamental problems in the field. In
particular, the PI will investigate structure in problem instances where exact
solutions to the original problem can be obtained from solving the relaxation,
study new relaxations for basic problems such as k-means clustering. The PI will
also study relaxations for problems where the goal is find a dense structure
inside a graph and problems involving laying out the vertices of a graph on a
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Course materials for graduate and undergraduate
courses will be developed distilling research results from this project, as well
as new developments in the field. The exact recovery questions investigated in
this project for mathematical programming relaxations are of great interest in
communities other than theoretical computer science; new insights here have the
potential to influence and impact these other communities. Undergraduates will
be involved in appropriately chosen pieces of the project so as to expose them
to research at an early stage. The PI will encourage the participation of women
and minorities in this research. He will organize outreach and community
building activities at Stanford, leveraging his experience with organizing such
activities in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
and shed new light on mathematical programming relaxations for hard
combinatorial optimization problems in various settings. The broad goals of this
project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Exact recovery via mathematical
programming: Investigate and understand the phenomenon of mathematical
programming relaxations returning integer solutions. The PI will apply this new
lens to linear programming (LP) and semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations
for several problems. Specifically, the PI will study SDP relaxations for
computing transformation invariant metrics on sets of points and solving
approximate graph isomorphism for correlated random graph models (introduced
recently in the study of de-anonymization and privacy in social
networks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Clustering problems: Investigate a recently
introduced SDP relaxation for the k-means objective to obtain a better worst
case approximation factor. The PI will also investigate the performance of this
relaxation on random models of clustered points that better represent instances
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Densest subgraph: Investigate hypergraph
generalizations of the k-densest-subgraph problem and a close variant, the
smallest-m-edge-subgraph, to understand the best approximation factor achievable
and whether natural planted instances of random hypergraphs suggest a natural
limit for efficient approximation algorithms. The PI will also study lower
bounds for densest subgraph, to understand the Lasserre hierarchy for planted
instances that are predicted to be the hardest for the
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Layout problems: The PI will study two
different classical optimization problems involving mapping the vertices of a
(un)directed graph to a line: minimizing (a) Cutwidth, and (b) Feedback Arc Set,
to improve the worst case approximation factors. For cutwidth, the PI will
investigate a new mathematical programming relaxation motivated by lift-and-
project hierarchies. For Feedback Arc Set, the PI will study a new semidefinite
programming relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Constructive Discrepancy: Recent
advances in designing efficient algorithms for minimizing discrepancy suggest
that new breakthroughs are possible. A recent result builds on a breakthrough on
the Kadison-Singer problem to show that the integrality gap of a natural
relaxation for Asymmetric Traveling Salesman is small. The PI will investigate
whether this existential result can be made algorithmic. The PI will also study
the Beck-Fiala and Komlos conjectures, where efficient algorithms can lead to
new progress.&lt;br/&gt;