* 1617844
* Impacts of Climate Engineering Using Stratospheric Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Alan Robock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2020
* USD 718,276.00

"Geoengineering" is the idea of taking purposeful action to offset global
greenhouse warming, in this case by artificially increasing Earth's reflectivity
and thus reducing the solar energy available to the climate system. This project
uses climate models, particularly the Community Earth System Model (CESM) to
examine the potential consequences of injecting sulfate into the stratosphere to
produce reflecting aerosols, mimicking the effect of large volcanic eruptions.
The award is a continuation of previous work by the PI under
AGS-1157525.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work by the PI and others raised
concerns that stratospheric geoengineering would result in a reduction in
monsoon rainfall, with negative impacts on tropical agriculture. Here the PI
proposes that the negative impacts could be mitigated using a geoengineering
technique that preferentially cools the Southern Hemisphere ocean. The idea is
based on research suggesting that cooling the Southern Hemisphere pushes the
intertropical convergence zone northward, thereby causing preferentially greater
amounts of rainfall in Northern Hemisphere monsoon regions. Numerical
experiments to test this idea would be conducted by artificially altering ocean
surface albedo in CESM simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second topic pursued
here is the effect of stratospheric sulfate injection on terrestrial vegetation
and agriculture. Previous work using vegetation models embedded in climate
models suggests a small reduction in photosynthesis due to stratospheric aerosol
injection, in part because scattering of sunlight by stratospheric aerosols
increases diffuse surface insolation at the expense of direct sunlight (in
addition to reducing total sunlight reaching the ground). But other effects
could be important, in particular the increase in ultraviolet (UV) sunlight due
to the reduction of stratospheric ozone as a consequences of aerosol injection
(an effect seen following volcanic eruptions). The impact of increased UV on
agricultural production is studied through the use of the Community Land Model
(CLM), the land surface component model of CESM, using the CLM-Crop version
which allows representation of agricultural crops. Some of the effort is devoted
to developing CLM-Crop to include more crops and represent processes relevant to
the UV impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the work with CESM, the
project also supports the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP),
a coordinated international project in which multiple climate modeling centers
perform a specified set of simulations, so that the range of possible outcomes
can be assessed. The project supports annual workshops for GeoMIP participants,
and is also launching an intercomparison project for crop model simulations of
the agricultural impacts of geoengineering. The crop model intercomparison
effort is organized under the existing Global Gridded Crop Model Intercomparison
(GGCMI) initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
stem from the need for studies such as this one to inform policy makers and the
public regarding the potential costs and benefits of geoengineering schemes. In
addition, the proposed developments to CLM-Crop will provide an enhanced
resource for the research community. The project support a graduate student and
a postdoc, thereby providing for the future climate science workforce.