* 1617075
* CNH-L: Assessing the Potential for Climate Change and Forest Insects to Drive Land-Use Regime Shifts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2022
* David Orwig, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/28/2022
* USD 879,251.00

Climate change and forest insects have significant impacts on forest ecosystems
and these factors also strongly influence land-use decision-making, with
indirect forest impacts at least as significant as the direct impacts. A
scientific frontier in sustainable forest management, is developing a better
understanding of these processes and drivers of land change, especially
identification of factors that can trigger major land-use shifts. This project
will address this challenge using a computer simulation model of how changing
land-use decisions and forest insect outbreaks affect each other. The simulation
will be set within the context of a changing climate and emerging energy markets
for woody biomass. The study region will be New England, which is densely
populated, highly forested, and has damaging forest insect pests. The research
will use interviews and a survey to study land owners and institutional land
managers as a basis for a computer simulation of land use decision making that
will be linked to a simulation of forest processes, including insect dynamics.
The interacting models will be examined for alternative outcomes in the
production of ecosystem services. The outputs from these models will be
integrated into a portfolio of decision support tools designed to help
landowners make informed land-use decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will examine how climate change and insect infestations affect land-use, and it
will quantify the individual, aggregate, and interactive impacts of these
processes on forest landscapes. The interacting influences of emerging woody
biomass energy markets, insect infestations, and climate change on forest land-
use decisions will be addressed. The study will examine (1) whether and how
climate change and insect dynamics are shifting land-use regimes in New England
by altering human decision-making; (2) how these alterations in human decisions
may affect forest ecosystems and the flow of select ecosystem services; and (3)
how, in turn, these ecosystem changes affect landowners. To achieve these goals,
the researchers will employ a three-faceted approach: (1) social science data
collection including surveys, and targeted structured interviews to understand
how private landowners in New England perceive climate change and insect and how
these perceptions are influencing their land us; (2) agent-based simulations;
and (3) regional-scale forest simulations that quantify changes in forest
structure, carbon, and species composition. The coupling between the agent-based
model representing the human system and the forest simulation representing the
natural system will be dynamic in order to capture the specific patterns that
emerge from the complex feedbacks between the two. In this framework, the
macroscopic properties of complex systems - i.e., land-use regimes - emerge from
lower-level interactions among agents. The research also includes a comparative
assessment of the effectiveness of the broader impact strategy.