* 1617824
* CSR: Small: Architectural and Operating System Support for Non-volatile Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,059.00

Since the dawn of modern computing, the technologies used to build computer
systems have stably partitioned into compute (manipulate data), memory (holds
data while power is on), and storage (for retaining long-term data). Today a new
class of technologies are emerging, namely non-volatile memory (NVM), that
promises to disruptively merge the concepts of memory and storage. This work
exploits the potential of this disruption by synergistically exploring software
and hardware changes with a team led by a systems expert and architects with
several foci. The work develops new benchmarks and- through analysis - new
designs that enable future computer systems do more work at the same cost or the
same work at less cost due to more effective access to NVM. Moreover, the
project disseminates its NVM benchmarks and software tools to further the work
of others and make NSF dollars more impactful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, the work develops and analyzes NVM benchmarks with dissimilar roots in
file systems, persistent memory, and data stores. It then uses this analysis to
develop computer NVM designs to hide latency while ensuring persistence, reduce
the cost of coordinating with multiple memory controllers, transmutes ideas from
general-purpose graphics processing units (GPUs) for NVM use, explores virtual
memory address translation for vast NVMs, and facilitates fast atomic
publication of data.