* 1617898
* CHS: Small: Innovation and Technology Entrepreneurship Cultures between Ghana, South China, and Silicon Valley
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Seyram Avle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,441.00

This research will investigate contemporary social and technological processes
that bring together and motivate specific kinds of leaders shaping transnational
networks of design and innovation in computing and communication technologies.
Ethnographic research of tech entrepreneurship cultures in Accra (Ghana),
Shenzhen (China), and Silicon Valley (USA) will document the complex reality of
global technology production. Who is at the forefront of molding these emergent
relations? What are the daily practices in the design and implementation of new
technologies between these regions, and what are the social, cultural and
economic processes that shape them? In both the high-end spaces of technology
production and in the street-side low-tech stalls, technology entrepreneurs
combine a range of tech skills and business acumen across borders to design,
acquire, modify and distribute information technologies. All of these
developments speak to a larger and currently unfolding transformation of where
and how technology design and innovation take place. By focusing on innovation
and entrepreneurship cultures, this project fosters a nuanced understanding of
how models of technology production are changing in a world that is growing more
connected globally. It also shows how both resource-rich and resource-
constrained environments are innovating transnationally, and identifies what can
be learned from them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research engages
with two groups of innovators: 1) transnational tech entrepreneurs making
software and hardware products; 2) hardware sellers and manufacturing
entrepreneurs who assemble, distribute and repair electronic devices. The first
group is often found in start-ups, incubators, and tech hubs whereas the second
group works from factories, repair shops, and electronic markets. While each of
these works in particular networks, they are increasingly coming together as
hardware prototyping becomes more affordable and software development readily
available. The researchers will engage with both groups across their sites of
operation, observing and interviewing them as is standard in ethnographic study.
The underlying goal is to identify how circulating concepts in tech
entrepreneurship and innovation like start-up culture, design thinking, and
Internet of Things shape both local strategies and transnational relations of
technology production.