* 1617955
* AF:Small: Nearest Neighbor Search in High Dimensional Spaces
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alexandr Andoni, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,960.00

The goal of this project is to advance the state of the art of algorithms for
the nearest neighbor search (NNS) problem. The NNS problem is one of the central
computational problems arising when dealing with modern massive datasets. For
example, it underlies a classical classification rule in machine learning: to
label a new object (such as an image), one can simply find the most similar
objects (the nearest neighbors) in a preprocessed database, and use the label of
the objects found. More generally, NNS is a key algorithmic tool in many areas
including databases, data mining, information retrieval, computer vision,
computational geometry, signal processing, bioinformatics, and others. In such
applications, the objects are usually represented in a high-dimensional space:
e.g., a 20x20 image is naturally represented by a 400-dimensional vector, with
one coordinate per pixel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends to study the high-
dimensional NNS problem, by addressing both foundational algorithmic questions,
as well as applied aspects. The project aims for both scientific and educational
impact. First, the study of the NNS problem is instrumental in developing
fundamental concepts in areas such as high-dimensional computational geometry as
well as sublinear space algorithms (including concepts such as dimension
reduction, sketching, metric embeddings, etc). Second, due to the numerous
applications of NNS, its efficient implementations are used widely in industry.
Overall, the PI aims to foster a stronger connection between the theory and
practice of NNS by code dissemination, public lectures, and student training.
The PI's affiliation with Columbia's Data Science Institute puts the PI in a
particularly good position to accomplish these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish the project's algorithmic goals, the PI will leverage the recently
developed approach of data-dependent hashing, where the hash function itself
adapts to a given dataset. As a proof-of-concept, the PI and co-authors recently
demonstrated that this new approach to NNS leads to algorithms outperforming the
classical NNS algorithms (such as those based on the Locality-Sensitive
Hashing). The project aims to develop this methodology further to its maturity,
extend it to other relevant metrics (similarity measures) which have
traditionally resisted efficient solutions, develop practical versions of the
algorithms, and to understand the limits of these techniques.