* 1617999
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Geometrical and Statistical Modeling of Space-Time symmetries for Human Action Analysis and Retraining
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Pavan Turaga, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 280,000.00

This interdisciplinary research aims to advance current understanding and
utilization of space-time symmetries in analyzing human movements, using
fundamental tools from engineering, geometry, and statistics. Broader
applications of this research include home or workplace-based self-reflection of
daily activities, promotion of higher efficiency of human movements, and long-
term management and/or prevention of movement disorders. While the need for
comprehensively and statistically analyzing human kinematics is well chronicled,
the current measures are often limited to simplistic quantities such as speeds
and acceleration profiles of individual limbs. This project will focus on both
spatial and temporal symmetries of limb movements, full body shapes, and
complete dynamical actions, for assessment of movements ranging from daily
activities to physiotherapeutic exercises.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Symmetry has
been used in the past, in clinical biomechanics, but in a limited way. This
project will develop a comprehensive theory, built on fundamental tools from
differential geometry and statistical analysis of geometric objects, to
represent, quantify, analyze, and classify motions according to their level of
symmetry. The specific forms of symmetry will include spatial reflection,
temporal reflection, and space-time glide symmetries. This formulation will
incorporate data from various sensing modalities and features, including point
trajectories and stick figures from motion capture systems, to shape silhouettes
and dynamic textures obtained from video sensors. The project outcomes also
include the development of a real-time media-system for movement re-training and
reflection of common actions, such as sitting to standing (STS). The proposal
brings together a strong and inter-disciplinary team of researchers with
expertise in computer vision and action recognition (Turaga), differential
geometry and statistics (Srivastava), and somatics and kinesiology (Coleman).