* 1617025
* Time-resolved conformational changes of proteins by very high frequency Gd3+ EPR
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to develop a method to "film" proteins, the tiny machines that
enable all of life as we know it, as they perform their critical biological
functions. Understanding how proteins function is one of the most exciting
frontiers of science, and is necessary in order to address societal needs in
fields as diverse as renewable energy and agriculture. The rich and intricate
3-dimensional shapes of more than 100,000 different kinds of proteins are now
documented, thanks to revolutionary advances in X-ray spectroscopy, magnetic
resonance, and other methods. However, while knowing the shape of a machine, for
example, seeing a photograph of a sewing machine, might give one a clue as to
how it works, a movie of a machine in action is far more revealing. The goal of
this project is to develop new methods to make such "movies" of proteins, or
stated more precisely, to develop methods to measure the time resolved
conformational changes in protein structure (or structural dynamics). A team of
graduate students and undergraduates, working at the interface between physics,
chemistry, and biology, and working closely with international collaborators,
will tackle this exciting problem, and will emerge well-positioned to become
leaders in the nation's science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Filming" proteins in action requires a
calibrated tool to measure distances of several nanometers with high throughput
and, ideally, sub-millisecond time resolution. This tool must be compatible with
the complex local environments in which proteins perform their functions;
ideally, in aqueous solutions although many proteins continue to function as
long as they are above about 215K. The primary goal of the proposed research is
to use high-frequency (&gt;200 GHz) electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
combined with site-directed spin labeling with spin-7/2 Gd3+ moieties to measure
time-resolved conformational changes of proteins. With prior NSF support, the PI
and co-PI's collaboration has demonstrated that the simplest possible 240 GHz
EPR measurements; measurements of the lineshapes of molecules containing a pair
of Gd3+ spin labels; is capable of resolving distances greater than 3 nm even at
room temperature. The proposed research will build on these key developments,
focusing primarily on time-resolved distance measurements in the model protein
Proteorhodopsin (PR), a photosynthetic trans-membrane proton pump that can be
triggered with flashes of light to begin synchronized cascades of conformational
changes on time scales ranging from less than 1 microsecond to more than 1
second. The main activities undertaken will be: (1) Developing a simple method
based on measuring the lineshape of the Gd3+ EPR line to extract distances and
distance distributions in the 1.5-4 nm range from PR doubly labeled with Gd3+.
(2) Measuring conformational changes of PR at temperatures ranging from about
215K (where PR is frozen but active) to room temperature with sub-millisecond
time resolution. (3) Pulsed EPR studies of Gd3+ to understand the spin physics
of Gd3+ at very high frequencies.