* 1617889
* CIF: Small: Combining Information Theoretic Security and Stochastic Control to Study Advanced Persistent Threats
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2023
* Parvathinathan Venkitasubramaniam, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 354,695.00

Despite tremendous advances in cryptography and communication security,
information attacks -- both passive such as eavesdropping, and active such as
unauthorized data injection --, can severely impair the functioning of modern
infrastructural systems that combine cyber communication systems and networked
physical components. The ability of adversaries to monitor transmitted data or
introduce false information for sustained periods of time whilst staying
undetected can result in leakage of sensitive information or cause critical
damages to underlying systems with consequences ranging from airline collisions,
power blackouts to malfunctioning nuclear reactors. In this research, rigorous
frameworks are developed to study vulnerabilities of cyber physical systems to
such persistent security threats with the goal of designing novel and resilient
system controllers. The systematic approach to study adversarial behavior will
not only enable effective cyber policing, but also lay a platform for developing
technologies to prevent the next generation of cyber terrorism that aims to
cripple basic infrastructural systems in energy, healthcare, transportation etc.
The education and outreach components will facilitate an enhanced awareness in
society of potential vulnerabilities of the burgeoning Internet of Things and
the path towards cyber physical security.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
will study two key challenges in securing cyber physical systems: preventing
retrieval of physical system information through continually monitored cyber
flows, and limiting disruption to system operations through continually hacked
cyber flows. Incorporating the strengths of information theoretic security and
statistical inference methodologies into a dynamic programming framework which
models cyber physical system evolution as a function of external information and
internal control, this research will study quantitatively the trade-offs between
information security and the system operational performance, and through the
process, develop attack detection and mitigation methodologies.