* 1617364
* CNH-L: Land transactions and investments: Impacts on agricultural production, ecosystem services, and food-energy security
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jane Southworth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,599,951.00

Tens of millions of hectares of land has changed hands in the last decade in a
large number of lower-income countries, with the UK, China, and the US being
among the largest sources of land investments. Control over land enables
investors to cultivate new commodity crops, deploy new agricultural practices
and technologies, and sell output for new uses and in new markets - with
associated impacts on food-energy security, human well-being, and ecological
processes. The scale and pace of changes in land ownership and access has
increased rapidly in lower-income tropical countries. The project will assess
outcomes of land transactions in Ethiopia - a country that has witnessed
thousands of transactions and has substantial external investment, including
from the United States - to identify when land transactions generate positive
versus negative outcomes. This research will focus in particular on
agricultural, ecological, and food and energy security outcomes. The project
will generate new data that will be available for public use by other scholars
and researchers, train scientists in the United States and build greater
research capacity among international collaborators, and produce findings that
will hold practical interest for decision makers in government agencies, NGOs,
and donor organizations. Generalizable propositions about the impacts of land
tenure changes on farm level processes, producer incentives, and labor practices
will be of interest to US investors in other regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus in particular on quantifying the nature and extent of
socioeconomic, land cover/change and ecological impacts, and modeling the causal
sequences and feedback loops of land transactions. The research will advance the
conceptual understanding of how tenure and institutional changes on land drive
human-nature interactions and impacts in coupled agro-ecological systems. The
project will aggregate and leverage existing socioeconomic datasets, and collect
original social and ecological data from eight transaction sites. The research
will contribute in three major ways towards an improved understanding of the
effects of land transactions and the social and ecological effects of land
tenure changes. It will: (1) Develop new theoretical insights into the
livelihood, land use, and ecological effects of land tenure changes and
displacement through integration, quantitative analyses, and agent based
modeling based on multi-level social, economic, ecological, and biophysical
data; (2) Enhance existing methods to understand and detect changes in land
cover using remote sensing data for both agricultural and forest landscapes,
particularly for the drier eastern African region; and (3) Improve statistical
analysis and computer simulations-based predictions, in particular by developing
better spatial analysis techniques. Overall, the project will show how varying
patterns of livelihood and land cover changes result from land transition
pathways associated with land transactions.