* 1617174
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Fortifications In Reifying Social Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Eilis Monahan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 24,153.00

The modern world is characterized by countless differences that cut along
economic, social, and political lines. Such structured and hierarchical
divisions within human society are neither an essential nor inevitable condition
of collective life, but develop under specific historical circumstances.
Archaeology is uniquely poised to study how such "complex societies" come about,
as it allows researchers to trace changes in social organization over the span
of millennia through the material remains of human action. Such understanding
helps one to better recognize both the opportunities and tradeoffs that come
with different approaches to political life. Ms. Eilis Monahan of Cornell
University will undertake research that investigates the early formation of
complex societies, through a particular focus on landscapes and the built
environment. Specifically, the research seeks to explain the roles played by
defensive structures, such as fortifications, in creating the kinds of social
and political boundaries that we take for granted today as basic features of
modern societies. In many parts of the world, fortifications and other dramatic
alterations to the landscape occur during times of transition to increased
complexity. This research is therefore of broad social scientific relevance,
contributing to wider debates on the relationships among power, society, and
defense. Ms. Monahan's study is undertaken in collaboration with the Department
of Antiquities, Cyprus and will foster collegial intellectual and professional
relationships between U.S., E.U. and Cypriot students and scholars. This project
will also document threatened sites of cultural and historical significance,
which will aid in the development of future heritage management planning in the
region.

Ms. Monahan will investigate how the construction of fortifications creates a
"disciplinary landscape" that alters how people experience and perceive space,
and the impacts this has on the development and reinforcement of inequality.
This project focuses on a cluster of four Middle Bronze Age fortresses in the
Ayios Sozomenos region in central Cyprus. Located near vital copper sources, and
situated at crossroads of communication and trade across the island, these
massive fortified sites appear during the dramatic transformation of Cyprus from
an insular and egalitarian village-based society to a socially-stratified urban
society, engaged in diplomatic relations and trade with the great polities of
the Eastern Mediterranean. Combining excavation, survey, and museum study, the
research will investigate how these fortresses were constructed and used in
conjunction with the location and chronology of other sites in the region. By
evaluating how fortresses alter the ways that people can move, see, and act, and
by analyzing shifting patterns of settlement, this research will reveal how
fortifications change the ways in which people interact with each other and how,
in turn, this contributes to the transformation of society.