* 1617315
* SHF: Small: Efficient In-Memory Computing Architecture Based on RRAM Crossbar Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Conventional digital computers, with separate processor and memory, face
increasing challenges in today?s ?big data? era as the constant movement of data
between the processor and the memory causes significant delay and energy
consumption. This problem, termed the ?von Neumann bottleneck?, affects
performance for both complex tasks such as image and video processing as well as
embedded applications such as distributed sensor networks where high speed and
low power are critical. This project aims to develop a new computer architecture
based on emerging resistive random access memory (RRAM) crossbar arrays, where
the memory and logic functions exist at the same physical locations and
computation is achieved in the physical memory by directly reading out stored
outputs for a given operation. By leveraging the unique properties of emerging
devices with a new computation architecture, this project will profoundly
advance the frontier of nanoscale device and computer architecture research, and
enable high-speed and low-power computation for applications ranging from
servers to Internet of Things (IoTs). This program will have significant impact
on the research community and the semiconductor industry, while providing
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students, and draw
broad participation of students of different levels and backgrounds in
collaborative research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach takes
full advantage of the high-storage density, non-volatility, and random-access
capabilities of RRAM arrays. RRAM devices operate based on the resistance change
when the device is subjected to a programming or reset pulse. Consequently, the
resistance not only stores information but also directly regulates information
(i.e. current) flow in the circuit, thus implementing both memory and logic
functions simultaneously. Previous studies on RRAM-based circuits focus on soft
computing tasks where the environment and the tasks are complex but inaccuracies
and approximations are tolerated. This project aims to develop a computing
system that can perform accurate arithmetic operations efficiently using RRAM
crossbar arrays. The system will be optimized for throughput and energy, and
experimentally demonstrated using fabricated high-density RRAM arrays, along
with the development of a toolset for design automation.