* 1617053
* CNH-S: Coupling of Physical Infrastructure, Green Infrastructure, and Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Sucharita Gopal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 484,136.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the connectivity and
functional interdependencies among co-located, critical infrastructure systems,
such as gas, water and sewer pipes, roads, and the urban canopy, as well as the
networks of people and institutions that depend on and manage and maintain the
urban infrastructure. The project will center on an aged, leaking natural gas
pipeline system that damages the urban forest canopy, creates road repair
problems, degrades air quality, contributes to atmospheric warming, and can
endanger human safety through explosion risks. The project will provide new
insights regarding the robustness, redundancy, and connectivity within and
across physical-biophysical-sociopolitical networks. By explicitly mapping out
hidden and unrecognized physical and social linkages among critical urban
infrastructure systems, the project will provide a foundation for more
effective, coordinated urban infrastructure management and maintenance. The
investigators will develop a general framework for sustainable urban
infrastructure systems that can be applied across a wide range of urban settings
across the U.S. and elsewhere. Project findings will be disseminated to a broad
range of potential beneficiaries, including officials in municipal public works
departments, local utilities, and state policymakers and regulators. The project
also will provide education and training opportunities for graduate students,
and it will involve a public school teacher as an integral member of the
research team in order to improve capabilities to effectively communicate
findings and insights to K-12 students and help them better understand the
importance of infrastructure management.

The investigators will use methods from plant physiological ecology, geospatial
science, and social network theory to measure interactions among co-located
infrastructure and social networks and to map their connectivity and functional
interactions across the Boston metropolitan area. They will perform field
research across a geospatially diverse set of known gas leaks in the greater
Boston area and employ geospatial analysis relate leak data to other data, such
as measures of tree health and damage. They will conduct field experiments to
assess the impacts of gas leaks on saplings, and they will assess the degree to
which methane might be vented through trees into the atmosphere. Analyses of the
geospatial relationships between gas leaks and human communities will examine
relationships among biophysical and demographic data, and the conduct of a pair
of extended case studies will provide insights into the formal and informal
relationships and interactions over daily, mid and long-term management issues
within the network. Through these complementary approaches, the investigators
will advance a general theory of urban function that has the power of
transforming science to practical application in guiding policy toward
effective, efficient, and environmentally beneficial coordination of
infrastructure management. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.