* 1617046
* CSR: Small: Scalable, heterogeneity-aware load balancing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 394,981.00

Several extremely large online services are provided by distributed systems.
Load balancers play a vital role in such systems by distributing incoming
requests among the back-end nodes. However, given the rise in cloud computing
and the increasing popularity of online services, load balancers today face
significant challenges that impact performance. Key among them is the need to
quickly distribute millions of requests among heterogeneous nodes while adapting
to changing system conditions. Failure to serve requests in a timely manner can
lead to loss of revenue due to customer abandonment. This research proposes
novel, scalable algorithms that enable high-throughput load balancers for cloud
deployments. By leveraging concepts from queueing theory, this research will
investigate dynamic, near-optimal load distribution policies with provable
performance guarantees. The proposed algorithms will be designed for easy
adoption in existing open-source load balancers, including Apache, HAProxy, and
nginx. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent network function virtualization trends have
put the spotlight back on software network functions. This project will explore
novel software load balancers for modern computing environments, including
dedicated clusters and shared cloud environments. Given the need for high-
throughput load balancing decisions, this research focuses on simple yet
powerful randomized load balancer designs. The key idea of the proposed research
is to dynamically adapt the routing probability based on inferred changes in the
workload and infrastructure. Queueing theoretic models will be leveraged to
understand the impact of routing on performance, and machine learning techniques
will be employed for detecting system changes. The proposed load balancers will
be evaluated in Web and data-dependent environments, including MapReduce
implementations. The integrated theory-systems research approach will provide
unique interdisciplinary educational and collaborative opportunities, including
(cross-listed) course development, student training, and technology transfer
with industrial partners.