* 1617773
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Enabling Application-Level Performance Predictability in Public Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Mosharaf Chowdhury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 238,500.00

State-of-the-art resource sharing mechanisms in today's datacenters and compute
clouds are agnostic to application-level performance requirements, resulting in
unpredictable performance. This is especially true for the network. Unlike, CPU,
memory, or disk, cloud operators do not provide any guarantees for the network.
Many tenants rely on over-provisioning and static allocation for performance
isolation, which results in low utilization and increased cost and environmental
impacts. This project aims to build a set of solutions to achieve short- and
long-term performance predictability with high resource utilization. The goal is
to enable coexisting applications from different tenants to meet a variety of
performance objectives including obtaining timely responses and minimizing
variance of successive responses, while adhering to organizational hierarchies
of individual tenants. The key technical challenges in this project include
developing short- and long-term resource allocation algorithms, accurate demand
estimation, as well as fast and efficient enforcement, all of which are
compounded by the multi-resource and shared nature of the network. Two key
techniques guide the proposed work: (i) temporal scheduling ensures predictable
performance through short- and long-term performance isolation, and (ii) spatial
placement ensures higher utilization through initial placement and periodic
migration of tenants' virtual machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predictable,
efficient data analytics will have significant socio-economic ramifications. It
will also enable mission-critical applications, e.g., anomaly detection, fraud
protection, autonomous vehicles, and robotics-- that require a highly consistent
and reliable level of performance to coexist with the less sensitive ones.
Algorithms and software from the project will be incorporated into existing
open-source big data stacks for public reuse. By leveraging ongoing
relationships with the industry, artifacts from this project will be converted
from research into practice in a fast manner. The project has significant
educational and outreach components, which include introducing new courses at
both graduate and undergraduate levels based on the outcomes of this project as
well as arranging cloud computing boot camps aimed at students from high schools
and involving women and under-represented minorities.