* 1617203
* TWC: Small: Secure by Construction: An Automated Approach to Comprehensive Side Channel Resistance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Patrick Schaumont, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

A software implementation shows side-channel leakage when the physical effects
of its implementation have a dependency to secret data such as cryptographic
keys. Relevant physical effects include instruction execution time, memory
access time, power consumption and electromagnetic radiation. Fifteen years
after differential power analysis was first demonstrated, side-channel attacks
are affecting software implementations in a broad variety of processors. Yet,
without the support of automatic tools, programmers still have to resort to
manual and error-prone insertion of countermeasures. This is problematic because
side-channel leakage is an implementation effect that is difficult to infer or
predict from source code. This project will create automatic software tools that
can help software developers synthesize and verify side-channel resistant
software, quickly and correctly. The automatic software code transformation
techniques to be developed in this project will be released as an open-source
compiler, thereby bringing the results in reach of a larger
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop design automation
techniques to systematically remove the dependency of side channel leakage to
secret data. The proposed countermeasures will be based on inductive synthesis
and formal verification, and they will be integrated as compiler-driven
transformations on the software code. The estimation of side-channel leakage
will be guided through a parameterized processor architecture model. This will
ensure that the side-channel resistant code is portable across different
architecture targets. Compared to existing countermeasure designs, the proposed
approach is generic and application independent; it can be used by non-
specialist programmers; and it offers correct-by-construction guarantees through
formal analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-cutting nature of
security brings a need for side-channel resistant design to a wide variety of
application domains including automotive, industrial, health-care, or smart-
grid. Developers from these fields need tools to help them to quickly build
correct and secure software without having to deal with the pitfalls of side-
channel resistant design. Automatic insertion of side-channel countermeasures
will address this need and lead to cheaper and more secure products. The
research outcomes of this project include an open-source, extensible compiler,
and a hardware demonstration platform to validate the side-channel resistant
code generated using the compiler. These artifacts enable the formal methods and
compiler community to investigate new countermeasure techniques, and they help
the cryptographic engineering community to create a benchmark suite to validate
these countermeasures. The PIs will advertise this potential in their respective
communities by developing a summer school to teach the outcomes of their
research. The PIs will also develop a graduate course that teams up students in
embedded system design with students in compiler design.