* 1617306
* AF: Small: Approximate Counting, Markov Chains and Phase Transitions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Eric Vigoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

This project studies algorithms for counting and sampling problems. For an
exponentially large set of discrete, combinatorial objects, the goal is to
estimate the size of this set or randomly sample from it in polynomial-time.
Algorithms for these problems are used in a variety of scientific fields, often
with little rigorous guarantees on their performance, and the results of this
project will enhance the reliability of such studies. The results of this
project will enhance connections between statistical physics and theoretical
computer science by formalizing connections between phase transitions in
statistical physics with the efficiency of algorithms for this type of
counting/sampling problems. In addition, the PI will organize inter-disciplinary
workshops tying together researchers from statistical physics, discrete
mathematics, and theoretical computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Loopy Belief
Propagation (BP) and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms are two popular
algorithms for the counting/sampling problems of approximating partition
functions and sampling from Gibbs distributions. In this project the PI intends
to present new techniques for proving convergence results for loopy BP and MCMC
algorithms. This will result in new, efficient counting/sampling algorithms for
problems of combinatorial interest including weighted independent sets and
colorings of a graph. These results will enhance recent results establishing
beautiful connections between the approximability of counting problems for
graphs of maximum degree D with statistical physics phase transitions for
infinite D-regular trees.