* 1617424
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Improving Android Security with Dynamic Slicing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Mobile devices have been very successful and continue to expand their user base.
However, the very features that have made these devices successful, e.g., rich
sensor inputs (GPS, camera, microphone) and continuous Internet connectivity,
have also made the devices a favorite target for attackers. Attacks can have
many negative consequences, from stealing users' secrets to spying on the users
or installing viruses that render devices inoperable. This project will develop
dynamic slicing techniques so that developers and researchers will be able to
gain effective insights into device and app behavior, including malicious apps;
this will make it easier to construct secure apps and to find/eliminate
malicious behavior, which in turn will benefit mobile device users.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be introduced to new approaches to
smartphone security, which will make students better equipped for tackling
emerging software research and development
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic slicing (analyzing an execution to
identify relevant code and data dependences) is a particularly effective
technique for addressing a wide range of security problems. This project will
develop a dynamic slicer for Android and then use the slicer, as well as its
integration with other existing tools, for three main security applications.
First, improving dynamic taint analysis via efficient, effective, integrated
control/data slicing. Second, finding relevant parts in the input to identity
which sensor stream and part thereof are responsible for security-relevant
behavior, e.g., attack, crash, botnet operation, or use of anti-detection
techniques. Third, Undo Computing, in particular combining slicing with record-
and-replay to support undo computing on Android. These lines of work are
expected to lead to advances in: security, e.g., precise and effective dynamic
taint tracking, finding leaks due to control dependences, understanding botnet
behavior, principled discovery of anti-detection techniques, separating benign
from malicious state changes; and program analysis, e.g., slicing programs that
are event-oriented or rely heavily on inter-process communication; computing
input/data/code interdependences in the presence of high-throughput event
streams.