* 1617333
* CHS: Small: Shape Processing with Deep Architectures
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Evangelos Kalogerakis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,935.00

Digital representations of three-dimensional shapes are becoming an integral
part of many scientific and engineering fields. And 3D printers are becoming
increasingly popular for transforming these digital representations into real
objects for industrial or home use as tools, mechanical components, or household
items. Virtual environments for simulation, education, and entertainment require
large numbers of diverse 3D models to maintain realism and operability. In
computer vision, several recent object recognition algorithms are trained on
large synthetic datasets originating from 3D shape repositories. All these
fields and several others increasingly depend on the availability of digital 3D
shapes. However, it is still a challenge to develop tools that allow users to
easily produce new 3D shapes, or even to retrieve and process existing ones from
online repositories. Current 3D modeling tools often require laborious user
interaction via low-level selection and editing commands, while existing search
engines for retrieving 3D shapes largely depend on manually entered tags and
hand-tuned feature representations which results in unsatisfactory retrieval
performance. The PI's goal in this research is to create algorithms based on
"deep" architectures that automatically learn from data how to reliably analyze
and synthesize 3D shapes that are optimized for 3D shape processing and
synthesis performance (so that, for example, when these shapes are 3D printed
they retain desirable physical properties such as reduced mechanical stress).
Project outcomes will be released as open source code and will have broad impact
not only on computer graphics and computer vision but also on industry,
computer-aided design and mechanical engineering pipelines, and architectural
engineering software for buildings and indoor
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make three major
contributions in terms of intellectual merit: 1) Deep architectures and
algorithms for learning 3D shape feature representations optimized for retrieval
and processing performance; the algorithms will be trained on massive 2D image
datasets as well as 3D model repositories, and the learned representations will
be used for accurate shape categorization, segmentation, correspondence, style
analysis, and texturing. 2) Deep architectures and algorithms for learning to
reliably generate new 3D shapes based on intuitive user input, such as sketches
and textual descriptions. 3) Algorithms for learning to optimize the underlying
geometry of 3D shapes such that they acquire desired physical properties for 3D
printing and manufacturing.