* 1617634
* NeTS: Small: Smart Interference Management for Wireless Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Wireless Internet of Things (W-IoT) consists of billions of wireless devices,
whose number is increasing at half a billion each year. These wireless devices
have strong wireless communications and networking capabilities and have brought
in huge amounts of data traffic over the airwaves. When multiple different
devices are transmitting at the same time, there will be interference at the
receivers, which could severely distort received signals and make them
undecodable. To mitigate interference, many of the existing standards focus on
interference avoidance, i.e., restricting to only one device transmitting at a
time. This avoidance approach has poor throughput performance when wireless
traffic volume in W-IoT becomes heavy. This project proposes a new approach to
mitigate interference by exploiting advanced interference management (IM)
techniques and programmability of new radio hardware. This approach has the
potential to offer much higher throughput than existing methods. The success of
this project will offer a revolutionary approach for IM in the W-IoT and offer
new knowledge and methodology for future research on IM in W-IoT. New education
materials will be developed and special programs to broaden participation by
female and underrepresented students are planned through Wireless@VT summer
symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental problem to ensure that data can
be smoothly transported in the W-IoT is how to manage interference effectively.
Recent advances in IM have introduced a number of new techniques to exploit
interference rather than avoiding it. On a separate front, advances in field-
programmable hardware and software-defined radios allow many physical and link
layer algorithms to be programmable on the fly. Capitalizing on these two
trends, this project investigates the feasibility of making IM techniques
programmable at a mobile device so that an optimal IM algorithm can be chosen
and programmed in real time based on the underlying communications scenarios.
This project aims to take concrete steps to realize this vision by focusing on
the following research topics: (1) gain fundamental understanding of
programmable IM algorithms, (2) design innovative new IM algorithms with much
improved capabilities and fewer limitations, (3) provide a roadmap for optimal
deployment of programmable IM in the W-IoT. System building and experimentation
are embedded into each component of this project. An array of advanced IM
algorithms will be implemented on the WARP platform and Virginia Tech CORNET
testbed.