* 1617945
* CCF-BSF:SHF: Small: Timing Validation for Asyncronous Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Rajit Manohar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Enabled by research and development in advanced materials, nano-manufacturing,
and digital computation, low-cost, high-performance, and low-power electronic
components have yielded smart-phones, wireless connectivity, high-throughput
networks, inexpensive data centers, to just name a few aspects of our modern
digital economy. However, as the current technology approaches limits set by the
laws of physics, gains in performance and power efficiency are no longer
realizable through conventional techniques. It is critical that a diverse group
of students be trained in unconventional approaches, so that they can take new
ideas to practice as part of the semiconductor industry and continue the
phenomenal growth of the past decades known as the Moore's law. Asynchronous
circuits and systems design, to be pursued in this project, is one such
unconventional approach being studied as a way to improve computational
efficiency. The project also collaborates with the Binational Science Foundation
(BSF) of Israel to leverage complementary research
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated timing validation is a critical
component in physical realization of a digital circuit. Timing validation
ensures that the physical implementation of the circuit is consistent with the
intent of the designer, in spite of the uncertainties and constraints introduced
by the manufacturing process. Two components are necessary for timing
validation: a mathematical foundation, and software that realizes the validation
process by implementing the mathematics. The goal of this effort is to develop
these two components for the timing validation of asynchronous circuits. The
project brings expertise from two different disciplines to bear on this effort:
(i) asynchronous circuit design and implementation, and (ii) the theory of
asynchronous distributed systems. The project adapts the concept of potential
causality from the distributed systems literature to the context of asynchronous
circuits. The fusion of insights and techniques from the two disciplines
promises to facilitate better design of fast and energy-efficient circuits, as
well as improving the techniques for validating and verifying the correctness of
systems built from them.