* 1617602
* Non-Invasive Diagnostics of Molecular Gas Plasmas with Quantitative Optical Emission Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* John Boffard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 525,000.00

This project aims to develop a new non-invasive and easily-implemented optical
diagnostic of an ionized gas, a plasma, for the particular class of low-pressure
molecular gas plasmas. Industrial processes involving plasmas contribute to a
long list of societal benefits that continues to grow at a rapid pace. The
unique properties of low-pressure ionized gas plasmas enable the manipulation of
materials in ways that cannot be achieved by other means. Specifically, their
complex dynamics lead to non-equilibrium chemistry; energetic ions, radicals
(atoms, molecules or ions that react strongly with substrate surfaces), and
photons produced in the plasma through collisions with energetic electrons etch,
modify or deposit thin films on materials surfaces. Process outcomes are thus
critically sensitive to the abundances of electrons of different energies and
other plasma parameters. This project will also celebrate plasma technology and
enhance public 'plasma literacy' through the development of a new hands-on
outreach exhibit highlighting plasma thrusters for spacecraft propulsion. The
centerpiece of the display will be a working plasma thruster operating at
atmospheric pressure. The display will be created in partnership with the Rocket
Club at Madison West High School and will become part of the Rocket Club's
popular traveling exhibit, viewed by thousands of people each year at science
festivals and school visits.

The spectrum of light emitted by the plasma carries an encoded mapping of plasma
parameters. Probing plasma properties by measuring the intensity of plasma light
emissions at characteristic wavelengths is made possible through a model that
predicts emission spectra by accounting for the excitation and de-excitation
processes that govern light emission by the plasma. This project's innovation is
the creation of a quantitative emission model for molecular gases, with oxygen
as an initial focus. Through careful consideration of known excitation rates,
the study will identify spectral features for inclusion in the model, choosing
some that show a strong quantitative dependence on the electron energy
distribution function and others that are strong functions of the dissociation
fraction, i.e., the fraction of molecules broken up into constituent atoms. This
approach will allow plasma parameters to be determined as the values for which
the model produces a best fit to the observed spectral intensities, measured
using optical emission spectroscopy (OES). To demonstrate and explore the
capabilities of the molecular OES diagnostic, it will be applied to selected
discharge phenomena (i) that exhibit complex plasma dynamics not fully
understood, (ii) for which new molecular OES is likely to contribute new
insights and (iii) for which the new insights obtained have relevance for
development of industrial processes.