* 1617020
* Prediction and Discovery of Host Metabolites and Metabolic Pathways Required for Proliferation of an Obligate Fungal Biotroph
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Mary Wildermuth, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,553,213.00

Powdery mildews are widespread fungal pathogens that cause major crop loss and
susceptible crops are regularly treated to limit infection. Most people have
observed the white powdery-like growth associated with powdery mildews in their
gardens for example, on leaves of roses. Powdery mildews are obligate biotrophs,
meaning they can only grow and reproduce on living plants. As such, they obtain
all nutrients from the plant host. The goal of this project is to couple cutting
edge approaches in molecular genetics and genomics, analytical chemistry,
informatics and modeling to identify the specific plant metabolites required by
the powdery mildew for its growth and reproduction. Broader impacts of this work
include developing novel tools and resources for the study of powdery mildews
and similar types of biotrophs for the research community, identifying novel
targets to limit powdery mildew growth to enhance crop yield while limiting
chemical treatments, and training and mentoring our next generation of
scientists,including under-represented minority students, in cross-disciplinary
science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The powdery mildew-host plant system is uniquely
suited to the development of tools and approaches that can be applied more
generally for the study of inter-organismal metabolism and development. This
project will iteratively create a constraint-based powdery mildew-host plant
integrated metabolic metabolic model to predict host and fungal metabolic
pathways. This will be accomplished by: i) developing novel computational and
experimental platforms, tools, and approaches, ii) identifying critical
metabolites and pathways required by obligate fungal biotrophs for their
development and proliferation, and iii) determining nutritional requirements to
enable axenic culturing. The project also seeks to obtain fundamental insights
into nutrient reservoir metabolism as local plant cells are used to fuel the
sustained growth and reproduction of the fungus, as well as knowledge about
control points and pathways targeted by pathogens. The broader impacts include
advancing knowledge of the powdery mildew - plant host interaction, training our
next generation of cross-disciplinary STEM scientists through mentoring of
students and postdocs, development, testing, and use of integrated metabolic
databases and prediction tools for the broader scientific community, and
identifying novel targets to limit powdery mildew growth and reproduction.