* 1617365
* CIF: SMALL: MASSIVE MIMO SYSTEMS: Novel Channel Modeling and Estimation Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The demand for wireless services and higher wireless throughput continues to
grow exponentially. To meet this growth, massive multiple-input multiple-output
(MIMO) has been identified as an enabling technology in next generation wireless
systems. A challenge in realizing the vision is the estimation of the wireless
channel between the transmitter and receiver as the number of transmitting
antennas becomes large. The channel modeling and estimation challenge is
addressed in this research for a variety of deployment scenarios; frequency
division duplex (FDD) systems, time division duplex (TDD) systems, and
distributed massive MIMO systems. In addition to having a significant impact on
the theoretical foundations and algorithms relevant to next generation wireless
systems, this research will involve several graduate students who will be
trained in the latest wireless technology and also result in novel tools that
have fundamental and wider import.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The channel modeling and
estimation research includes the development of line-of-sight channel estimation
via advanced sparse signal recovery algorithms like sparse Bayesian learning
with the goal of reducing training overhead. The non-line-of-sight environment
is considered from a novel dictionary learning perspective to enable low
dimensional representations of the channel. These representations along with
compressive channel learning will lead to the development of techniques that
significantly reduce the feedback overhead for FDD systems. For TDD systems, the
research involves the development of data-aided channel estimation techniques to
improve channel estimates well beyond what is possible with pilot-only training.
In addition, the research includes an in-depth study of the tradeoffs of
distributed massive MIMO array design to develop insights necessary for
selecting the optimal array configuration.