* 1617718
* RI: Small: Network Formation for Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2022
* USD 389,660.00

Many multi-robot tasks, which arise in search-and-rescue, environmental
monitoring and similar applications, require the robots to communicate with one
another. In contrast to most current work, where the robots are deployed in
controlled settings and are guaranteed to be connected, as multi-robot systems
get deployed in real-world applications, they will often lose connectivity due
to navigation errors, communication failures, or planned movements into
communications-denied areas. When this happens, the robots need a systematic and
efficient way to reconnect into a network. This project studies the theoretical
question of how should the robots move so that they can quickly form a
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network formation generalizes a number of
fundamental problems (e.g. rendezvous search, freeze tag, minimizing movement)
that have been studied in relatively simple settings by disjointed groups of
communities. This work attempts to introduce a unified treatment and address
aspects relevant to robotics applications, such as the presence of obstacles and
sensing limitations. The proposed work will study three variants of network
formation for a number of practically relevant environment models. The first two
variants are based on the information available to the robots (e.g., whether the
initial locations are known). The third variant will introduce novel network
formation problems in which a team of heterogeneous vehicles with different
motion capabilities (e.g. ground robots on a terrain and aerial vehicles flying
over them) try to form a network. These variants are formulated as novel-
optimization problems whose solutions will provide efficient network-formation
strategies with provable performance guarantees. Results will be evaluated in
simulation and field applications with ground-ground and ground-air vehicle
teams.