* 1617915
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Practical Hardware-Assisted Always-On Malware Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dmitry Ponomarev, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 283,000.00

The project explores building support for malware detection in hardware. Malware
detection is challenging and resource intensive, as the number and
sophistication of malware increases. The resource requirements for malware
detection limit its use in practice, leaving malware unchecked on many systems.
We use a low level hardware detector to identify malware as a computational
anomaly using low level features such as hardware events, instruction mixes and
memory address patterns. Once malware is suspected, we inform a higher level
software detection or protection mechanism that can focus its resources only on
suspected malware. The detector uses low complexity machine learning approaches
to classify malware from normal programs using implementations that are feasible
in hardware.

The project explores countermeasures based on adversarial machine learning to
limit attackers trying to evade detection, develops secure integration between
the hardware and software detection, and evaluates implementation tradeoffs. The
project contributes a new approach to improve the effectiveness of malware
detection and to allow systems to be protected continuously without requiring
the large resource investment needed by software monitors. The project holds the
promise of significantly impacting an area of critical national need to help
secure systems against the expanding threats of malware. The principles pursued
in the proposal can generalize to different computational environments including
mobile phones, clouds, and cyberphysical systems.