* 1617504
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Limits of Robust Interference Management -- Between the Extremes
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 499,787.00

The capacity of wireless interference networks is one of the most important open
problems of network information theory. Much progress has been made on this
problem within the past decade. However, the initial focus has been on divergent
extremes: where channel knowledge is available either with infinite precision or
entirely absent; where the interference is either too strong or too weak; where
channels are either perfectly constant or independently varying. Where previous
studies have focused on extreme scenarios to arrive at radically divergent
conclusions, this research reconciles the divergent extremes by resolving
incompatibilities wherever they exist and exploiting synergies everywhere
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is comprised of three main
components ? exploring progressively, the full range of partial channel
knowledge, channel strengths, and channel coherence patterns. The stepping
stones for the three thrusts include recent advances in topological interference
management, the optimality of treating interference as noise, and blind
interference alignment. The final critical ingredient of this research is a
breakthrough in robust outer bounds, called the Aligned Image Sets (AIS)
approach ? a novel combinatorial argument that bounds the relative size of the
images cast by a set of codewords at different receivers based on the amount of
channel knowledge available to the transmitters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research combines the theoretical pursuit of capacity limits with the practical
concern for robustness. Understanding the capabilities of wireless communication
networks in robust settings is essential for the industry, the academia, the
government agencies and the society in general to have realistic expectations
from the networks of the future.