* 1617851
* AF: Small: Sublinear Algorithms for Graph Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Very-large scale graphs routinely arise in applications where the data describes
pairwise relationships among a set of objects. Some standard examples include
the Web graph, social networks, and biological networks. The prevalence of such
large data sets has led to a rapidly growing interest in the design of sublinear
algorithms, that is, algorithms whose computational resource requirements are
substantially smaller than the input size. As vast amounts of networked data is
being collected and processed in diverse application domains, sublinear
algorithms that accurately compute and describe relevant properties of the data
will increasingly play an important role in computing on such data. The goal of
this project is to develop sublinear algorithms for several fundamental graph
optimization problems. The specific graph problems studied in this project are
of both theoretical and practical interest, and are among the most well-studied
problems in combinatorial optimization. Additionally, a study of these problems
through the lens of sublinear algorithms is likely to yield new insights into
computational aspects of these fundamental problems. The research proposed here
will go hand-in-hand with educational and student-training initiatives,
including mentoring and training of undergraduate and graduate students, and
teaching in programs that introduce high-school students to exciting ideas in
theoretical computer science.

The research focus of this project is broadly divided into three parts. In the
first part, the PIs consider streaming algorithms for graph problems where an
input graph is revealed as a sequence of edge insertions and deletions. Some
representative problems studied in this part include matching and cut problems
in graphs. While both cuts and matchings have received considerable attention in
the streaming literature, several important questions concerning their
computability in the streaming model remain unresolved. In the second part, they
consider communication-efficient protocols in a distributed setting when the
input graph is partitioned across multiple sites. This model offers a natural
abstraction for distributed computation and is closely related to the streaming
model. A representative problem here is to understand the communication
complexity of the maximum matching problem. The third part of this project
investigates a new model for sketching graphs that consist of a (large) static
part and a (small) dynamic part. The goal here is to understand if there exist
compact sketches for several fundamental graph problems whose size is
proportional to the size of the dynamic part of the input graph such that any
updates to the dynamic part can be applied directly to the sketch.