* 1617774
* TWC: Small: Self-Recovering Certificate Authorities using Backward and Forward Secure Key Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marten van Dijk, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 327,159.00

Recent years have shown the fallacy of Certificate Authorities (CAs); insiders
are able to steal master signing keys and impersonate certificates, exploitation
of system vulnerabilities and other means of infiltration allow attackers to
gain access to CAs and copy their keys, etc. At stake is the mere survival of
public key infrastructures as trust in them is bootstrapped from trust in
certificates that bind public keys to known identities. The current attack
surface exposed by CAs makes trust in their issued certificates questionable.
The main problem is the information that a current stolen key leaks about to-be-
used future keys for signing future certificates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project introduces a new notion of backward security allowing a CA to revoke
newly reconstructed secret keys, which were maliciously modified by an attacker
and are known to the attacker, before the attacker is even able to sign valid
certificates. The project also provides efficient self-recovery meaning that, in
the presence of a powerful adversary, CAs are able to replace revoked keys by a
new non-compromised signing key sequence. Self-recovering CAs promise strong
security guarantees against the most powerful attacker who can read all digital
state and this will have a major societal impact: enterprises and individuals
will be able to trust such CAs and will regain trust in public key
infrastructures as a whole. Self-recovering CAs eliminate a serious security
threat to our economy and society.