* 1617562
* SHF: Small: Rapid Development of Adaptable RF Transceivers for IoT Applications via Built-in Self-Test and Calibration
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The fast-paced IoT domain requires rapid development of hardware, firmware, and
software, usually all by a small number of developers. Unfortunately, current
integrated circuit hardware design practices are not conducive to the fast-pace
development cycle of the IoT domain. Communications hardware requires a large
group of designers who spend the majority of their time tweaking their designs
such that the systems work under worst case scenarios of manufacturing
variations. A small IoT team may not have the resources necessary to build the
communications hardware with respect to the application needs. This project aims
to remove the hardware development roadblock by creating an innovation platform
that provides a library of hardware building blocks. Realizing that there is a
shortage of workforce in engineering, and interest in STEM related careers
begins early in the educational experience, the K-12 outreach objective for this
project is to inspire and engage the middle and high school student population
in engineering. In order to achieve this goal, the PIs will support middle and
high school students to engage in research via a virtual hardware design
platform. The students will team up to develop an IoT application and use
conceptual design tools to develop their hardware. These projects will also be
demonstrated in local middle schools and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an outcome of this
project designers will be enabled to plug-and-play the crucial hardware
components from a library without requiring deep design expertise. These library
blocks will include self-adaptation capabilities for critical communications
subsystems, which will automatically fine-tune hardware performance after the
manufacturing step, thereby removing the detailed design tweaks that are
otherwise common. In order to enable such plug-and-play hardware design for the
crucial communications circuits, adaptation components must be minimally
invasive, present with a small footprint, must be robust with respect to
manufacturing variations, and must accurately hit the performance target of the
specified IoT application. While these requirements are seemingly in conflict,
these goals will be achieved by co-design of the library blocks together with
their self-tuning components, using relative signal analysis to achieve high
accuracy, and using built-in analytical models to optimize the hardware
performance with respect to the IoT specification.