* 1617590
* RI: Small: Computational Techniques for Large Multi-Step Incomplete-Information Games
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Game-theoretic solution concepts provide a sound definition of how rational
agents should act and update their beliefs in multiagent settings. The ability
to compute such solutions in large incomplete-information games is a key
capability in a myriad of applications, such as in negotiations, cybersecurity,
physical security, medicine, and auctions. To achieve such strategically robust
intelligence, the solution concepts must be accompanied by computational
techniques for finding such solutions. Only then will the definitions be truly
operational. The PI proposes a host of techniques for this. The proposed work
will enable game theory to be an operational tool for analyzing large-scale
settings. The methodology is application independent, so it has extremely broad
applicability. To ensure scalability, the techniques will be benchmarked on
very-large-scale games. This is on a path to a vision where software agents
conduct commerce on behalf of humans and companies, or advise them. That leads
to increased social welfare (or increase in other measures of desirability of
outcomes) through better decision making. It also enables broader and fairer
access because it helps put less experienced/educated people/companies on an
equal footing with expert market participants. Broader access, in turn,
increases the benefits of (electronic) commerce further, and the benefits get
distributed more fairly across segments of society. The proposed algorithms can
also help others in their research by 1) providing counter-examples to incorrect
hypotheses (by rapidly generating and solving games within the class of
interest, and observing properties of the equilibria) and 2) helping guide the
formulation of new theorems by solving numerous cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research has four high-level technical prongs: (1) The PI will leverage
his recent breakthrough (with S. Singh) that enables game abstraction algorithms
(which have to be lossy in order to create small enough models to solve) to
create strategies that have bounds on exploitability. He proposes to broaden the
framework to general sequential games, to develop better action and state
abstraction algorithms, and to study abstraction both for scalability and
modeling purposes. He also proposes algorithms that create imperfect-recall
abstractions that have bounds, are potential-aware, support efficient
distributed equilibrium finding, and have compact representations. In addition,
he proposes techniques for optimal action abstraction and ways to do abstraction
during equilibrium finding and during execution of the game strategy. (2) He
proposes directions around the question of how opponents' actions should be
mapped to the abstract model. He also plans to determine why making one's
strategy less randomized can---surprisingly---be beneficial. (3) He proposes
parallelization and sampling techniques for the counterfactual regret
equilibrium-finding algorithm, and ways to solve imperfect-recall game
abstractions. He also proposes techniques for effective, detailed endgame and
midgame solving, as well as techniques that leverage endgame solving in finding
an equilibrium for the entire game. He also proposes a new computationally
feasible equilibrium refinement. (4) He proposes major scalability enhancements
to algorithms that combine game-theoretic reasoning and opponent modeling. He
proposes new directions based on a recent breakthrough (with S. Ganzfried) that
shows that fully safe opponent exploitation is possible. He also proposes to
study the three-way tradeoff among exploitation, exploitability, and
exploration.