* 1617403
* CHS: Small: Creating Versatile Vibrotactile Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lynette Jones, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Many consumer devices include vibrotactile technology to enhance the avenues of
communication available to the user. Despite high expectations, this technology
has not been as widely implemented as anticipated and in many devices tactile
output is limited to the provision of simple alerts. The question arises as to
whether this relatively narrow domain of application reflects limitations in the
technology itself or in the ease with which tactile signals can be developed and
implemented in different devices. The focus of the research is on developing the
tools and human performance models so that designers can optimize the use of
tactile technology in a variety of applications. This involves creating a
library of vibrotactile stimuli that can be used to present a variety of tactile
effects, and measuring the characteristics of these tactile signals when they
are presented in wearable and hand-held devices.

Vibrotactile technology has not been as widely implemented as anticipated and in
many devices tactile output is limited to the provision of simple notifications
and alerts. As wearable haptic and tactile technologies become more pervasive,
it will be critical to understand how the needs of a diverse user community can
be met by providing them with the tools to customize haptic and tactile signals.
A graphical design tool is being developed that can be used with different
actuators to display vibrotactile effects physically and to determine their
associated sensory and emotional attributes. User studies are conducted to
evaluate the graphical user interface and assess the efficacy of the content
presented. As part of this process, users indicate their preferences and
associations for the stimuli displayed so that these can be incorporated into
the interface. More widespread implementation of tactile communication will
require that the technology can support a broader range of users and different
user functions.