* 1617474
* TWC: Small: Designing Strong End-to-End Authentication Mechanisms for Modern Telephony Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Patrick Traynor, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Telephony is the dominant means of digital communication across the globe. With
more than six billion users worldwide, these systems represent the only
communications infrastructure available to the majority of people on the planet.
Authentication has traditionally been the most central security issue for
telephony providers. Tied directly to the billing process, authentication
ensures that providers are able to correctly charge specific parties for their
network usage. The problem with these techniques is that they do very little for
end users -- while the network is fairly certain of the identity of the user and
the user of the network, these techniques do nothing to assist the user in
determining the identity of the party on the other end of a call. As primary
evidence of this problem, well over US$2 Billion is lost every year via phone
fraud. These attacks are possible because the model of authentication addresses
only the provider's needs, not those of their customers. If attacks such as
Caller ID spoofing are ever to be mitigated, the diverse landscape of telephony
systems will require stronger, more universally applicable mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses authentication problems by tying
modern telephony systems into the global authentication infrastructure that has
dramatically improved transaction security over the Web during the past two
decades. This proposal seeks to create transformative techniques to mitigate
much of modern phone fraud (e.g., IRS fraud, bank/wire fraud).