* 1617617
* AF: Small: Incremental and Asynchronous Projective Splitting Methods for Mathematical Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jonathan Eckstein, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 457,072.00

A key to solving large computational and mathematical problems, such as
analyzing large datasets or planning for the operation of an electrical power
grid or any other complicated systems with an uncertain future demands and
supplies, is decomposing into smaller solvable subproblems or subsystems, then
coordinating and integrating their results, and decomposing again into adjusted
subproblems. Properly designed decomposition methods repeat a decomposition -
coordination cycle that converge to the solution of the entire original, non-
decomposed problem. The PI is working with Sandia National Laboratories and has
particular interest in problems that arise in operating electrical power grids
with high penetration of renewable generation sources, like solar and wind,
where weather has unplanned affects the supply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project studies a new way to perform decomposition, called "incremental
projective operator splitting" (IPOS) or "block-iterative splitting." It is
related to a popular decomposition method called the alternating direction
method of multipliers (ADMM) but is far more flexible. While essentially all
prior decomposition methods follow a rigid cycle of decomposition and
coordination steps, with every decomposition step encompassing all the
subsystems, the new method has much greater flexibility: only a subset of
subsystems need to be considered between coordination steps, and decomposition
and coordination calculations can overlap asynchronously. This flexibility
should allow more efficient use of parallel computers by eliminating rigid
synchronization points. This property is important because most future growth in
computer performance is anticipated to result from larger numbers of parallel
processing units, and only parallel computers will be able to manipulate the
large datasets and decision problems we hope to analyze.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the new IPOS methods are so flexible, there are
numerous ways in which they could be used on the same class of problems. The
main goal of this project is to develop and experimentally evaluate strategies
for applying IPOS on parallel computers. It will focus on two common problem
classes, large-scale data analysis and planning under uncertainty, using real-
world input data to the maximum practical extent. Other research topics include
sharpening the mathematical theory of IPOS, and extending this theory to cover a
broader range of problems, and development and release of software based on this
new theory.