* 1617040
* RAPID: Extreme Flooding Mobilized Natural Organic Matter from Forested Wetlands - Implication of Mercury and Carbon Cycling in Coastal Blackwater Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Tanju Karanfil, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,961.00

Seasonally flooded, freshwater cypress-tupelo wetlands are commonly found in
coastal regions of the southeastern United States, from Texas to North Carolina.
These wetlands are the main terrestrial source of natural organic matter (NOM)
that causes the yellowish tea-colored water in coastal blackwater rivers such as
Waccamaw River in South Carolina (SC). Importantly, the concentration of NOM is
highly correlated with concentrations of total mercury and methylated mercury,
mediating the bioavailability and transport of mercury in coastal ecosystems. On
October 1-5, 2015, the interaction between a stalled extratropical cyclone
(nor'easter) and hurricane Joaquin caused torrential rain and extensive flooding
in a short period of time in the coast of SC, resulting in a large volume of NOM
exported from the forested wetlands into the coastal blackwater rivers. Such
large quantity of NOM exports on an unprecedented scale could potentially
mobilize relatively stable and recalcitrant pools of mercury and carbon from the
forested wetlands into the blackwater rivers. This highly interdisciplinary
research will dramatically improve understanding of mercury and carbon
biogeochemistry under extreme weather conditions and demonstrate the
relationships within the context of ecosystems. This study represents a new and
unique collaboration between four investigators with different specialties from
three universities including two assistant professors respectively in a minority
serving institution and an undergraduate institution. This study will also raise
the awareness of the impacts of extreme weather events on low-lying coastal
areas in the Southeastern United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal wetlands
are considered as important carbon and mercury sinks. However, extreme weather
events under the changing climate could alter the equilibrium status, affecting
the stability of carbon and mercury pools in the coastal ecosystems. The goal of
this RAPID research is to study the influences of the extreme flooding on carbon
and mercury cycles and associated biogeochemical processes in coastal wetlands
and blackwater rivers. Specifically, the study will integrate field
investigations, controlled field experiments, and hydrological computer modeling
to examine carbon and mercury exports, sources, and temporal trends along the
hydrograph of the extreme flooding event. The research team has been collecting
water samples along the Waccamaw River since Oct 4, 2015, representing the
rising limb of the hydrograph. Samples were analyzed for general water quality,
dissolved organic carbon, ultraviolet absorbance, nutrients, cations, anions,
total mercury, and methylated mercury in the filtered and unfiltered samples. To
determine the carbon and mercury budget, a hydrological model will be used to
estimate the total water discharge from this flooding event that went into
Waccamaw River. The PIs will engage in a transformative research study to assess
novel decomposition process routes of terrestrial organic matter in forested
wetlands under the influence of extreme flooding event. The PIs contend that the
novel method of using stable mercury isotope along the hydrograph of the
flooding event, coupled with measurements of dissolved organic matter in water
using ultraviolet/visible and fluorescence spectroscopy, will be useful for
understanding the relationships between carbon and mercury in coastal blackwater
rivers. Determining the temporal variation of carbon and mercury will be useful
for developing a mechanistic and landscape-level understanding of how extreme
flooding events affect the biogeochemical process of terrestrial organic matter
in coastal ecosystems.