* 1617713
* AF: Small: Randomness in Computation - Old Problems and New Directions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xin Li, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 374,815.00

A major goal of computer science is to study how to compute more efficiently
using limited resources. The understanding of this question has had profound
influence on our daily life, in a variety of areas ranging from e-commerce,
cloud computing, to travel planning and weather forecast. In this project the PI
seeks to understand how to efficiently use the valuable resource of randomness
(such as coin flips) in computation.

Randomness is extremely useful in computation and widely used in practice.
Simulation of complex models such as those used for weather forecast and economy
prediction relies on the use of random processes, and modern computer security
will be lost completely without randomness. In this context, the project studies
the fundamental questions of the power and limitations of randomness in
computation. From a theoretical aspect, it can lead to breakthroughs towards
solving long standing open questions in computer science, such as whether
randomness is really necessary for algorithms. From a practical aspect, it can
lead to improvements in several areas important to society, such as designing
streaming and scalable computation protocols for massive datasets, enhancing
computer security in an adversarial environment, and tolerating errors in
communication protocols. Based on the research activities, the educational
component in this project plans to train several Ph.D. students, publish online
surveys for free access, integrate research outcomes into courses the PI is or
will be teaching, and provide research opportunities for minority students
through a joint effort with Johns Hopkins University.

The questions that will be addressed in this project include how to generate
high quality randomness for computation, how to use randomness in the presence
of information leakage or tampering by an adversary, and how to use randomness
to detect and correct errors introduced in communications. Two fundamental
objects and tools for studying these questions are pseudorandom generators and
randomness extractors. A pseudorandom generator is an algorithm that stretches a
small number of random bits into a large number of bits that appear to be
perfectly random to a certain class of functions. A randomness extractor is an
algorithm that converts low quality random sources into very high quality random
bits. The project will explore new ways of constructing these objects, as well
as the connections between these objects and other areas in computer science,
such as cryptography, error correcting codes, and computational complexity.
Through this the PI seeks to establish new connections between different areas,
and thus leading to possible new breakthroughs.