* 1617015
* Early Solar System Objects:  Testing Solar System Formation Models
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Karen Meech, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 541,055.00

Astronomers have recently discovered "Manx" comets, or comets that have orbits
that go farther out in the Solar System, but do not send out gas and dust when
they get closest to the Sun in their orbits. New models suggest that they could
be objects that formed in the inner Solar System and were forced into the outer
part of the Solar System when the Solar System was forming. Spectral signatures
of some Manx comets are like those of the most common asteroids in the inner
Solar System. This leads astronomers to think that the Manx comets are fresh
material from the inner Solar System. The investigators will study the Manx
comets through using telescopes to image and take spectra of the comets to look
at composition and any dust or gas that could be present around the objects.
These observations can help astronomers learn how the early Solar System formed.
This research serves the national interest by increasing our knowledge about how
our Solar System formed and what materials formed at different distances from
the Sun. The investigators participate in many educational outreach efforts,
including innovative data visualization with the Hawaii Innovation initiative,
and including interns from the K - 12 Assets School in Honolulu.

In an effort to place firm constraints on models of the Solar System, the
investigators will study the newly-discovered "Manx" comets, or comets that have
long-period orbits but have little or no activity at perihelion. These
observations suggest that these might be objects that were ejected into the Oort
Cloud in the outer Solar System during early planet migration. Photometry of one
object suggests that it is similar to the S-complex asteroids that dominate the
inner Solar System, but it is also outgassing, suggesting that the Manx comets
might represent fresh inner Solar System material. These studies include
photometry and spectroscopy of the Manx objects to determine their surface
compositions from reflectance spectroscopy, deep images of Manx comets that are
sufficiently bright to determine any amount of coma that might be present, a
search of old archived data for past detections of Manx comets, and modeling to
determine ice sublimation. Observations of many Manx comets could distinguish
between Solar System dynamical models. If there are active objects with S-type
spectra, the Manx comets could represent primitive material that formed near the
Solar System water-ice line. The investigators participate in efforts to train
the next generation of scientists in STEM fields through one-on-one mentoring,
development of new courses, integration of research and hands-on science into
courses, and exploring innovative data visualization with the Hawaii Innovation
initiative. The team is currently partnering with the K - 12 Assets School in
Honolulu in their intern program, and will incorporate the Manx comet work into
this program.