* 1617466
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: The Master Print: Investigating and Addressing Vulnerabilities in Fingerprint-based Authentication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Arun Ross, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2020
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the security of fingerprint
authentication systems, especially those using partial fingerprints. A number of
consumer electronic devices, such as smartphones, are beginning to incorporate
fingerprint sensors for user authentication. The sensors embedded in these
devices are generally very small and the resulting images are, therefore,
limited in size. To compensate for the limited size, these devices often acquire
multiple partial impressions (templates) of a single finger during enrollment to
ensure that at least one of them will successfully match with the image obtained
from the user during authentication. In some cases, the user may even be allowed
to enroll multiple fingers, and the templates pertaining to these multiple
fingers are associated with the same identity (i.e., one user). A user is deemed
to be successfully authenticated if the partial fingerprint obtained during
authentication matches with any one of the stored templates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating the possibility of
generating a "Master Print," a synthetic or real partial fingerprint that
serendipitously matches with a large number of partial impressions pertaining to
multiple users. This is akin to having a Master Password that can unlock a
diverse set of user accounts. In this regard, the following tasks are being
conducted: (a) Analyzing the vulnerability of fingerprint authentication systems
that use partial fingerprints by developing methods to generate Master Prints;
(b) Models for computing the distinctiveness or uniqueness of partial
fingerprints compared to full prints; (c) Methods for mitigating the
vulnerability associated with the adversarial use of Master Prints.