* 1617374
* CNH-L: Restoration and Resilience in Coupled Human-Natural Systems: Reciprocal Dynamics of a Coastal Lagoon
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Linda Walters, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 1,600,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will explore the role of small-scale,
community-based restoration projects in facilitating enhanced resilience within
both human and ecological systems. This project will increase knowledge of the
processes through which human engagement in ecosystem restoration promotes
beneficial feedbacks within coastal ecosystems. It will enhance understanding
about the specific pathways through which restoration disrupts degraded
ecosystems and influences human behavior. A large number of complementary,
integrated datasets will be assembled, allowing the project to provide a system-
level assessment of ecosystem services related to coastal restoration. The
project also will explore the potential for changes in human perception and a
sense of place to create feedbacks through altered human behavior that impact
natural system dynamics. In addition to its fundamental intellectual merit, the
project will yield a diverse set of positive broader impacts. It will quantify
relationships between restoration success and impact within and between human
and natural components of coastal ecosystems in order to improve likelihoods
that future restorations will effectively reduce human vulnerability and improve
ecological function. The investigators will engage local research participants,
such as fishermen and business owners, in ecological restoration and in the use
of techniques like participatory geographic information systems. They also will
engage elementary and secondary school educators and students in research
through hands-on workshops focused on using digital technologies for
storytelling, mapping, and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant
attention has been given to the degradation and exploitation of natural
resources, but ecosystem restoration represents an activity through which humans
seek to improve natural systems. Despite growing investments in restoration, a
critical knowledge gap persists in understanding what constitutes "success" and
whether traditionally accepted metrics of restoration success (such as the
survival rate of plantings or the number of volunteers who participate) are
truly indicative of measurable "impacts" (such as improvements to ecological
function or enhanced stakeholder buy-in). The investigators will leverage a
decade-long monitoring dataset for more than 80 oyster reef and living shoreline
restoration projects that have involved over 51,000 volunteers spanning along
Florida's Indian River Lagoon. They will generate experimental data to examine
restoration impacts on local and regional biogeochemistry, hydraulics, sediment
transport, recreational fisheries, and threatened or endangered wading birds.
Combining these restoration-impact measures with traditional restoration success
metrics for both site- and lagoon-scale ecosystem responses will provide a more
complete and quantitative understanding of restoration outcomes. They also will
conduct a comprehensive assessment of stakeholder perceptions, attitudes, and
the creation of a "sense of place" within the restored and surrounding natural
system. Research products will create highly transferable knowledge regarding
the critical attributes of restoration and local community engagement that
cascade into beneficial feedbacks between humans and restored ecosystems. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.