* 1617790
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Metric Embeddings and Partitioning for Minor-Closed Graph Families
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Anupam Gupta, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The interaction between algorithm design and metric embeddings has been a very
fruitful one. Over the past two decades, the toolbox of metric embeddings has
become an indispensable one for the algorithm designer. The reason is simple:
embeddings give a set of techniques to simplify graphs and metric spaces. This
has led to approximation algorithms for many graph partitioning and network
design problems. In turn, better graph decompositions have led to better
embeddings. Nevertheless, the interplay between graph topology and the metric
geometry is not fully understood. This proposal focuses on developing new
techniques for interesting families of graphs. Broader impacts include the
engagement of undergraduate students and women in research, and the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Moreover, the proposed research
should help develop deeper connections between computer science and mathematics.
Being part of a joint initiative between NSF and the US-Israel Binational
Science Foundation, this project will increase collaboration between researchers
working on similar topics in the United States and
Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of the research focus on
questions in metric embeddings and graph partitioning for planar, bounded tree-
width and path-width graphs, and general minor-closed families of graphs. These
include getting better low-diameter partitions for these families via the
bounded-threatener program, getting better L1 and tree embeddings, and improved
metric and graph compression techniques, such as improved vertex-sparsifiers and
spanners.