* 1617691
* CIF: Small: Efficient Discriminant Analysis Through Parsimonious Probabilistic Models
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Qing Mai, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 414,215.00

In the Big-Data era, there is a pressing need to develop more efficient and
easy-to-interpret data analysis methods to face the new challenges rising from
real life applications, such as cancer diagnosis, brain connectivity network and
neuroimaging studies. Besides their intimidating sizes, data sets in such
applications demand researchers to understand the intrinsic and complex
structure behind them. This research involves new directions in discriminant
analysis and classification by exploring state-of-art statistical methods and
contemporary computation techniques. The investigators will develop new
statistical methods and computational tools to utilize the intrinsic structure
of the data, such as high correlation, network structure and tensor/array data
structure. The research results will advance the research in statistics, machine
learning, text mining, bio-medical research, finance, neuroimaging analysis,
among other fields. The research will also be integrated with substantial
educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the
investigators aim to develop parsimonious probabilistic discriminant analysis
models for efficiently analyzing data with intrinsically complicated structures,
and for improved estimation of parameters and accuracy in predictions. Three
sets of problems will be investigated: (1) parsimonious linear discriminant
analysis with envelope, aiming to integrate a nascent technique of envelope
modeling with the classical linear discriminant analysis model; (2) simultaneous
discriminant analysis and differential network estimation, aiming to develop a
novel and unified framework for simultaneously studying differential networks,
estimating multiple covariance matrices, and training quadratic discriminant
analysis classifier; and (3) sparse tensor discriminant analysis with feature
selection, aiming to develop a sparse discriminant analysis method for tensor-
valued data that directly uses the tensor-valued features for discriminant
analysis, while simultaneously achieving feature selection and preserving
interpretable tensor structure.