* 1617573
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Taming Mobile Hardware &amp; OS Diversity for Comprehensive Software Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Zhiyun Qian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Today, the Android operating system running on mobile systems such as
smartphones, tablets, and wearables, is increasingly diverse. This is mainly
because Android is heavily customized at multiple layers by many different
vendors and mobile carriers, for various reasons including the difference in
hardware and brand-specific value-added applications and services. This
diversity of Android creates important challenges for testing, debugging, and
analysis of software running on these mobile systems, including testing for
consistent functionality and performance across different systems, finding crash
bugs, analyzing malware, and identifying security vulnerabilities. The goal of
this project is to make testing and analysis of the entire software stack of
mobile systems running Android faster and more affordable, while at the same
time requiring small engineering effort, all despite the diversity of mobile
software and hardware. The proposed project will help improve the quality and
security of software on mobile systems - a significant benefit to society and
the economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan to achieve the aforementioned goals
through a cloud-based mobile farm service, which provides virtual mobile
instances, or virtual instances for short. Each virtual instance is a virtual
machine that runs on powerful servers and that fully resembles the hardware and
software configurations of a particular mobile system. By leveraging virtual
machines running in servers, the proposed solution will provide a low cost, thus
lower prices for the users. The important challenges will be addressed in two
research thrusts. The first thrust investigates techniques to consolidate the
real mobile systems in the cloud to reduce the overall infrastructure cost. The
second research thrust targets at enhancing the performance of virtual instances
by leveraging software and hardware techniques such as speculation, record and
replay, dynamic boundary, and Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA).