* 1617437
* NeTS: Small: Design, Management, and Optimization of Cache Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2021
* USD 439,464.00

The current Internet supports a wide variety of services ranging from on-line
banking and commerce to messaging and teleconferencing, and from gaming to
delivery of movies. In spite of this variety, much of the data transported
across the Internet corresponds to 'content' and in particular video content.
Moreover, the amount of content traveling over the Internet is growing
exponentially, doubling every three years. This places a tremendous burden on
network and content provider infrastructures. This has stimulated a number of
innovations whereby storage and processing capacity is located near the end user
and content consumer. When a user requests content, say a video, the request
goes to a nearby cache (storage facility coupled with server) to fetch it. If
the content is present in the cache, it is immediately served; otherwise the
request is passed on to the content provider, who in turn serves the content to
the user. The advantages of such a system are reduced latencies to the user and
decreased consumption of network and provider resources when the content is
found in the cache. However, this raises substantial challenges that are the
focus of this project. These include: how should the caches be managed both at
the level of individual objects of content, i.e., individual movies, and among
different content providers? Should there be service differentiation between
contents or providers and if so, how should this be accomplished? How should
third parties providing caching services price these services? The project is
concerned with answering these questions.

The approach of this project for addressing the questions listed above will
combine techniques and results from two areas. The first is time-to-live (TTL)
caches and the second is utility maximization. Using these as a foundation, the
project has three thrusts.

1. Management and provision of differentiated services. The project will develop
a framework based on recent results on TTL caches and utility maximization, for
the provision of differentiated cache services. This framework will be used to
design timer-driven cache management mechanisms for providing per content
differentiated services. It will also focus on the development of per content
provider mechanisms, which will allow providers the flexibility of using cache
management mechanism of their choice. The project will focus on both individual
caches as well as collections of caches.

2. Pricing cache services. Results from the above effort will be used to design
and evaluate per content and per provider pricing mechanisms.

3. Modeling and analysis of cache networks. The project will develop techniques
and algorithms for evaluating the performance of arbitrary cache networks that
account for a wide range of cache management algorithms.

Broader Impacts: This project will develop new resource allocation algorithms
and resource pricing mechanisms with applications to content-centric networks.
The project will also develop a better understanding of how to engineer large
content-based systems, which will enhance the quality of experience of the
typical Internet user. Educational activities for this project will enhance
undergraduate, and graduate education aiding in the training of a workforce able
to use quantitative methods for the purpose of designing, analyzing, and
comparing competing engineering designs.