* 1617982
* US-Israel Collab: Pathogens and disease transmission in migratory birds along the Palearctic-African flyway
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,499,966.00

The primary aim of the study is to understand the role that migratory birds play
in spreading various disease causing agents around the world. Wildlife has been
implicated as a vector, capable of transmitting, or as an environmental
reservoir, capable of storing, different types of viral and bacterial pathogens.
In this project, the researchers will capture, tag, collect blood and parasite
samples from birds belonging to ten different species that stop over in Israel
to feed and rest during migration. These birds migrate between breeding sites in
Europe and Asia and overwintering sites in Africa. Individual birds will be
tested for exposure to avian influenza virus and Newcastle Disease virus, the
presence of salmonella bacteria, lice and ticks, and their general state-of-
health will be assessed. Many of the animals will be fitted with GPS tags that
record the movement and locations of individuals as they migrate, breed, and
overwinter over a period of many months to several years. In addition, this
study will provide new methods and tools for describing and predicting disease
transmission by migrating birds. These tools will be useful both for human and
livestock health, as well as for the conservation and management of wildlife.
They will be made available to the ecological disease research community and for
educational purposes at high school and colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific aim of the study is to advance knowledge of how migration impacts the
evolutionary ecology of hosts and pathogens within migratory host populations
and also to understand this within a community of multiple species residing in
an area ephemerally used by migratory populations. This will be achieved by
comparing the serological, immunological and physiological state of resident and
migratory subpopulations within Israel with individuals opportunistically
sampled in breeding and overwinter grounds, at sites revealed by movement
information obtained from GPS and data-logging tags. These individual-health
data, high resolution movement data as well as pathogen genomic data, will be
analyzed to assess relationships in timing, intensity and spread of diseases
within and beyond Israel. Agent-based computational models will be constructed
using the Nova modeling platform and used to assess relationships among
correlated variables. In addition, these models will be use to predict responses
of disease systems to both land-use practices and global climate change.