* 1617255
* RAPID - Abnormal bleaching in Cliona varians in the Florida Keys: Consequences for coral reef health.
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Malcolm Hill, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2017
* USD 69,753.00

Sponges feed on bacteria and extract other material from the water column as
they pump water through their tissues. This bio-filtration plays important
ecological roles on coral reefs, and may serve as the base of food webs in these
habitats by turning dissolved and particulate organic material into detritus
(shed sponge cells) that can be eaten by a variety of organisms. This ecological
function is known as the sponge loop, and the proposed research tests an
unexplored aspect of the sponge loop. Sponges typically support dense and
diverse symbiont communities that contribute to their overall ecological
performance. It is unknown how the symbiont communities contribute to the
ecological performance of the host sponge. During the recent mass coral
bleaching event (i.e., loss of algal symbionts) in the Florida Keys, sponges
with algal symbionts, that normally do not bleach, were also found to have
bleached. This unusual observation offers the opportunity to test ideas about
the role of symbionts in the sponge loop. That is, the hypothesis under
consideration is that disruption of symbiotic associations compromises a
sponge's bio-filtration capacity. The broader impacts of this project includes
training undergraduate students, producing new scientific information,
presenting public talks, and tying this work into existing integrated science
courses at the University of Richmond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The health of coral
reef ecosystems may be tied directly to the normal functioning of coral reef
sponges through the sponge loop. Detrital food webs may rely on the continued
input of shed sponge cells through which dissolved and particulate organic
matter are processed into biologically usable material. Previous work indicates
that the symbiont state of the host sponge might influence feeding and pumping
behavior, but no direct test of the impact symbiont state has on the sponge loop
has been conducted. A recent bleaching event involving clionaid sponges in the
lower Florida Keys provides an opportunity to test the hypothesis that reef
health is a function of health of sponge symbiont populations through host
filtration efficiency and feeding behavior. This research project focuses on
interactions between symbiotic systems, host behavior, and ecosystem function
using Cliona varians. Water samples will be collected using IN-EX sampling
followed by flow cytometry and microscopic analysis of the material expelled by
sponges. Stable isotopic signatures of the hosts will be compared before,
during, and after bleaching events.