* 1617533
* III: Small: Novel Representations for Inference in Graphical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Daniel Sheldon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 484,137.00

Probabilistic inference is an important tool that allows humans to gain insight
and make predictions from data. An analyst posits a probabilistic model for
observed data, and then conducts inference to fit parameters, assess model
validity, and make predictions. With data growing in size and complexity across
nearly all domains of science and society, rich probabilistic models paired with
fast and accurate inference algorithms are essential to the data analytic
process. Probabilistic graphical models support these goals by leveraging graph
structure to design rich models and enable fast message-passing algorithms for
inference. However, exact message passing applies only to limited model classes.
The goal of this project is to significantly expand the class of models to which
message-passing algorithms apply by developing novel representations of
probability distributions and messages. The research is expected to
significantly improve the available inference techniques for a wide range of
models that are encountered in practice, especially in the fields of time-series
modeling and population ecology. The project website will be used to disseminate
research prototypes.

This work proposes two novel representations for factors in graphical models.
The first proposed representation is based on probability generating functions
for models with count variables. Message passing does not currently apply to
these models because the variables have countably infinite support and factors
cannot be manipulated in finite space and time using standard representations.
However, in many cases, probability generating functions can represent countably
infinite factors exactly and compactly. The goal of the proposed work is develop
expressive classes of generating functions that are amenable to algorithmic
manipulation and can represent commonly appearing factors in graphical models,
and then to develop exact and approximate algorithms to perform message passing
directly in the space of generating functions. The second proposed
representation is based on piecewise-exponential functions, which provide
approximate representations of continuous densities. Piecewise-exponential
functions are compact, computationally tractable, and provide a tunable level of
approximation. They apply to models with continuous but non-Gaussian variables.
The goal of the proposed work is to develop techniques to construct accurate
piecewise exponential approximations and propagate them within message-passing
algorithms. The algorithms developed by this work will be tested and applied to
improve inference in existing models and provide new capabilities for models in
population ecology.