* 1617896
* NeTS: Small: Joint Backhaul and Radio Access Design for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 408,000.00

Delivering pervasive access to data-hungry wireless applications is contingent
upon enabling wireless cellular systems to sustain the foreseen 1000x increase
in the demand for wireless capacity. One promising solution is via wireless
network densification in which small base stations are deployed at possible
adverse locations, such as lamp posts and the sides of the buildings, to
significantly boost the wireless capacity. However, reaping the benefits of such
dense cellular networks requires devising novel heterogeneous backhaul solutions
that can connect the small base stations to the Internet and core network by
smartly and jointly exploiting existing, wired infrastructure, as well as new
wireless, possibly in-band, backhaul solutions. The key goal of this project is
therefore to introduce a fundamentally new cellular network design framework in
which elaborate wireless, wired, heterogeneous, and possibly multi-hop backhaul
models are tightly integrated with the access networks to facilitate joint
analysis, modeling, and optimization of backhaul and radio wireless access. This
proposed framework will enable tomorrow's cellular systems to support bandwidth-
intensive wireless applications such as mobile high-definition video streaming,
thus expediting their global deployment. The proposed research is further
coupled with an elaborate educational plan that includes the introduction of an
educational program encompassing new courses and student seminar series focused
on heterogeneous cellular networks. Moreover, under-represented student groups
will be involved in the research via hands-on projects and outreach events, thus
contributing to training tomorrow's workforce in the area of wireless
communications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will introduce a
holistic mathematical framework that will lay the foundations of joint backhaul
and radio access design in heterogeneous wireless networks. The proposed
framework will marry together notions from stochastic geometry, microeconomics,
and wireless networks to yield several important outcomes that include: 1) Novel
tractable models and quality-of-service (QoS) metrics that will provide an in-
depth, fundamental understanding on the performance limits of joint backhaul and
access design in heterogeneous networks; 2) Fundamentally new resource
management algorithms that can be used to jointly optimize the backhaul and
radio access network performance; 3) New resource allocation and network design
methodologies, such as joint uplink/downlink optimization with end-to-end QoS
guarantees, that can explicitly leverage the opportunities brought forward by
the presence of heterogeneous backhaul links; and 4) Validation of the developed
theory over software and hardware testbeds. These critical outcomes are expected
to break new research ground by providing a truly unified theory for system-wide
design of emerging heterogeneous cellular networks.