* 1617340
* I-Corps: High Risk Patient Monitoring during Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Tsz Ho Tse, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Over 800,000 people in the US experience a stroke each year according to the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, a majority of which is severe enough
to disqualify them from receiving the advanced diagnostic standard set forth by
modern Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), primarily due to the inability to
accurately monitor patient conditions while they are inside an MRI scanner
present with strong magnetic fields. This in turn degrades the ability of the
overseeing physician to properly diagnose, as those high-risk patients are
excluded from MRI diagnosis and follow-up treatments. This I-Corps team's
proposed technology is a patient monitor which allows for continuous high
quality monitoring of patient conditions during MRI scans, permitting high-risk
patients to benefit from MRI for diagnostic scans and MRI image-guided
treatments. For clinicians, the risk in performing new MR imaging and image-
guided procedures will be greatly reduced through this product. For hospitals,
MRI scanner, and life support manufacturers, their services can be expanded to a
new patient group that was previously ineligible for MRI, allowing for a
competitive advantage. For patients, they can access and receive a higher
quality of diagnostic care, with a larger potential for the emergence of
advanced diagnostic and functional MR imaging, and MRI image-guided treatments
which may become new standards for patient care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MRI-
compatible systems are those deemed safe for operation within the MRI scanner;
typically non-magnetic, minimally conductive, and robust against the strong and
rapidly switched magnetic fields present within the MRI scanner. The proposed
product will be a high-fidelity, MRI-compatible 12-lead Electrocardiogram (ECG)
recording system, capable of monitoring high-risk patients (e.g. being sedated
and intubated), as well as low- to med-risk patients, who may require an
extended MR imaging session, in which they would remain unattended within the
MRI scanner. The product provides real-time diagnostic quality monitoring,
previously unavailable using current technologies, while not compromising the
operation and diagnostic ability of the MRI scanner. This product could greatly
improve the state of patient monitoring in the MRI, which is critical for
severely-ill patients, and subsequently the state of patient healthcare.