* 1617396
* CNH-L: Visualizing Forest Futures Under Climate Uncertainty: Integrating Indigenous Knowledge into Decision-Support Tools for Collaborative Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Nancy Tuana, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,700,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how human values and
practices impact preferences about natural systems and influence the trade-offs
made in decision making about forest resources and sustainability. The project
will focus on two overarching themes: the importance of feedbacks in natural-
human systems and the importance of value systems and customary practices that
are not adequately captured by knowledge systems alone. It will provide new
insights and information regarding how changes in forest ecosystem structure and
function result in new relationships between humans and forest species and
services as well as how forest-management practices influence ecosystems. The
project also will advance understanding of the complex reciprocal relationships
among values and practices, including traditional knowledge of indigenous
people, and decision making by individuals and communities. Furthermore, the
project will enhance understanding of the degree to which individuals and
communities hold cultural, spiritual, ethical, and aesthetic values and engage
in customary forests practices that are not adequately captured by conventional
knowledge systems. Because the project's participants include the College of the
Menominee Nation, the project will provide opportunities for Native American
students to have education and training opportunities with respect to both basic
research and to the use of innovative technologies, including virtual reality
software and devices. Other education and training opportunities in the conduct
of interdisciplinary science will be provided for graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars. The project will promote collaborations among educators,
scientists, and managers in the region and will inform ongoing environmental
assessment activities focused on indigenous peoples and tribal knowledge. The
project also will contribute to enhanced decision making for environmental
change adaptation in tribal communities by providing clear routes by which
values and relationships with forests can be embedded within state-of-the-art
optimization procedures, and it will assist forest managers and community
members in working together to evaluate trade-offs when making
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional knowledge from indigenous cultures
is recognized as important in environmental assessments but has not been
adequately captured in landscape-level planning. Forests managed by tribal
communities are under threat from increasing insect damage, which is already the
most spatially extensive forest disturbance in North America, affecting
approximately 20 million hectares of forest per year with an estimated cost of
$1.5 billion. Significant changes to forests could adversely impact the forest
industries upon which many tribal communities depend and could alter tribal
identity. The investigators will use state-of-the-art visualization and virtual
reality experiences about future forest conditions to access a broader range of
human values about scenarios of future forest conditions. These outcomes will be
used to model preferences in forest-management activities and determine trade-
offs and synergies among economic and other value-based decisions about forest
management. The investigators will employ anthropological, ethical, process-
based, and immersive means to explore the complex factors that influence how
people and communities make decisions and evaluate trade-offs among diverse
objectives when faced with considerable uncertainty. The investigators will test
a set of hypotheses, include the propositions that immersive virtual reality can
enhance emotive and cognitive perceptions of environmental changes and that
current management activities can be refined through the incorporation of value
structures into a robust decision making analysis. Values and practices will be
incorporated into consensus mental models, which will inform information
available via immersive virtual reality and ecosystem modeling, and the
investigators will enhance a decision support algorithm to assess trade-offs in
outcomes. The immersive virtual reality experiences will include interactive 2-D
and 3-D landscape maps, 360-degree depictions of alternative forest structures,
and interactive maps through time. The decision-analytics approach will
facilitate analysis of trade-offs across a broad set of sustainability metrics
and will help test the performance of alternative strategies under uncertain
future conditions. The investigators will characterize and tradeoffs and
synergies among competing values that reflect cultural, ecological, and economic
well-being and assist in determination of what choices lead to sustainable
solutions. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (CNH) Program.