* 1617791
* SHF: Small: DNA Circuits for Analog Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 308,001.00

Analog devices have potential advantages over Boolean circuits, particularly for
performing numerical computations, and analog circuits are often much more
compact and require less resources. These advances are enhanced at molecular
scales, where resources are scarce and compact designs are crucial. PI proposes
extension of DNA computation from Boolean to analog computation. The analog DNA
circuits can be used to control a wide variety of molecular devices. The central
goals of this project are (i) to develop (design, simulate, and experimentally
test) two architectures for analog DNA circuits, (ii) develop DNA-based methods
for digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversions to allow hybrid analog-
digital DNA circuits, and (iii) to provide demonstrations of applications of
analog DNA circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will involve students at all
levels: the graduates students, undergraduates, and high school students.
Females and minority students will especially be recruited. Students working on
this project will receive training at Duke Univ. in computer science, chemistry,
and DNA-based nanoscience. In addition, there are also opportunities for summer
internships for undergraduates and high school students. Analog DNA circuits
have many important potential applications such as analog control devices, where
real values are sensed and analog computations provide controlling output. Prior
devices for control of chemical reactions systems that provide for molecular
species sensing and response have been limited to finite-state control; analog
DNA circuits will allow much more sophisticated analog processing and control.
DNA-based molecular robotics have allowed devices to operate autonomously (e.g.,
to walk on a nanostructure) but have been limited to finite-state control, and
analog DNA circuits will allow molecular robotics to include real-time analog
control circuits to provide much more sophisticated control, e.g. for control
articulated joints of a molecular robot?s limb. Many systems that dynamically
learn (e.g., neural networks and probabilistic inference) require analog
computation, and analog DNA circuits can be used for back-propagation
computation of neural nets and Bayesian inference computation of probabilistic
inference systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces two architectures
for molecular-scale analog computation. In both, the input and outputs of analog
gates are directly encoded by relative concentrations of input and output
strands respectively, without requiring thresholds for converting to Boolean
signals. The 1st architecture has 3 gates: addition, subtraction, and
multiplication. Analog circuits constructed from these gates can compute
polynomials as well as approximate inverse, and division. The 2nd proposed
architecture provides a novel DNA-based method to compute analytic functions
such as sqrt(x), ln(x), and exp(x) using multiple DNA-based autocatalytic
reaction systems working together. The project also introduces DNA analog-to-
digital (A/D) and digital-to-analog (D/A) converters that enable the
communication between analog and digital DNA circuits. The project includes
full-scale designs, simulations, and experimental demonstrations of the two
architectures, demonstrations of hybrid analog-digital DNA circuits, and a
small-scale demonstration of an application of analog DNA circuits for control
of a chemical reaction system: sensing input concentrations of molecules and
controlling output of concentrations of molecules.