* 1617717
* SHF: Small: Semantics, Static Analysis, and Refencing of Concurrent Programs with Weak Memory Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Patrick Cousot, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 481,399.00

Modern computers have parallel multicore architectures sharing a hierarchy of
caches and memories from fast and expensive ones to large and cheaper ones. The
consequence is that not all cores running concurrently see the shared memory in
the same way: some see newly stored values while others see older ones. This is
called weak consistency models for shared memory on a single chip or memory
distributed on several chips or on networks. This modern design makes the task
of designing and programming parallel computers very complex. In particular the
same program may have very different behaviors when running on different
architectures whereas the same program had the same effect on all machines of
the previous generation.

This project define a generic formal semantics of parallel programs with weak
consistency models parameterized by a formal definition of the computer
architecture. Based on this parameterized semantics, the project investigates
invariance proof methods to be used by programmers and verification tools to
prove properties of parallel programs with weak consistency models. The project
contributes to formal methods and tools for concurrent programming which, by the
foreseeable evolution of hardware design, will be inevitable in the future. The
publications and prototypes from this project are widely disseminated.