* 1617401
* SHF: Small: Design and Inference of Choreography Types to Reduce Concurrency Programming Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Gul Agha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

With the growth of the web, cloud computing, sensor networks and multicore
programming, concurrency has become critical to software applications in the
real world. Because the Actor model of concurrent computation provides scalable
concurrency, commercial software is often written using the Actor model. Many
concurrency related errors such as unprocessable messages, deadlocks, and
livelocks result from a mismatch of component actors in a system. The research
develops choreography types as a method to understand concurrency structures and
detect concurrency related bugs. The intuition behind the research is that
combining symbolic execution with information from concrete traces obtained
during unit testing can provide a way to infer and approximate choreography
types. The research would make concurrent and distributed programming safer--
increasing trust in applications such as cloud computing on which a large part
of the US economy is dependent today. Much as data types help programmers think
about the interfaces of components in a sequential program, the research would
provide ways in which programmers can think about the structure of parallel
programs in terms of choreographing actors with evolving type structure. The
educational impact of the research is to facilitate teaching scalable parallel
programming, creating tools that expose and facilitate the understanding of the
structure of concurrent programs.