* 1617458
* TWC: Small: Hardware Security for Embedded Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Russell Tessier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2021
* USD 512,523.00

Embedded processing systems are widely used in many devices and systems that are
essential for daily life. These embedded systems are increasingly connected to
networks for control and data access, which also exposes them to remotely
launched malicious attacks. It is of paramount importance to develop embedded
processing systems that are hardened to withstand these remote attacks while
continuing to operate effectively. Since embedded systems are often used in
real-time environments with lightweight operating systems and limited processing
and power resources, conventional software solutions for malware detection are
not suitable in this domain. Instead, architectural solutions that are
specialized to embedded processing systems are necessary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a comprehensive attack detection and
mitigation system that is based on hardware monitors that are co-located with
the embedded processor. The hardware monitor tracks the operation of the
processor and compares each executed instruction with a model of the application
that was created by analyzing the original binary. Changes in operation caused
by an attack can be detected within one cycle, and recovery steps can be taken.
The proposed system does not require any changes to the software running on the
processor and does not cause any reduction in processing speed. This project
aims to realize a transformational shift in embedded system security from
software-based defenses to hardware-based defenses. The results from this
research address current security shortcomings and provide solutions that make
embedded processors more resilient.