* 1617985
* NeTS: Small: Detecting Races in SDN Control Plane
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Guofei Gu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Software Defined Networking (SDN) has rapidly emerged as a promising solution to
building the future Internet. Current legacy network devices are typically
proprietary, closed, and complex platforms, which as a result have severely
throttled innovation in networking. SDN in contrast is designed to separate
intelligent control plane (controller) from switching fabrics, ushering in
enormous opportunities for rapid open innovations and quick creation of
customized services. In SDN, the controllers play a central role, acting as the
brain of the entire network. Thus, the reliable and secure operation of them is
of extreme importance. Unfortunately, the asynchrony of network events and the
complex architecture of SDN controllers make them prone to hard-to-find yet
serious data race bugs, that can cause serious reliability and security issues
to the whole SDN network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the principal investigators'
(PIs) initial investigation, they found that data race bugs in the control plane
can greatly reduce the reliability and security of SDN, e.g., causing system
crashes, denying critical network services, interfering with service chains, or
leaking privacy network information. These are not acceptable for SDN technology
deployment. Unfortunately there is a serious lack of techniques to detect
systematically these harmful concurrency bugs in the SDN control plane. This
work seeks to address these issues. First, this project will conduct a
systematic investigation of mainstream SDN controllers and develop an abstracted
causality model to capture the unique happens-before semantics of the SDN
control plane for race detection. Second, the project will develop the first
dynamic race detection tool for the SDN control plane and will target mainstream
controllers, such as Floodlight, ONOS and OpenDaylight, to maximize the impact
on the SDN community. Third, this project will design new techniques to handle
missing events in the dynamic execution of SDN controllers to reduce false
alarms and for more complete race detection. Finally, the PIs will extend the
techniques to detect a broad range of concurrency bugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to develop a reliability and security model for the SDN
control plane. The PIs have been developing network security, SDN, and software
analysis related courses. The PIs will recruit and educate minorities and
underrepresented students. The teams are well positioned to help shape the
landscape of SDN reliability/security research and education in the academic
communities and to influence the industry.