* 1617287
* 2016 Pan-REU PI Workshop: Leveraging Excellence Through Collaboration Across REU Programs, April 28-30, 2016, Arlington, VA
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Janet Branchaw, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 77,371.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison proposes to organize a workshop for NSF REU
Site Principal Investigators (PIs) from all disciplines. This award is supported
by Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG),
Geosciences (GEO), Mathematics and Physical Sciences (MPS), and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
2016 Pan-REU PI workshop is to leverage best practices from all disciplines and
promote collaboration. The meeting will involve approximately 80 PIs from across
the REU community representing the full diversity in terms of discipline, type
of institution, and demographics. These PIs will be nominated by the NSF program
officers responsible for REU programs in each directorate. A smaller group of PI
leaders reflecting the diversity of the REU program will form a Steering
Committee to develop the meeting agenda. One predetermined agenda item is to
discuss an online student assessment survey, which has been developed
specifically for NSF REU programs. This survey will provide significant cost
savings and allow analysis of student training outcomes within a program and
across programs. The Pan-REU PI workshop is structured to provide both large
group settings for dissemination of key information, such as the online student
assessment survey, and to facilitate sharing of best practices and promote
collaboration in small group and networking sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will allow all disciplines to provide input in the design and use of
the student assessment tool, which would be available to any PI of an REU Site
program. The tool, when properly implemented, will result in significant savings
to the programs. In addition, the aggregate data resulting from the collective
use of the tool can be very useful for evaluation researchers. The workshop
materials and findings will be reported to NSF and made available to the entire
REU community. More information is available by contacting the PI, Dr. Janet
Branchaw at branchaw@wisc.edu.