* 1617593
* TWC: Small: Emerging Attacks Against the Mobile Web and Novel Proxy Technologies for Their Containment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nick Nikiforakis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,481.00

Users entrust their mobile devices with sensitive data, including business
emails, as well as health and financial information. Thus, mobile devices have
become an increasingly popular target for attackers. Mobile devices house
powerful browsers that are vulnerable to at least as many attacks as their
desktop counterparts. Yet, the security of these mobile browsers is understudied
by researchers, leading to a lack of current information about ongoing attacks
and possible defenses. This project is gathering up-to-date information about
potential attacks against mobile browsers, and developing defense systems that
can safeguard a user while taking into account the intricacies of the mobile
platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help researchers better understand and
prioritize protections for potential attacks against mobile browsers, the
project is first developing an attack taxonomy that includes information about
cornerstone vulnerabilities on which current and future attack vectors can rely.
Second, the project is developing an automated vulnerability assessment
framework to assist analysts in identifying which browsers are vulnerable to
which attacks. Finally, the project is developing a protection proxy to allow
cloud-based analysis of traffic to the resource-constrained mobile device, while
avoiding proxying of privacy-sensitive activities. The information gained
through this project will inform the research community of the vulnerabilities
of the mobile web platform and help to prioritize future research efforts toward
developing the most effective and performant defenses.