* 1617172
* CHS: Small: Real-Time Simulation of Elastic Solids
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ladislav Kavan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 465,062.00

Visual effects in modern films demonstrate that offline physics-based
simulations achieve quality which often cannot be distinguished from real video
footage. However, the opposite is true in real-time applications such as surgery
simulators, where even non-expert users can quickly notice deficiencies in the
simulation when compared to reference video recordings. The PI's goal in this
project is to lay the algorithmic foundations for the next generation of surgery
simulators, which would reduce the need for surgeons to practice on real
patients or animals. In biomechanics applications, finite element software
packages are often criticized for slow running times. The PI's new numerical
methods will lead to more rapid iterations, allowing biomechanics researchers to
test more hypotheses in less time. Fast physics would also be highly appreciated
in the computer animation industry, because current methods are too slow for
interactive character posing with physically accurate elasticity of skin and
flesh. Virtual reality is a new but increasingly important application area.
Real-time physics will be necessary to power virtual reality applications
ranging from training simulators to creative applications (e.g., clothing
design) and games, the latter being particularly useful for popularizing
mathematics, physics, and computer science, thereby opening up new opportunities
for education and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern general-purpose methods
for the numerical time integration of the equations of motion, typically used
for offline simulation, feature advanced mechanisms for error control while
striving to maximize computational efficiency. However, real-time physics-based
simulation techniques must conform to a different set of requirements. In
particular, the numerical integration algorithm must be able to advance the
simulation while using only a small amount of computing resources. Interactive
applications such as surgery simulators typically require at least 30 frames per
second to create the illusion of smooth motion. This makes real-time physics
computationally challenging, even with modern CPUs and GPUs. To cope with this
challenge, specialized algorithms have been developed for entertainment
applications (games), where accuracy is less critical. In this research the PI
will study new numerical time integration algorithms which meet the difficult
computational constraints of real-time physics but maximize accuracy, with a
specific focus on the simulation of elastic solids such as biological soft
tissues. Despite their complex nonlinear material properties, the PI's recent
work suggests that accurate real-time simulations of detailed models are within
reach. In particular, whereas implicit integration schemes, numerically solved
using Newton's method, are the traditional computational workhorses of physics-
based simulations, the PI's results demonstrate that Newton's method is not
always the most effective approach, especially in the real-time setting.
Implicit time stepping can be formulated as an optimization problem, which
connects physics-based simulation with mathematical optimization, opening up
many interesting research opportunities. The situation is complicated by the
fact that even simple mechanical systems require non-convex objective functions.
Real-time applications do not offer a second chance to fix incorrect results
and, therefore, it is imperative to avoid simulation instability - without
increasing computational complexity. All numerical integration schemes
inevitably incur error due to time discretization and in difficult scenarios
such error may be further exacerbated due to the real-time computing
constraints. This project will seek to discover new numerical methods which
simultaneously satisfy requirements of 1) real-time computing, 2) stability, and
3) accuracy, while supporting realistic material models.