* 1617019
* Structural Basis of Phosphorylation and Alternative Splicing in Dynein Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Elisar Barbar, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,086,000.00

TITLE: Structural Basis of Phosphorylation and Alternative Splicing in Dynein
Regulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems use biological motors to
transport materials into cells in specific directions along train-like tracks
called microtubules. One such motor is dynein which is essential for many
cellular processes including transport of chromosomes during cell division,
movement of vesicles containing nutrients, and in neuronal migration. How dynein
knows when and what cargo to transport requires interactions with other proteins
that control dynein function. These interactions are regulated by modification
in the protein sequence in regions of dynein that lack regular unique three-
dimensional structure and are referred to as intrinsically disordered proteins.
Expected results will specifically show how these modifications help in
selecting the binding partners, and subsequently what cargo to transport.
Understanding this system will ultimately be the basis for the design of
synthetic nano-machines that can transport materials on demand. This work will
facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate students in the practice
of cutting-edge research. In addition, the PI and her team will impact progress
in other disciplines at Oregon State University and the region by providing
access to biophysical instrumentation, by initiating and organizing an annual
NMR workshop and an annual regional one-day conference focused on biophysics,
and by implementing hands on demonstrations and science activities of varying
complexity to K-12 area schools that include models/animations of protein
disorder and structural changes for large-scale demonstrations at the Oregon
Museum of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses how
phosphorylation and intrinsic disorder in one subunit of dynein modulate the
interaction of dynein with multiple regulatory proteins including dynactin,
whose interaction occurs in all eukaryotes and plays an especially important
role in neurons, and NudE, a nuclear distribution protein which is essential in
diverse processes including kinetochore and centrosome migration. The
intrinsically disordered N-terminal 300-amino acid domain of dynein intermediate
chain (IC) is responsible for these interactions and is also the hub of most
dynein activity. While there is ample evidence for phosphorylation and isoform
expression as key to dynein regulation, there are no studies of the molecular
mechanisms underlying their effects. This project will specifically focus on: 1)
How IC phosphorylation affects the interaction of tissue-specific isoforms of IC
with dynactin, 2) How IC phosphorylation selects between regulatory proteins
dynactin and NudE, and 3) How IC regulation differs among mammals, Drosophila,
and yeast. These outstanding questions about dynein regulation will be addressed
using a combination of state-of-the-art NMR, isothermal titration calorimetry,
synthetic biology, computational methods, and in vivo-based assays and will
elucidate how phosphorylation and alternative splicing of intrinsically
disordered proteins in general govern their molecular function and ultimately
affect the behavior of entire protein interaction networks. Significantly, the
use of proteins from yeast, Drosophila and mammalian origin, assesses the
different IC processes that evolved for inducing structural changes within
highly disordered regions, underscoring the strategic role for protein disorder
and IC isoforms in regulation of dynein function.