* 1617463
* CNH-S: Interactions Between Human Perspectives and Natural System Dynamics in the Restoration of Riparian Forests in the Southwestern U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Anna Sher, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 332,839.00

This interdisciplinary research project will explore the factors associated with
success in restoring forest ecosystems in river basins that have been degraded,
including the reciprocal causality between people's attitudes and the dynamics
of plant communities on land they are managing. The project will provide new
insights and information about plant community dynamics before and after
restoration and the attitudes, knowledge sources, and perspectives of land
managers regarding restoration. The project will generate new knowledge about
interactions between human and natural systems with respect to the influence of
ecological variables on public and private land managers' perspectives as well
as the influence of land managers' perspectives on the ecological variables.
Project findings will inform land managers about the best practices for
restoration and will provide much-needed feedback to restoration scientists
about the degree to which their findings are being used and whether anticipated
improvements to plant communities are occurring. Results will be disseminated
through regional workshops and trade publications aimed at land managers as well
as through scholarly presentations and publications directed toward the
scientific community. The project also will provide education and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Billions of dollars are spent each year to restore
degraded river systems around the world. Research on efforts to restore degraded
riparian ecosystems have tended to focus on the interplay between engineering
designs and the natural dynamics of water, vegetation, and other natural
components of the ecosystem, but very little attention has been given to
ascertaining how the knowledge, backgrounds, and motivations of people involved
in restoration affect the ecological outcomes of such projects. The
investigators will undertake this project by expanding on a database they
previously assembled based on detailed vegetation surveys and environmental
parameters for more than 400 sites along streams in the Colorado River and Rio
Grande basins in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah.
They will seek answers to four sets of questions using these natural-system data
and data about human attitudes and behavior gathered through the conduct of
online surveys and in-person interviews with land managers for each of the
sites: (1) How does plant community structure change as a consequence of
restoration? (2) What aspects of a land manager's background best explain
variability in attitudes toward nature and science? (3) Do elements of the
natural environment predict land manager attitudes about science or nature? (4)
Do the attitudes of land managers toward science and/or nature affect the
success of restoration projects? The impact of restoration activities will be
measured with comparisons of vegetation over time within restoration sites as
well as comparisons among restoration sites and non-restoration reference sites.
The variability in restoration outcomes will be explored using the human-system
data, including information about knowledge sources, perspectives on science and
nature, and background information, such as education level and level of
authority. Qualitative information from interviews will complement the
quantitative data from the statistical analyses in order to ascertain which of
many factors are important for describing overall patterns. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.