* 1617101
* III: Small: Uncertainty Quantification and Propagation Analysis in The Visualization Pipeline
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alireza Entezari, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,982.00

Decision making in presence of uncertainty is a notorious problem where making
rational choices often requires analysis and prediction in complex environments.
With the prevalence of computational tools for data visualization and analysis
that are employed in diverse decision making scenarios, new challenges arise in
quantifying, propagating and understanding uncertainty. This project
investigates the interaction of data uncertainty with the data analysis process
as different features are extracted and visualized. It addresses fundamental
challenges that arise in analysis and quantification of uncertainty as the data
propagates throughout various stages of the visualization pipeline. This
uncertainty-aware framework allows for an end-to-end sensitivity analysis in
imaging pipeline where the uncertainties in data acquisition are propagated
throughout the synthesis process. The research is driven by problems that arise
in uncertainty quantification in a number of application domains including:
ensemble simulation and visualization, inverse problems in imaging, and large-
scale data visualization. The project broadens the computer science education by
providing research training for graduate students and mentoring other
trainees.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To model the propagation of uncertainty through
the visualization pipeline, this project develops a statistical rendering
framework in which each data point is a random variable whose distribution
characterizes the uncertainty present at that point. The project addresses
challenges that arise in imaging and visualization where data transformations
(e.g., data filtering, reconstruction, classification, and isosurface
extraction) lead to non-linear transformation on the uncertainty. These non-
linear transformations on the distribution of random variables accumulate as the
uncertainty propagates through the visualization process. This project develops
novel approaches for characterizing these transformations that are common to
various visualization algorithms. The developments in this project enable the
integration of uncertainty, as a first class object, within the key data
transformations present in direct and indirect visualization paradigms.
Moreover, due to the ubiquity of these data transformations in a wide range of
data processing operators, this project opens possibilities for uncertainty
quantification in a diverse set of data analysis and visualization systems. The
resulting algorithms, software and publications are made accessible via the
project web site (http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~entezari/research/uqp/).