* 1618398
* TWC: Small: Evidence of Presence for Intelligent Vehicles using Environment-Based Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Haibin Ling, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 416,938.00

Emerging intelligent automobiles will be able to harness advance on-car sensors
to support new applications such as pollution detection, road condition
monitoring, and traffic control. All these applications require the ability to
verify both the location and the time of a reading. This project involves the
design of verification methods that make use of environment factors, such as the
presence of light and shadows and the measured wireless signal strength, instead
of conventional public key infrastructure-based methods, in order to verify when
and where data was collected. This new environment-based paradigm is resilient
against insider attacks, easier to deploy, and protects the individual car
owner's privacy. This research will help in realizing applications arising from
the increasing presence of smarter vehicles on our roads which can benefit the
public's wellbeing. The project also incorporates outreach components for high
school and college students through the organization of science competitions,
national undergraduate workshops, and summer research camp activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first effort to use the wireless
communication and video recording abilities of modern automobiles to capture
natural environment characteristics to securely verify spatial-temporal claims
in a vehicular network setting. This is an interdisciplinary research effort
combining wireless networking and computer vision to address vehicular network
security. The main project goals are: (1) explore new vision analytic algorithms
in order to identify the location and time images are captured by an automobile
camera; (2) research new algorithms for identifying optimal roadside unit
locations for location disambiguation to support wireless spatial-temporal
verification; (3) develop new techniques for utilizing encounters with public
vehicles for verifying spatial-temporal claims; (4) developing a fusion
framework to combine wireless measurements, vehicular encounters, and visual
images for spatial-temporal verification; and (5) perform realistic experiments
on real roads and vehicular test bed to collect image and wireless datasets and
evaluate the research. These datasets are of interest to both wireless
networking and computer vision research communities, and will be made available
to the public.