* 1618213
* TWC: Small: Thwarting Kernel-Level Malware with Secure Virtual Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* John Criswell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 475,074.00

Modern computer operating systems are designed to adapt to new needs by enabling
extensions that can add new features or fix flaws. However, attackers can take
advantage of this flexibility by hijacking extension mechanisms to insert
malicious code into software; this malicious code steals secrets, corrupts data,
and hides malicious activities. At present, these attacks are nearly impossible
to detect and prevent. Without methods to prevent or detect such attacks,
computer operating systems will be untrustworthy. This project is addressing the
challenge of safe extensibility of the operating system
kernel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher are investigating the use of both
static and dynamic analysis to automatically generate security policies. These
policies dictate which data structure fields can be read and modified by each
extension in order to that limit the damage that malicious kernel extensions can
cause. The project is also exploring methods of statically validating that
kernel extensions follow these policies. Since static analysis may,
conservatively, mark benign extensions as potentially malicious, the researchers
are enhancing existing operating system kernels to prevent kernel extensions
from hiding malicious computations. This is accomplished by inserting code into
extensions to enforce the aforementioned security policies at run-time. To
minimize run-time overheads, the researchers are also investigating the use of
sophisticated compiler optimizations.