* 1618161
* SHF:SMALL:Enabling and Supporting the Development of Energy-Efficient Software
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 515,999.00

Inherent in today?s computing environments are concerns about battery life, heat
creation, fan noise, and overall potentially high energy costs. This project
addresses how software engineers can design and implement software with
consideration for its energy usage. Empirical studies have shown that software
engineers currently do not have the knowledge they need to produce energy-
efficient software. They lack the information they need to make decisions
affecting energy consumption of their applications, and they make incorrect
assumptions about the underlying causes of those impacts. This project will
address these needs at the software engineer?s level, enabling practitioners to
further improve the energy usage of their applications beyond what can be
achieved at the lower system levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the state of the art by developing novel, automatic analyses to
support decision-making with regard to energy usage and will also increase
understanding of the energy usage impacts of decisions made at the software
engineering level. The project will develop tools for software engineers to
discover and apply modifications that reduce the energy usage of their
applications. The research is driven by empirical studies that related
engineering decisions to energy consumption. The tools and experimental
infrastructure developed within the project will be publicly released, which
will let researchers and practitioners build on the project?s results.