* 1618408
* Indiana STEM LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2016,09/30/2023
* Patricia Lang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,893,708.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM. The need for
cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United States (U.S.)
to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all
its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas
that underpin the knowledge-based economy. American students from diverse ethnic
groups are underrepresented in STEM fields, and represent an untapped resource
for the STEM workforce in the U.S. The Indiana STEM LSAMP (IN STEM LSAMP), which
consists of three research institutions: Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis (lead institution), Indiana University Bloomington and Ball State
University; two four-year regional universities: Indiana University Northwest
and Indiana University South Bend; and Ivy Tech Community College Indianapolis,
will address the critical need of increasing the participation and advancement
of underrepresented students in STEM disciplines through its comprehensive and
holistic plan that is built upon the elements of the LSAMP Model (academic
integration, social integration and professionalization).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IN STEM LSAMP activities will result in significant
increases of STEM degree holders among historically underrepresented
racial/ethnic populations in Indiana and the nation by providing these students
access to faculty research mentoring, academic support, and STEM-related
professionalization. To achieve alliance goals, all IN STEM LSAMP partners will
implement the following cohesive high-impact practices to increase the retention
rate of first-year full-time students and to strengthen students' disciplinary
engagement: a) mathematical placement and online review support, b) summer
bridge programs, c) freshman learning communities, d) peer mentoring programs,
e) degree mapping, f) faculty-mentored research, and g) annual research
conference. Additionally, the alliance will facilitate seamless transitions into
STEM undergraduate and graduate degree programs by i) increasing program
activities for community college transfers and ii) improving undergraduate
disciplinary connections and preparation for STEM graduate programs. The project
will generate new knowledge regarding the relative contributions of the selected
high-impact practices to the academic success of underrepresented students.
Additional new knowledge will be gained regarding the efficacy of pre-transfer
programming at community colleges and STEM degree program collaborations for
success in the retention and graduation of underrepresented students in STEM
fields at the four-year college level. The alliance's accomplishments will have
widespread effects beyond the region as its talented STEM graduates enter
national research and development enterprises and thus, will diversify the STEM
workforce of the U.S.