* 1618321
* NeTS: CSR: Small: Towards a Redundancy Aware Network Stack
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Fahad Dogar, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 549,493.00

This research project will leverage redundancy, which is naturally present in
typical cloud environments, to improve application performance. The key idea is
to make the entire network stack aware of replicas, and to design network
mechanisms that pro-actively use duplicate requests to avoid stragglers.
Specifically, this research will build a redundancy aware network stack (RANS);
in RANS, applications will expose information about redundancy to the network
(e.g., data is stored in both machine A and machine B). The network will use new
mechanisms that leverage this information (e.g., transport protocol that uses
multiple replicas at the same time). Applications will be modified to make full
use of the new mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring the co-design of
the application and the network, this project will make research advances at
different levels of the protocol stack.&lt;br/&gt;This includes innovation in at
least four different aspects: i) scheduling framework, ii) abstraction and
interface between the applications and the network, iii) new network mechanisms
(transport, in-network mechanisms), and iv) new application designs that exploit
the new mechanisms. This research will address the challenges of implementing
this framework for different resources (e.g., network). RANS promises to
overcome the problems caused by stragglers. This will reduce application
latency, especially at the tail, which is a major concern for application
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will make fundamental
advances in designing systems and network protocols to improve performance of
data center applications. &lt;br/&gt;This research will have significant impact
on various stakeholders, including Internet users, cloud service providers, and
researchers and students of networking. End users will experience better
performance while using existing applications. Cloud service providers can
deploy new applications that require high reliability and performance.
Researchers will benefit from the open source software artifacts and students
will benefit from a cloud computing Hackathon workshop and opportunities for
research projects.