* 1618185
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research:Exploiting Predictability &amp; Interdependency of Physical Parameters for Resource-Efficient Integration of Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Nathan Fisher, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 249,049.00

Everyday activities are increasingly enabled by embedded systems. In such
systems, a deadline violation can lead to dangerous and/or disastrous
consequences. The timing parameters of such systems are driven by the physical
state of these systems (e.g., ignition timing in automotive systems is
determined by engine speed). Current approaches to deal with the dependencies
between the physical environment state and timing parameters make very
simplistic assumptions, resulting in wasted hardware and energy resources. This
research facilitates more effective integration of embedded systems --thus
enabling smaller technology via incorporation of techniques from mechanical
engineering, control systems, and real-time scheduling. The resultant techniques
will minimize the carbon footprint of systems that are ubiquitous and run our
everyday lives. The educational objective of this project incorporates resulting
artifacts into undergraduate- and graduate-level courses, as well as in K-12
outreach at local schools via summer camps and challenge
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to minimize the computational
utilization of real-time embedded systems by analyzing, modeling, and predicting
dependencies between the physical state and timing parameters to reduce the
size, weight, and power requirements of next-generation embedded systems. A
central objective is development of run-time scheduling algorithms and
associated schedulability analysis for new real-time task models that
characterize multiple physical dimensions of the system and their
interdependencies. Run-time adaptation protocols effectively allocate resources
when the estimates of the physical parameters are inaccurate. Implementations of
the scheduling and allocation algorithms upon embedded platforms provide
evaluation of performance of multi-dimensional techniques compared to the
traditional single-dimensional models.