* 1618384
* CSR: Small: Effective Sampling-based Miss Ratio Curves: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Zhenlin Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 09/30/2021
* USD 390,876.00

Caches, such as distributed in-memory cache for key-value store, often play a
key role in overall system performance. Miss ratio curves (MRCs) that relate
cache miss ratio to cache size are an effective tool for cache management. This
project develops a new cache locality theory that can significantly reduce the
time and space overhead of MRC construction and thus makes it suitable for
online profiling. The research will influence system design in both software and
hardware, as nearly every system involves multiple types of cache. The results
can thus benefit a wide range of systems from personal desktops to large scale
data centers. We will integrate our results into existing open source
infrastructure for the industry to adopt. In addition, this project will offer
new course materials that motivate core computer science research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a new cache locality
theory, applies it to several caching or memory management systems, and examines
the impact of different online random sampling techniques. The theory introduces
a concept of average eviction time that facilitates modeling data movement in
cache. The new model constructs MRCs with data reuse distribution that can be
effectively sampled. This model yields a constant space overhead and linear time
complexity. The research is focused on theoretical properties and limitations of
this model when compared with other recent MRC models. With this lightweight
model, the project seeks to guide hardware cache partitioning, improve memory
demand prediction and management in a virtualized system, and optimize key-value
memory cache allocation.