* 1618932
* TWC: Small: Rigorous and Customizable Spatiotemporal Privacy for Location Based Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Li Xiong, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2020
* USD 456,399.00

Rapid advances in location based applications are leading to increased concern
about location privacy. Current mobile operating systems only provide users with
rudimentary location access controls - either to block or allow location access
- which are inadequate and inefficient in mitigating privacy threats. Most
existing location obfuscation mechanisms are based on syntactic privacy models
that do not consider mobility and are hence vulnerable to inference attacks. The
goal of this project is to develop rigorous and customizable privacy notions and
location perturbation mechanisms for individual location sharing in location
based applications, and study their impact in the context of location based
queries and geospatial crowdsourcing. Building privacy mechanisms that can be
directly used by mobile users will minimize unnecessary disclosure of their
precise locations and trajectories to location based applications and other
possibly malicious third parties. By addressing the spatiotemporal privacy
barrier, this project promises significant impact in enabling and promoting
adoption of location based applications while ensuring individual privacy. The
project also includes a set of integrated educational activities including
hackathon events, involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, and
encouragement of participation by women and minorities.

The project has several objectives: 1) Develop rigorous privacy notions based on
differential privacy and its variants for location protection while accounting
for spatiotemporal correlations of a user's locations through mobility modeling,
and to investigate optimal and heuristic perturbation mechanisms to achieve
privacy guarantees with optimal utility; 2) Extend privacy solutions for
protecting a trajectory or a sequence of time-location pairs; and 3) Develop
customizable privacy solutions for location and trajectory protection through
policy graphs, considering user preferences, spatiotemporal semantics, and
privacy-utility tradeoffs. Privacy-utility tradeoffs using perturbed locations
are studied in the context of location based applications such as predictive
range queries and k-nearest neighbor queries as well as geospatial
crowdsourcing.

More information on this project can be found at
http://www.mathcs.emory.edu/aims/stprivacy