* 1618014
* CCF:  Small:  Accelerating Irregular Algorithms using Cache-Coherent FPGA Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* James Hoe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

Until recently, FPGA acceleration of computations has largely focused on
algorithms that exhibit a high degree of regularity and predictability in their
parallelism and memory access. The advent of high-capacity FPGA accelerators
connected to the processor and main memory through a high-performance cache-
coherent interconnect enables algorithms with irregular parallelism to be
considered. These irregular algorithms, including many data analytic and machine
learning kernels, operate on very large, memory-resident, pointer-based data
structures. This project will study the opportunity to accelerate irregular
algorithms for performance and energy efficiency on emerging cache-coherent FPGA
accelerators. The outcome of this investigation has potential for practical
commercial impact by helping to establish cache-coherent FPGA acceleration as a
viable new platform option for accelerating irregular algorithms that are
fundamental to datacenter workloads. This project will also provide valuable
training to both graduate and undergraduate students, and improve graduate-level
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of the traditional "off-load" model of
FPGA acceleration, this project seek to develop a new tightly-coupled FPGA-
processor collaboration model that takes advantage of the low-latency, fine-
grain shared-memory interactions between the processor and FPGA that are now
possible. The project studies fine-grain concurrent mappings of irregular
algorithms where the processor and FPGA work together---each leveraging its own
characteristic advantages, e.g., large cache, high frequency ALUs for the
processor and energy-efficient spatial hardware concurrency for the FPGA---to
outperform what either can achieve alone. An integral part of the investigation
is also to develop new insights toward what should cache-coherent FPGA
accelerators ultimately look like, especially with the support for irregular
algorithms in mind.