* 1618727
* NeTS: Small: Beyond Separate-Then-Centralize: A Cellular Operating System to Optimize Software-Defined 5G Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Existing wireless networks rely on closed and inflexible architectures that
often limit and delay the adoption of new wireless networking technologies. The
notion of software defined networking (SDN) has therefore been recently
introduced to simplify network control and to make it easier to introduce and
deploy new applications and services. However, to date, existing SDN
architectures are far from fulfilling the requirements of next-generation
wireless networks. This project proposes a radically different approach to SDN
for next-generation wireless cellular networks. At the core, it will try to
develop a principled theory and practice of software-defined wireless networking
for next generation cellular networks based on cross-layer optimization theory.
The project is expected to bridge the gap between SDN and distributed network
optimization/control; lead to simplified control plane that does not rely on any
centralized control entity; finally, considerably ease the burden of network
engineers that will be able to control and manage the network operations without
in-depth understanding of distributed optimization
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the core building
principles of a Wireless Cellular Operating System (WiCOS). WiCOS will provide
the network designer with a set of abstractions hiding the low-level details of
the network operations as well as details of their distributed implementation,
thus providing the network designer with a centralized view abstracting the
network functionalities at a high level. Based on this abstract representation,
WiCOS will take centralized control programs written on a high-level view of the
network and automatically generate distributed cross-layer control programs
based on optimization theory that are executed at the network edge by each
individual network element on an abstract, common representation of the radio
hardware. The goals will be accomplished by executing four research tasks: WiCOS
architecture design; automated network control problem decomposition;
programmable protocol stack (PPS) design; and prototyping and demonstration. The
project will provide demonstrations of the proposed WiCOS framework by
concentrating on three scenarios, i.e., coordinated networks, semi-coordinated
networks and uncoordinated networks, and develop detailed demonstrations for
each scenario.