* 1618059
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Concurrent Software Verification with Rely/Guarantee Abstractions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Thomas Wies, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2020
* USD 240,252.00

It is now widely recognized that increasing the reliability of concurrent
software is one of the most important scientific and technological challenges in
the emerging era of multi-core and distributed computing. The last decade has
seen substantial advances in automatic verification technology to improve the
reliability of sequential programs, and software tools that can be applied to
large industrial code bases. Unfortunately, the underlying technology of such
tools cannot be directly applied to concurrent programs.

This project investigates scalable techniques for automatic verification of
concurrent software. The approach uses thread-modular decomposition of the
overall problem that does not completely decompose to the granularity of an
individual thread. Since base components may exhibit concurrent behavior, the
investigators develop analysis algorithms for these base components so that they
can be automatically proven correct with respect to their environment
description and vice-versa. This work yields automatic verification tools that
exploit richer notions of modular reasoning about parallelism, thereby offering
improved scalability and robustness over previous approaches. The project team
includes graduate and undergraduate students.