* 1618588
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Instruction Address Translation Revisited
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Alan Cox, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,950.00

Applications continue to grow both in the size of their code and in the
amount&lt;br/&gt;of data they access. Whether on mobile, desktop, or server
platforms,&lt;br/&gt;applications are written in a modular fashion, relying
heavily on common&lt;br/&gt;functionality provided by a large number of
libraries. Modern operating&lt;br/&gt;systems leverage this commonality by
sharing libraries across applications to&lt;br/&gt;avoid duplicate copies of
instructions in memory. However, operating systems&lt;br/&gt;still maintain
independent memory management (address translation) data&lt;br/&gt;for each
process, consuming memory resources proportional to the number
of&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously executing processes. The goal of this project is to
enhance&lt;br/&gt;the efficiency of memory system access and management for
shared code&lt;br/&gt;libraries. The success of these efforts will contribute to
the long-term&lt;br/&gt;sustainability of the world's fast evolving digital
economy and society,&lt;br/&gt;reducing computational waste and improving
responsiveness. The education&lt;br/&gt;component will include improving
classroom instruction by contributing new&lt;br/&gt;course modules as well as
training graduate students in the importance of&lt;br/&gt;efficient
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves designing novel hardware and
software to promote&lt;br/&gt;efficient access to shared code in a multi-tasking
environment, including: 1)&lt;br/&gt;new operating system memory management
mechanisms and policies to eliminate&lt;br/&gt;duplication and minimize cache
and translation lookaside buffer (TLB)&lt;br/&gt;footprint, examining the
tradeoffs between the use of variable segments and&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical page
tables; 2) reexamining the need for caching translations&lt;br/&gt;when
utilizing emerging low-latency persistent memory; and 3) using
available&lt;br/&gt;protection support for safe translation sharing in modern
TLBs in addition to&lt;br/&gt;designing new hardware support to improve
efficiency.