* 1618391
* NeTS: Small: Geometric and Topological Analysis on Trajectory Sensing: Collection, Classification and Anonymization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jie Gao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The maturing of mobile devices and systems provide an unprecedented opportunity
to collect a large amount of data about real world human motion at all scales.
The rich knowledge contained in these data sets can have a huge impact in many
fields ranging from transportation to health care, from civil engineering to
energy management, from e-commerce to social networking. While the applications
are paradigm-transforming, recent studies show that the trajectory data can
raise serious privacy concerns in revealing personally sensitive information
such as frequently visited locations or social ties. These concerns become the
major hurdle in utilizing these data sets. This project systematically studies
the issue of anonymizing trajectory data, from the bottom layer of trajectory
sensing and data collection, to the middle layer of trajectory representation
and anonymity, to the application layer of how the anonymized trajectory data
can be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the nature of trajectories as being time
stamped sequence of points, in this project novel geometric and topological
algorithms that directly work on distributed sensors collecting the trajectories
are developed for achieving the objective. Queries to such decentralized sensors
are made to ensure no sensitive information is released. The intellectual
contribution lies in the following aspects. 1) The topological representation of
trajectories, i.e., how trajectories pass around obstacles and landmarks in the
domain is adopted. The topological representation is compact and descriptive,
introducing novel discrete and combinatorial problems to study. 2) A novel
framework is developed for distributed sensors to directly learn, classify and
compare the topological types of the target trajectories, using harmonic one-
forms and Hodge decomposition from algebraic topology. The new framework can
substantially reduce the communication cost within the network, while
maintaining the requirement of user privacy from the very beginning of sensing
and data collection. 3) A family of anonymization algorithms using different
ideas are developed, by altering the way to connect the time-stamped points into
trajectories, by adjusting the topological resolution to reach a balance between
data anonymity and utility, and by sensing and recording randomized hash data to
answer popular trajectory queries. 4) The trajectory data sets are often huge,
so algorithms for handling large scale trajectory data sets are developed in
both centralized and decentralized settings.