* 1618908
* CIF - Small: High Resolution Computational Imaging with Motion in Spatially Varying Fields
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 497,154.00

Basic questions about optical information in the presence of scatter, and more
specifically, related to object motion in spatially varying electromagnetic
fields, is being addressed. Light provides key information through spectroscopy,
paramount in human health applications, and allows for high-resolution imaging.
However, random optical scatter due to tissue, for example, can obfuscate an
object of interest. Such random scatter produces speckle, the granular nature of
light seen when a laser pointer scatters from a rough surface. A new
computational imaging method is being developed to image hidden objects based on
motion in such structured fields. With control over laser illumination and
precise motion, far-subwavelength feature information can be obtained. This
understanding is being developed into a high resolution computational imaging
approach, critical in a variety of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One aspect
of this project involves the use of optical speckle correlations over object
position or as a function of time for imaging through or within a heavily
scattering medium at potentially wavelength scale resolution. The goal of this
project is to take the initial presentation of this concept to a practical
computational imaging modality. Measured laser speckle images with example
scattering media, representative of several centimeters of tissue, are being
used with various levels of understanding about the moving objects. The other
direction is to develop a computational method to determine if a small object is
present by precisely scanning a sample in a spatially varying field established
by two or more laser beams. A key application is to determine whether a defect
exists in a semiconductor material system. More generally, opportunities for
far-subwavelength optical imaging based on motion in structured illumination is
being pursued.