* 1618065
* SHF: Small: Greybox Computing: An Associative Computing Methodology with Instruction Directed Power and Clock Management
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Jie Gu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 457,300.00

Energy consumption has become the bottleneck for many emerging applications such
as wearable electronics and biomedical devices. The conventional low power
design methodology has reached its limitation, bounded by the fundamental
tradeoff of performance and power. Given that hardware design and software
development are conventionally performed separately and treat each other as
blackboxes, this project aims at creating a "greybox" methodology where the
information from hardware design of a microprocessor are visible to the higher
level software compilers and vice versa. The additional information from
different layers of the design space can be used to establish a real-time power
optimization technique based on advanced power and clock management circuitry
developed in recent years. By breaking the boundary of the traditional design
space, it is possible to achieve significant energy savings that are beyond the
reach of conventional schemes. The "greybox computing" methodology proposed in
this project can overcome the limitations of existing low power technology and
provide a new design paradigm based on joint hardware and software optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will yield several key enabling
techniques to achieve ultra-energy saving including (1) a comprehensive
associative mapping between software instruction and hardware performance, (2)
high efficient power and clock management circuitry design, (3) hardware and
software collaborative calibration scheme. This project seeks to develop a new
paradigm for low-power system design that would have profound positive impact in
a wide range of applications that rely on battery powered or energy scavenging
electronics. The project promotes an interdisciplinary collaborative design
methodology that could create strong impact on the development flow of current
computer design. The project also includes plans for integrating research with
education through graduate student training, course development and workshop
organization. Outreach activities inspired by this project will encourage
underrepresented students to pursue graduate studies.