* 1618960
* NeTS: Small: Distributed Wireless Networking with An Enhanced Physical-Link Layer Interface
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jie Luo, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 398,577.00

The development of future wireless systems requires a network architecture that
simultaneously addresses communication efficiency and system modularity. Due to
the inefficiency of current network architectures, most existing networks adopt
the structure of using wireless communication only at the last hop. The goal of
this project is to develop an enhanced physical-link layer interface to solve
the architectural inefficiency problem in wireless part of the special-
structured networks, mainly for the distributed communication and networking
model. By equipping a link layer user with multiple transmission options, the
new interface enables advanced communication adaptation at the link layer that
exploits wireless capabilities such as power, rate, and antenna adjustments.
This project represents the first systematic investigation of distributed link
layer networking that exploits multiple transmission options at each link layer
user. The project will establish an important bridge toward the integration of
information and network theories, and will serve as an example wireless
architecture development that seeks to minimize its disturbance to the operation
of wireline systems. Unification of information theory and network theory will
also influence the way subjects are taught in Higher Education and attract more
talented students to this field of acute national importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized into four steps. In Step I, the
focus is to investigate typical distributed networking scenarios with
homogeneous users and saturated message queues. Based on a stochastic
approximation model, a medium access control (MAC) framework will be developed
to enable effective formulation of distributed channel sharing problems.
Distributed algorithms will be developed to ensure asymptotic optimal or near
optimal performance with respect to the maximization of particular network
utility functions. In Step II, the focus is to extend the MAC framework to
distributed networks that contain user groups with different priorities, as well
as to distributed cognitive networks where secondary users are required not to
disturb the communications of the primary users. In Step III, the focus is to
develop fast adaptive MAC algorithms by incorporating the exponential backing-
off approach into the MAC framework. In Step IV, the focus is to use computer
simulations to investigate performance of the MAC algorithms in practical
scenarios.