* 1618104
* SHF: Small: Enhancing Memory System Dependability by Integrity Checking
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 443,500.00

Memory system dependability is increasingly a concern as memory cell density and
total capacity continue to increase. Recent field studies have shown that memory
error rates are rising and memory errors have demonstrated correlation patterns.
With these two trends, current memory error protection schemes are no longer
sufficient for server computers. This project explores a unique error protection
scheme called MemGuard, which is based on memory integrity checking, to enhance
memory error protections for server computers as well as to provide a cost- and
energy-efficient solution for personal and mobile computers. The research may
significantly improve the dependability of computer systems without incurring
high cost or energy overhead. The education and outreach activities will
encourage minority and women students to get involved in the research, and will
include interactions with middle/high school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MemGuard scheme checks the consistency
between memory reads and memory writes using hash-based signatures to detect
memory errors. It can detect memory cell errors with a negligible rate of false
negative. Compared to SECDED (single error correcting double error detection)
ECC and SDDC (single data device correction) schemes, it is much stronger in
multi-bit error detection and with negligible cost and energy overhead. It does
not correct errors immediately as the other two schemes do; instead, it may
reply on OS checkpointing or program restarting for error recovery. The project
will fully investigate the design of MemGuard, evaluate the strength of MemGuard
with realistic DRAM error modes, extend it to multiprocessors and I/O rich
environments, develop a similar integrity-based scheme for processor/memory
communication error protection, and combine MemGuard with existing error
protection schemes. The project will also optimize the design and implementation
of the hash functions of MemGuard, combine MemGuard with selection error
protection, and explore efficient checkpointing strategies for improved
efficiency.