* 1618512
* CCF-BSF: CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coding and Information - Theoretic Aspects of Local Data Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Arya Mazumdar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,996.00

This project studies fundamental problems in data coding that can improve the
efficiency of distributed storage systems by increasing data reliability and
availability while reducing storage overhead compared to existing industry
standards. The results of this research can benefit storage applications ranging
from financial, scientific monitoring, and signal processing to social networks
and sharing platforms. The new combinatorial, coding, and information theoretic
tools developed in this project will be incorporated in course curricula in the
respective institutions of the principal investigators.

Data coding with locality, the focus of this project, is a rapidly developing
area of coding theory that was initially motivated by applications in
distributed storage, and has links to many areas of network science (e.g., index
coding and network coding) as well as to computer science. This project advances
the theory and practice of data coding with local recovery by investigating
broad implications of the locality constraint in coding problems. These include
studying new error-correcting code families and their decoding, fundamental
limitations on the code parameters and capacity bounds under the requirements of
local data recovery. The newly designed coding schemes developed in this project
will be validated through implementation and evaluation in simulated computer
environment, aiming at enhanced performance of data coding in current industry
solutions.