* 1618615
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Limits of Wireless Communications with Stochastic Information Flows and Queueing Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Mustafa Gursoy, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 442,320.00

Mobile data traffic has experienced unprecedented growth recently and is
predicted to grow further over the coming years. This exponential growth in the
flow of mobile data and multimedia content has significant implications on
wireless networks. For one, such wireless multimedia traffic requires certain
quality of service guarantees. Another consequence is heterogeneity in network
traffic. Wireless networks now carry heterogeneous stochastic traffic in diverse
environments, and successful design of networks and effective quality of service
provisioning for mobile multimedia communications critically depend on the
appropriate choice of source traffic models. Motivated by these factors, this
project addresses the important and timely topic of wireless communication with
service guarantees. The outcomes of this research will significantly contribute
to the design of next generation wireless networks supporting multimedia traffic
with service guarantees, and are poised to have significant impact on the
society due to extremely fast growth in mobile video
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology of this project is centered around
combining tools from information theory and stochastic network calculus to
establish a strong analytical framework by rigorously determining the
fundamental limits of wireless communication under queuing constraints. In
particular, this project investigates the maximum throughput in single- and
multi-user wireless channels in the presence of random data arrivals and
statistical queuing constraints. First, an idealistic setup with Gaussian
codebooks and reliable communication with no bounds on the code lengths and no
errors is addressed. Subsequently, wireless throughput is characterized in the
more practical regimes of finite block-length coding and of finite-alphabet
inputs with arbitrary distributions.