* 1618531
* CSR: Small: Project T: Enabling Open Innovation in Mobile Platforms through API Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Steven Ko, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2020
* USD 486,444.00

Openness is a key to innovation. Numerous areas in computer science and other
disciplines have embraced openness and witnessed an explosion of new
technological advances. This proposal argues that mobile platforms (such as
Android and iOS) need to embrace openness as well. This is motivated by the fact
that the current mobile platforms are mostly closed and do not allow third-party
innovation, making it extremely difficult to introduce disruptive technologies.
This can be observed easily by examining the most open mobile platform, Android.
Android is regarded as an open platform since its source code is open. However,
it is indeed a closed platform from the perspective of open innovation; this is
because a small, independent third party has no easy way to modify the platform
and distribute the modification at a large scale to end users. Only a select
few, such as Google and Samsung, have the power to modify the platform and
deliver it.

Recognizing such a problem, this project proposes a new technique called API
virtualization that enables open innovation in mobile platforms. API
virtualization allows third-party developers to modify, reimplement, or
customize platform APIs and deploy the modifications seamlessly. The uniqueness
of the proposed technique is that it enables modifications completely at the app
layer without requiring any platform-level changes. This allows practical
openness---third parties can easily distribute their modifications for a
platform without the need to update the entire platform.

If successful, this project will produce (1) a working prototype that implements
API virtualization on Android, (2) several case-study systems that leverage API
virtualization and provide better functionality such as app anonymity, automatic
mobile-cloud integration, and energy policy customization, and (3) a Web service
where third-party developers upload their platform API modifications that end
users can download and use.