* 1618866
* AF: Small: Approximation Algorithms and Data Structures for Geometric Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Mount, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 407,537.00

Many data sets can profitably be viewed as points in a&lt;br/&gt;high-
dimensional space: think of employee salary and seniority,&lt;br/&gt;weather
stations' hourly reports of temperature, humidity, wind speed,&lt;br/&gt;and
direction, or even the images from your cellphone camera as
color&lt;br/&gt;values per pixel. Geometric retrieval problems seek to
preprocess&lt;br/&gt;multi-dimensional geometric data for rapid access; for two
examples,&lt;br/&gt;"nearest neighbor queries" could find images similar to a
query image,&lt;br/&gt;and "range queries" could find all times with temperature
and humidity&lt;br/&gt;above given thresholds. These queries are of fundamental
importance throughout&lt;br/&gt;engineering and science, and have applications
in knowledge discovery&lt;br/&gt;and data mining, pattern recognition and
classification, machine&lt;br/&gt;learning, data compression, multimedia
databases, document retrieval,&lt;br/&gt;and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high computational complexity of
nearest neighbor and range queries in high dimensions has&lt;br/&gt;inspired
research into approximate solutions. The work of this project&lt;br/&gt;deepens
and broadens our understanding of the computational&lt;br/&gt;complexity of
these two problems. It studies new, more efficient solutions to&lt;br/&gt;key
special cases, including&lt;br/&gt;low-complexity approximations to convex
bodies, faster algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;polytope membership queries,
applications to approximate nearest&lt;br/&gt;neighbor searching, efficient
approximation algorithms for Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;minimum spanning trees, and
range searching with structural queries.&lt;br/&gt;These improved algorithms
will lead to more efficient solutions in the&lt;br/&gt;applications described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software systems and libraries developed
as part of this project will be&lt;br/&gt;made freely available over the Web to
help scientists and engineers in&lt;br/&gt;other disciplines. The algorithms
developed as a part of this project&lt;br/&gt;will be incorporated into graduate
and undergraduate courses at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland. Course
materials will be made available over the&lt;br/&gt;Web as a resource for
researchers interested in learning more about this&lt;br/&gt;area.