* 1618810
* RI: Small: CompCog: Pique: A Cognitive Model of Curiosity for Personalizing Sequences of Learning Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Mary Lou Maher, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2020
* USD 449,419.00

One of the most significant challenges in education is to simultaneously provide
personalization and scale. How can each learner in an online class of hundreds
or thousands be provided with knowledge and challenges that suit them
personally? This project will develop an AI system for personalized learning
that is inspired by cognitive models of curiosity, creativity and intrinsic
motivation. Pique (short for the "Personalized Curiosity Engine") is based on
understanding what makes an individual learner curious, and then recommending
resources that will stimulate their curiosity. Pique's cognitive model of its
learner uses natural language processing techniques to figure out what sequences
of resources will be familiar enough to be accessible, but sufficiently new to
not be boring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pique is a novel cognitive system drawing
on technologies from intelligent tutoring systems, computational creativity, and
natural language processing. Its key contribution is combining a cognitive model
of curiosity with educational recommender systems. We will evaluate the
effectiveness of Pique first with simulations and then with students at a large
comprehensive public university. Evaluation will take the form of a comparison
between the full Pique system and a modified version with its cognitive model of
curiosity disabled. This will enable us to determine whether recommending
resources that are simultaneously curiosity-stimulating and fit to the task is
more effective than recommending resources that are just fit to the task. Given
the interdisciplinary nature of this research we will disseminate our results
broadly, including to the educational technology, cognitive systems, information
retrieval, and computational creativity communities.