* 1618646
* NeTS: Small: RUI: Hybrid Visible-Light and Radio-Frequency Communications with Integrated Medium-Access Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Siddhartan Govindasamy, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 98,335.00

The explosion in demand for wireless communications has resulted in the crowding
of the electromagnetic spectrum. To service the exponentially increasing demand
forecast for the near future, new technologies and frequency bands need to be
considered. One such technology is Visible-Light-Communications (VLC), where
light-emitting diode (LED) based lighting systems can be used to transmit data
while also providing illumination. The visible-light spectrum provides a very
large bandwidth of electromagnetic spectrum that has the potential to help
alleviate the spectral crunch. This proposed effort addresses the challenge of
tightly integrating VLC communications with Radio-Frequency (RF) communications,
where the RF channel is used only when a VLC link cannot be established, and for
upstream data transmissions between users and access points since the upstream
link poses a number of challenges for VLC including significant glare that would
result from high-powered lights on mobile devices, and high power consumption.
The PI proposes to develop practical, efficient protocols and algorithms for
hybrid VLC-RF communications systems. The PI works in an undergraduate-only
institution and will work with undergraduate students in this project.
Additionally, the PI plans to work with a youth teacher program to educate
middle- and high-school aged children on the fundamentals of digital
communications, using VLC as an example technology. Successful completion of
this project will be a major step towards making VLC-RF systems practical which
will help service the increased demand for wireless data communications in the
future, and help train the next generation of engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to design, develop, and implement in
hardware, hybrid RF-VLC systems with integrated Medium-Access Control (MAC),
which also provide illumination. The proposed program will involve 1) designing,
simulating and implementing a VLC-RF MAC protocol; 2) developing and integrating
into the system, physical layer algorithms that exploit channel information that
can realistically be obtained through MAC protocol interactions; and 3)
optimizing the MAC protocol for Room-Division Multiplexing (RDM). The fact that
the proposed systems will have integrated MACs, enables practical VLC-RF systems
for which physical layer implementation is decoupled from higher layers, which
is an important principle of modular communications system designs. Optimizing
the system for RDM can potentially increase data rates significantly due to the
higher spectral re-use on the VLC enabled downlink of the hybrid system.
Successful completion of this project will help make VLC a practical and modular
communications system, which can lead to improved internet access, particularly
in dense urban environments.