* 1618448
* III: Small: Semantic Trajectory Mining with Contexts
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Zhenhui Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,057.00

Rapid advances of sensing and positioning technologies have provided us with an
increasing amount of trajectory data collected from human movements, animal
traces, and traffic. Understanding such large-scale trajectory data together
with their surrounding contexts (e.g., location information, local events,
weather and environment) could benefit a number of important applications. For
example, a semantic understanding of human trajectories can help profiling a
person's interest, socioeconomic status and health conditions; mining traffic
patterns w.r.t. local events and weather conditions can lead to a more resilient
transportation system; and studying how animal movements respond to
environmental changes can advance our understanding of the ecological system.
This project investigates data mining algorithms and provides solutions toward
semantic trajectory mining with rich spatial-temporal contexts. The results will
have broader impacts in other disciplines such as social science, health,
transportation, and ecology through PI's interdisciplinary collaborations.

This project seeks innovative solutions for trajectory data mining. State-of-
the-art trajectory data mining methods have been largely limited to studying
only trajectory data without considering the rich spatial-temporal contextual
information. Such a limitation often results in detecting trivial or even
erroneous patterns. For example, anomalies (e.g., heavy traffic or detouring
trajectories) may actually be expected if considering the contexts such as big
football games or extreme weather. To incorporate contexts in trajectory mining,
the key challenge is to model the implicit and complications correlations
between contexts and trajectories given the sparse and noisy observations on
both trajectories and contexts. To correctly and fully utilize the rich contexts
in analyzing trajectory data, this project has two research aims: (1) trajectory
annotation using contexts and (2) trajectory mining with contexts. In the first
aim, the objective is to associate trajectories with relevant static or dynamic
contexts. In the second aim, the researchers will re-visit trajectory mining
algorithms and innovate three important mining techniques: recurrence pattern
mining, anomaly detection, and trajectory clustering. New data mining techniques
will be developed to incorporate the annotated contexts in the data mining
process. The project will advance the state of the art in trajectory data mining
and enrich general data mining principles.