* 1618657
* AF: Small: A-Hypergeometric Solutions of Linear Differential Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mark van Hoeij, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,999.00

Many scientific laws are captured as differential equations
--&lt;br/&gt;formulas that relates a quantity (such as position) to its
derivatives&lt;br/&gt;(velocity and acceleration). Differential equations are
common in&lt;br/&gt;science, mathematics and engineering. They can be solved
numerically,&lt;br/&gt;but may also have a closed-form solution -- an exact
solution written&lt;br/&gt;in terms of familiar
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Except for small equations, closed-form
solutions were thought to be&lt;br/&gt;rare. Algorithms for second-order
equations, which were developed by&lt;br/&gt;the PI and his students, have
demonstrated that closed form solutions &lt;br/&gt;of linear differential
equations with polynomial coefficients&lt;br/&gt;are actually common; solutions
can often be written in terms of&lt;br/&gt;Gauss's hypergeometric function, a
familiar function in differential&lt;br/&gt;equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to find out if closed form solutions are also common&lt;br/&gt;for
higher order equations. The PI will work with two graduate&lt;br/&gt;students to
develop algorithms to search for solutions in terms
of&lt;br/&gt;A-hypergeometric functions, which were introduced by
Gel'fand,&lt;br/&gt;Kapranov and Zelevinski.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is a
wide variety of A-hypergeometric functions, which&lt;br/&gt;correspond to
polytopes. A-hypergeometric functions can be&lt;br/&gt;multivariate, so several
tools that currently only exist for&lt;br/&gt;univariate equations need to be
generalized. A key motivating&lt;br/&gt;question is if convergent integer-series
solutions can always be&lt;br/&gt;written in terms of A-hypergeometric
functions. If true, then&lt;br/&gt;A-hypergeometric solutions would be common in
areas of mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;science that involve combinatorial structures
or integrals, such as the Ising model&lt;br/&gt;or Feynman diagrams in physics.
This question leads to several others&lt;br/&gt;on A-hypergeometric functions,
some of which can be settled by the&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to be developed in this
project.