* 1618427
* AF: Small: Reconstructing Mixtures of DNA Sequences from High-Throughput Sequencing Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

In a wide range of problems in genomics and personalized medicine, it is of
critical importance to accurately reconstruct distinct nucleotide sequences
present in a heterogeneous mixture. Examples include viral quasispecies
reconstruction, mapping repertoire of immune cells, and haplotyping. While
recent advancements in high-throughput DNA sequencing have enabled affordable
studies of genetic variations, technological limitations of sequencing platforms
as well as potentially non-uniform frequencies of the sequences in a mixture
render the analysis of heterogeneous mixtures a challenging and computationally
intensive task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop fast and
accurate algorithms for reconstruction and frequency estimation of sequences in
diverse mixtures that will assist practitioners in pharmacogenomics and
personalized medicine. The project includes a focus on fostering diversity,
dissemination of new interdisciplinary research across disciplines, and
enrichment of the educational experience of participating engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of the project include: First, the
design and analysis of matrix factorization methods for accurate and efficient
reconstruction of distinct sequences present in a heterogeneous mixture and for
estimation of their frequencies. In the proposed framework, sequence
reconstruction is formulated as the problem of factorizing structured, partially
observed low-rank matrices and efficiently solved by exploiting salient features
of high-throughput sequencing data. Second, the development of a methodology for
the analysis of dynamically evolving mixtures of sequences temporally sampled by
means of high-throughput sequencing. This research thrust will lead to novel
sequence reconstruction methods capable of tracking the evolution of sequences
over time and accurate identification of their frequencies. The third and final
goal is the development of algorithmic solutions to specific sequence diversity
analysis problems that fully exploit structural features of the respective
applications and thus enable superior performance.