* 1618783
* RI: Small: Effective Preference Reasoning over Combinatorial Domains: Principles, Problems, Algorithms, and Implementations
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Miroslaw Truszczynski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 06/30/2020
* USD 457,594.00

Preferences are fundamental attributes of human reasoning and decision making.
They appear whenever a choice between alternatives is to be made. Understanding
and automating preference reasoning is a major problem of artificial
intelligence, especially important for the design of autonomous intelligent
decision support systems. If there are few alternatives, preferences between
them can be represented explicitly and preference reasoning is typically easy.
However, in practice the number of alternatives facing the decision maker can be
daunting in many cases. In such cases, modeling and representing preferences of
the decision maker, and automating preference reasoning based on the model are
challenging. To respond to the challenge, the project will study principles and
properties of preference aggregation and optimization over large domains of
alternatives, and algorithms to support preference reasoning tasks; will develop
methods for preference learning and approximation in support of building
preference models; and will implement software for effective preference modeling
and reasoning. Areas such as knowledge representation, computational social
choice, and constraint solving embodied by answer-set programming and
satisfiability testing will inform these studies. The project will result in a
theoretical and algorithmic framework for preference reasoning over
combinatorial domains, in software tools for effective preference reasoning, and
in methods to integrate them into artificial intelligence decision support
systems that are becoming pervasive in industrial, scientific and governmental
applications.

The project will assume that the space of alternatives is modeled by a
combinatorial domain, where alternatives are represented in terms of values of
attributes relevant to decision making. While combinatorial domains are
exponentially large in the number of attributes, the sets of values of
individual attributes are typically small. This opens a possibility of
expressing preferences over elements in a combinatorial domain in terms of
preferences on attribute values and relations between the attributes. This is
the setting for the project, with preference trees, CP-nets and answer set
optimization programs as formal representations of preferences over
combinatorial domains. The project will focus on preference aggregation and
preference optimization. Finding optimal and near-optimal alternatives, finding
collections of optimal or near-optimal alternatives that are in some sense
diverse (or similar), and aggregating preferences that are only partially known
are some examples of specific problems we will consider. As building manually
preference models over large domains is infeasible, the project will study
methods to learn preference models (for instance, preference trees), and develop
methods for model approximation (different models have varying computational
properties, and close approximations of ``hard'' models with ``easy'' ones may
prove effective for reasoning with the former). Finally, the project will
develop a software suite for several key preference reasoning tasks. The
implementation will exploit advances in answer-set programming and
satisfiability. The resulting software will be systematically evaluated on
benchmarks coming from or motivated by practical applications.