* 1618153
* TWC SBE: Small: Helping Teens and Parents Negotiate Online Privacy and Safety
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Julie Downs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Land
* 08/31/2018
* USD 256,141.00

The project will use interviews to guide development of new web tools that
parents and teens can use to improve communication about the risks of using the
web and social media, and to help teens engage in online behaviors that are less
risky. The researchers will create simple prototypes of these new tools, pilot
testing them to improve them and refine their features by allowing teens and
parents to role play using the tools. This research addresses the under-explored
area of how parents and teens negotiate and make decisions about teens? online
privacy and safety, with the goal of developing proofs of concept of
technological solutions that help support parent-teen communication. The project
could have a significant impact in helping families negotiate online boundaries
and discuss appropriate online behaviors and risks so that parents can make more
informed decisions and teens can learn to avoid high-risk behavior. The
prototypes are expected to influence the features that social media companies
make available to their users. Students in Carnegie Mellon University's Usable
Privacy and Security class and Privacy Engineering Master's Program will be
actively involved in this project. A "teen panel" of students at a local high
school will participate as research interns and in participatory design
exercises. The PIs and their students will disseminate outreach materials for
parents online and at local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As teens increasingly
have access to smartphones and the Internet, parents are faced with making
decisions about whether and how to monitor and guide their teens' online
behavior. To make informed choices, parents need to understand how their teens
are using these technologies. Teens may appreciate some parental guidance, but
may resent or even circumvent parental monitoring. The research team will first
explore the risks related to teens' online activities as well as the concerns
and barriers that prevent open communication between parents and teens, building
on previous work with experts about risky behavior. Through an iterative design
process, researchers will prototype and test a variety of software tools
(including standalone tools and features that could be added to existing
products and services) to determine how parents and teens would interact with
these tools and which they would find most useful. The research plan begins with
exploratory interviews with parents and teens to learn what problems most
concern families, and which of those pose the highest risk. Interviews will
include discussion and role-play of common risk behaviors, as previously
identified in interviews with experts. The results from these interviews will
guide an iterative design process, in which researchers will develop low-
fidelity paper prototypes of tools and features to demonstrate to parents and
teens for feedback. Role-playing techniques will be used to facilitate
participants' understanding of use scenarios. Researchers will iterate on these
prototypes, trying different approaches and features, until additional testing
identifies the types of tools and formulations that are most likely to be
adopted and used by teens and their parents, with the highest promise for
reducing high-risk online behaviors.