* 1618138
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Distributed Approximate Packet Classification
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Minlan Yu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2017
* USD 152,650.00

Network traffic classification - assigning incoming packets to classes for
processing based on pattern-matching rules - is critical for many network
management tasks, including performance monitoring and fault diagnosis. However,
as the number of classification tasks grows, the resources required to store and
apply the rules (switch memory in particular) can become scarce. This project
takes an end-to-end view of traffic classification, observing that in addition
to the memory usage at switches, other, cheaper resources are involved in packet
processing, specifically bandwidth to transfer selected packets to the
receivers, and the receiver systems themselves. The proposed approach trades off
memory for bandwidth by introducing overselection, in which approximate
classification made in reduced memory introduces additional unwanted traffic.
The idea is that in many applications, the side-effects of overselection are
quite manageable; the project will investigate multiple types of applications
such as middleboxes and packet scrubbers that can tolerate overselection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach involves a Cuckoo-filter-based approximate
prefix matcher at switches, which stores classification rules with different
prefix lengths. The key challenges in supporting distributed approximate packet
classification include: (1) new data structures that best support the tradeoffs
between memory and overselection; (2) new algorithms and systems that handle
traffic dynamics and network dynamics with overselection; (3) systematic
analysis of the impact of overselection on different network functions; and (4)
spatial and temporal coordination of switches and receivers. This project will
enable innovations and redesign of these management applications relying on
traffic classification in software defined networks (SDN), and thus lead to more
efficiently managed enterprise and datacenter networks. Moreover, the work will
facilitate interactions among theoretical and systems research. Finally, the
principal investigators have a record of engaging underrepresented groups and
undergraduates in research and plan to continue these engagements as part of
this project.