* 1618428
* SHF: SMALL: Deep Spiking Neural Networks: Algorithms, Architecture, and Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This research attempts to explore new computing models by mimicking mammalian
brains via new learning methods for brain-like Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs).
However, the inherent mismatch between the characteristics of the CMOS devices
and the functionality of neuron and synapses in the brain lead to drastic
increase in circuit complexity. Spintronics based (non-CMOS) devices will be
used in this research for hardware design of such brain-like architectures. The
nanoHUB (www.nanohub.org) facility at Purdue University will be used to
disseminate research results and to make the devices-to-systems simulation
framework for neuromorphic computing available to researchers, educators, and
students. The PI will develop new course modules to include the concept of using
spin as a state variable for computation. These will be further used to update
undergraduate and graduate level courses at Purdue, and made available through
the nanoHUB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, research on new spin-transfer
torque devices will be exploited to investigate the possibility of mimicking
functions of spiking neurons and synapses with efficient learning capabilities.
The research will be driven by a combination of top-down and a bottom-up
approach, where the team will explore algorithms that will be hardware
compatible for implementing low-power on-chip learning mechanisms. The proposed
research will develop new learning methods on brain-like spiking neural networks
and use efficient device/circuit/algorithm co-design to achieve highly energy
efficient spiking neural networks for image recognition and video analysis
problems.