* 1618231
* SHF:Small: Techniques for Pruning Problem and Solution Spaces to Enable Methodical Exploration of Software Development Alternatives
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Software engineers make thousands of design decisions during development. That
process remains manual and error-prone, while new research advances tend to be
partial and disconnected from one another. A key reason is that prevailing
approaches treat uniformly software systems across application domains (e.g.,
games, banking, avionics). The variations among different kinds of software
systems have led some researchers to narrow their focus to specific domains.
Domain-specific approaches work well, but only within the confines of a domain.
This project is developing simple, but powerful techniques that enable software
engineers to extend the benefits of domain-specificity across diverse domains,
and that guide and support engineers in modeling and analyzing complex
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project furthers the advances to-date in
model-driven engineering (MDE). MDE has two known shortcomings: (1) existing
techniques generate software modeling support for an application domain, but not
analysis and simulation tools; (2) implementation generation is restricted to
specific domains, languages, and toolsets. This is coupled with two additional
shortcomings: (3) modeling editors generated by MDE toolsets provide no support
for design space exploration; (4) optimal system deployment depends on
parameters that form a massive space of options. This project targets the above
four shortcomings. It defines an MDE platform with extensible semantics and
automatically synthesizes model interpreters for software system design,
analysis, simulation, and generation. The biggest envisioned impact of this
project is in its potential to change how software engineers approach
development. In particular, the burden of making a possibly overwhelming number
of non-critical, but also non-obvious, decisions is shifted to tools, allowing
engineers to focus on things that matter. This presents an opportunity to change
the way software engineers are trained, from the predominant one-size-fits-all
curricula of today to the more appropriate domain-driven specializations.