* 1618046
* SHF: Small: From Declarative Specifications of Search Problems to Efficient Solutions
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Neng-Fa Zhou, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 385,855.00

Search is one of the fundamental techniques used by many intelligent software
systems. There is a big chasm between the languages that programmers use to
describe problems and the encodings that are suitable for solvers to conduct
search. This research aims to narrow the gap by designing and implementing
algorithms for translating declarative specifications of combinatorial problems
into efficient encodings. The intellectual merits are novel frameworks and
algorithms for translating planning specifications into sophisticated and
efficient tabled logic programs, and cutting-edge algorithms for compiling high-
level constraints into SAT (satisfiability) encodings. The project's broader
significance and importance are its potential to produce long-lasting,
significant economic, educational, and social impact because of the ubiquity of
combinatorial problems, and the resulting theory and prototypes that will form
the technology which enables future systems to obtain high-quality solutions to
a variety of combinatorial problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
focus on two types of combinatorial problems: AI planning and constraint
satisfaction problems solved using SAT. Tabled logic programming has been shown
to be a powerful and flexible modeling and solving language for planning
problems. Nevertheless, it is an art, not a science, to develop efficient
planning models in tabled logic programming. The algorithms designed by this
research for translating planning specifications into efficient tabled logic
programs will have the following capabilities: (1) convert factored
representations of states into structural representations that exploit
symmetries; (2) extract domain-dependent control knowledge, such as
deterministic actions and partial orders; and (3) learn representation-specific
heuristics. Global constraints are an important part of constraint programming.
They not only allow easy modeling of many problems, but also enable use of
powerful propagation algorithms. SAT encoding algorithms have been proposed for
some of the global constraints. Nevertheless, there are no well-established
algorithms for encoding global constraints into SAT; many other global
constraints, such as graph constraints, have not received much attention despite
their usefulness in practical applications. This research will produce
algorithms for a comprehensive set of global constraints, and will develop a
cutting-edge constraint-solving system based on these algorithms.