* 1618158
* SHF: Small: Testing and Analysis for Reliable Numerical Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Zhendong Su, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Society increasingly depends on numerical software, which uses finite precision
arithmetic to approximate the reals and necessarily introduces approximation and
error. Cyber-physical systems are ubiquitous and rely on numerical software.
Anti-lock breaks and medical devices such as haptic control systems for remote
surgery are two such examples. Numerical errors in these systems can be
disastrous. Toyota suspects such errors contributed to its costly acceleration
problem; the Ariane 5 rocket exploded due to an overflow in its inertial
reference system; and scientists have had to retract papers from prestigious
journals (e.g., Nature). Techniques and tools for improving numerical software
reliability are critically needed.

This project explores practical techniques to test and analyze numerical
software. It focuses on the two most fundamental sources of numerical errors:
uncaught exceptions, and numerical stability and accuracy. The proposed
techniques are centered around symbolic execution and guided testing, and domain
insights are used to develop principles and heuristics to make the techniques
practical. This project considers three main dimensions: (1) problem formulation
and analysis strategies, (2) constraint solving, and (3) implementation
techniques. It aims at advancing the state-of-the-art in engineering robust
numerical software to help avoid costly, dangerous errors.