* 1618280
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Coding for Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Bernhard Haeupler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Modern computing systems are getting drastically larger and increasingly
distributed. The lack of centralized control necessitates communication between
the system components in order to synchronize computations and coordinate
actions. Communication is also needed to disseminate information throughout the
network. In almost all distributed settings communication is both a bottleneck
for efficiency and simultaneously the largest source of errors and
unreliability. This project aims to study the possibilities of reducing the
amount of communication through coding while still providing strong reliability
guarantees. While having reliability and efficiency of communication as a
central theme the focus of this project on interactive and network-centric
distributed settings sets it apart from classical information and coding theory
settings which are typically (i) static, (ii) have two or a small constant
number of parties and (iii) assume that information is one-directional, i.e.,
sent from one party to another. The overall goal of this project is to
contribute to the foundation for fast and reliable communication and computation
in the distributed systems of tomorrow and as such influence tomorrow's
technologies and society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
an NSF-BSF collaborative endeavor. The two relatively junior PIs have a strong
and extensive track-record in designing and adapting coding procedures for
distributed settings, both individually and collaboratively. Their strengths in
coding and distributed computing complement each other well and these synergies
have already lead to several joint publications and further preliminary results
on the topics of this project. A major goal of this project is to extend and
strengthen this US-Israeli collaboration and provide funding for graduate
students to join this research. The project includes detailed plans for
integrating research and education, e.g., by including research directions,
topics and results in curriculum development activities spanning graduate
courses, undergraduate courses and seminars. The project also puts forward
initiatives and concrete steps to attract, excite, recruit, and mentor students
from underrepresented groups as well as undergraduate students and integrate
them in the outlined research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on two distributed settings in which the development and application of
novel coding techniques has a potentially large impact:&lt;br/&gt;? Radio
Networks and Network Coding: Radio networks are an excellent setting for the
application and development of network coding techniques. The PIs will pursue
several ideas which allow to exploit the additivity of the wireless medium,
which usually considered harmful due to causing collisions, by employing coding.
They will also consider extensions to the classical radio network models which
more faithfully reflect characteristics of real radio networks, in particular
the uncertainty of message delivery and explore ways to alleviate those effects
with coding approaches.&lt;br/&gt;? Error Correction for Interactive
Communication in Distributed Networks: The PIs will attack several questions and
approaches to develop coding techniques that allow any distributed computation
to become robust against corruptions in their communications, a question that
has not been explored sufficiently so far. This builds on recent advanced in
coding schemes for interactive two-party and multi-party protocols.