* 1618475
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Perishable Network Information Flow
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 249,854.00

End-to-end delay is an inherent important metric of all modern communication
systems. As the end-to-end delay requirement is becoming more stringent (5G
wireless technology is aiming for a latency of less than one millisecond) and as
the improvement of local delay is quickly approaching the physical limits of the
individual components, it is of paramount interest to study the fundamental
limits of end-to-end delay from a network's perspective. Specifically, what is
the largest throughput one can transmit over a multihop network while respecting
a small end-to-end delay requirement? The research in this project will uncover
new delay-aware fundamental limits of network communication and computation.
Such results will have a basic impact on information theory, algorithmic graph
theory, and communication complexity theory and promote bridging and sharing
across technical disciplines that are normally studied by different scientific
communities. The design of low-delay schemes will also have immediate and long-
standing impact on many practical applications, including Internet of Things,
cyber-physical systems, video conferencing, and mobile gaming. The project also
includes plans for integrating the research into graduate-level lecture
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project is centered around
answering the question ?what is the information-theoretic capacity of a
networked system under a stringent (small) finite end-to-end delay
requirement??. The distinct nature of this problem requires a cross-disciplinary
approach spanning graph-theory, computer science, and information theory. This
project develops various new tools including new traffic models, new
probabilistic frameworks, and new distributive functional computation paradigms
and provides a long overdue theoretic study that explores both the graph-
theoretic and information-theoretic aspects of perishable network information
flow. The research is divided into two thrusts: one focused on end-to-end delay-
constrained multihop network capacity and the other focused on delay-constrained
distributed function computation.