* 1618203
* SHF:SMALL:Certified cost recurrences for higher-order functional programs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Norman Danner, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 461,830.00

One of the main jobs of a computer scientist is inventing new solutions to
computational problems. There are often many different ways of solving the same
problem, and running these different solutions on a computer can cost
drastically different amounts of time, memory, power, money, or other resources.
Given limited resources, it is often the case that one solution will accomplish
a desired goal, while another solution will fail to do so -- not because the
solution is wrong in principle, but because it would cost too much. Therefore,
programmers need to be able to predict how much a solution will cost before
actually running it, in order to predict whether a proposed solution will
successfully accomplish the desired goals. In this project, the principal
investigators, along with a postdoctoral fellow and students, are investigating
new techniques for predicting the resources used by programs. The intellectual
merits of the project are advancing the state of the art in interactive
reasoning about program cost, building on several different areas of computer
science research. The project is investigating methods that can be implemented
in interactive tools, so that a computer can help with making these cost
predictions and checking that programmers' predictions are correct. The
project's broader significance and importance are improving the quality of
software, by making it easier for programmers to both code in a high-level
language and reason precisely and formally about the cost of their programs,
leading to faster and more maintainable code. The project is training
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers for scientific careers.
Finally, the techniques developed by this project may inform the development of
pedagogical tools for computer science students.

More technically, this project is developing the foundations of a tool that
programmers can use to semi-automatically analyze the execution cost of
programs, in the style of an interactive theorem prover or proof assistant. The
main topic of investigation is formally certified methods for the extraction and
solution of cost recurrences from source code -- a method of cost analysis that
allows a smooth transition between automated and manual verification methods,
and is applicable to a wide class of programs. The investigators' prior work in
this area shows that the process of extracting recurrences from higher-order
functional programs on programmer-defined inductive datatypes can be viewed as a
translation from the source language to a complexity language, followed by a
semantic interpretation of the complexity language. This method is certified by
a bounding theorem, proved by logical relations, which implies that the cost
predicted by the recurrences bounds the execution cost of the program on all
inputs. This project is extending these techniques to more fully-featured source
languages (e.g., supporting general recursion and coinductive datatypes); to
other forms of cost analyses (e.g., parallel cost and amortized analysis); and
to deeper analysis of extracted recurrences (e.g., methods for solving higher-
order recurrences; a syntactic logic for manipulating recurrences). The project
is developing formalizations and implementations of the proposed techniques, and
applying the techniques to verifying compiler optimizations.