* 1618187
* AF: Small: Eliciting Accurate and Useful Information from Heterogeneous Agents
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Grant Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project will design and study systems for eliciting and aggregating
information and expertise when it is distributed across many heterogeneous
agents. This addresses a central challenge in the field of crowdsourcing, and
these solutions can be directly applied to typical crowdsourcing problems
including peer grading, and labeling spam or other non-compliant material.
Additionally, these systems should prove useful in gathering and aggregating
information in basic scientific research, reputation systems, and many decision-
making contexts including purchasing, product development, pricing, etc. Because
privacy is an instance of a participant cost, the ideas developed in this
research will readily import back to the field of privacy as well.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While the field of information elicitation promises many rich
applications, challenges in the area of mechanism design must be overcome to
fulfill its promise. The current state of the art is sufficient to run
mechanisms in simple settings, but very little effort has gone into studying the
difficulty of having heterogeneous agents with various levels and/or areas of
expertise. Particularly problematic are what we term divisive problems where
naïve agents err in a systematic and non-random way that can be predicted by
more expert agents. In such a setting, the expert agent may answer incorrectly,
in anticipation of being scored against naïve agents. Such occurrences are
extremely problematic because they render the above mechanisms incapable of
soliciting information from experts, exactly those whom are most important to
reach.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the theory necessary to
reason about information elicitation mechanisms with heterogeneous agents,
tackle key challenges, and devise innovative solutions to overcome these
challenges. This project will break through the most daunting barriers by
creating new mechanisms and accompanying theoretical analysis and empirical
tests to show that they achieve the stated goals. The PI will build upon the
rich and emerging literature in information elicitation without verification
using cutting-edge tools and insights from various fields including privacy,
mechanism design, game theory, proper scoring rules, information theory,
probability, and learning theory. If successful, this proposal will transform
the field of information elicitation by creating robust mechanisms having
provable guarantees that work with heterogeneous agents.