* 1618364
* SHF: Small: Scalable Spectral Sparsification of Graph Laplacians and Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Zhuo Feng, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/29/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This research is motivated by investigations on scalable methods for design
simplifications of nanoscale integrated circuits (ICs). This is to be achieved
by extending the associated spectral graph sparsification framework to handle
Laplacian-like matrices derived from general nonlinear IC modeling and
simulation problems. The results from this research may prove to be key to the
development of highly scalable computer-aided design algorithms for modeling,
simulation, design, optimization, as well as verification of future nanoscale
ICs that can easily involve multi-billions of circuit components. The algorithms
and methodologies developed will be disseminated to leading technology companies
that may include semiconductor and Electronic Design Automation companies as
well as social and network companies, for potential industrial deployments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectral graph sparsification aims to find an
ultra-sparse subgraph (a.k.a. sparsifier) such that its Laplacian can well
approximate the original one in terms of its eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Since
spectrally similar subgraphs can approximately preserve the distances, much
faster numerical and graph-based algorithms can be developed based on these
"spectrally" sparsified networks. A nearly-linear complexity spectral graph
sparsification algorithm is to be developed based on a spectral perturbation
approach. The proposed method is highly scalable and thus can be immediately
leveraged for the development of nearly-linear time sparse matrix solvers and
spectral graph (data) partitioning (clustering) algorithms for large real-world
graph problems in general. The results of the research may also influence a
broad range of computer science and engineering problems related to complex
system/network modeling, numerical linear algebra, optimization, machine
learning, computational fluid dynamics, transportation and social networks, etc.