* 1618627
* CSR: Small: Data Services for Reliable Crowdsensing in Urban Spaces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 409,159.00

This project develops theory and tools for reliable crowdsensing, aiming to
significantly reduce infrastructure investment costs needed to turn urban spaces
into future smart cities. Crowdsensing, for purposes of this project, refers to
the utilization of the smartest asset in the city - the people - in sharing data
on their environment, thereby reducing the need for expensive physical sensors.
As an example and living testbed, the work builds a smart transportation
application, offering a novel vehicular crowdsensing-based navigation service,
called GreenGPS. The novelty of this service is in finding the most fuel-
economic routes for drivers, as opposed to the shortest or fastest, saving
10-20% in energy costs according to initial tests.

It is estimated that, today, 54% of the world population lives in cities. This
percentage will increase to 66% by 2050. City dwellers are the primary
stakeholders and beneficiaries of this project. They are the drivers in smart
transportation applications, the survivors in disaster response scenarios, and
the consumers in energy saving systems. They are in possession of increasingly
many sensing platforms, such as cameras, GPS devices, Internet-connected cars,
smartphones, and activity monitoring wearable devices. By building the tools
that broadly enable smart city applications to rely on opt-in human
stakeholders, the project can leverage the pool of their existing sensors to
facilitate informed city-scale decision-making in areas like traffic flow,
energy consumption, or post-disaster management. A key analytic contribution
lies in developing the mathematical foundations for attainment of information
reliability guarantees on top of the generally unreliable data that human
sources may provide. The project also includes creating educational modules for
different levels of undergraduate and graduate instruction on the topic of next
generation crowdsensing systems. Combining research and education, the project
aims to facilitate evolution of urban spaces into smart cities, while educating
future decision-makers and workforce on theory and tools underlying the
transition.