* 1618566
* NeTS: Small: Enabling Mobile mmWave Communication: Achieving Low Power and Delay via a Hybrid RF Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 318,712.00

By 2020, annual data traffic is expected to surpass 130 exabits. This deluge of
traffic will significantly exacerbate the spectrum crunch problem that cellular
providers are already experiencing. To support this significant increase in
traffic demand, it is envisioned that 5G cellular systems will use certain
portions of the millimeter-Wave (mmWave) band, spanning the spectrum between
30GHz to 300GHz. This will substantially increase the spectrum available for
cellular providers who are currently confined to the frequency spectrum between
700MHz and 2.6GHz with only 780MHz of bandwidth allocation for all current
cellular technologies. However, before mmWave communication can become a
reality, it faces significant challenges due to variable channels, intermittent
connectivity, high delay, and high-energy usage that need to be addressed. To
overcome these challenges, this project will develop and implement the necessary
architecture and associated algorithms to exploit the mmWave and RF interfaces
in a fully integrated fashion. The proposed research is ambitious, but if
successful is expected to take an important step towards the development of
mobile mmWave technology, which will significantly alleviate the enormous
spectrum crunch that we are currently encountering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will be conducted across three major inter-related
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;1. Scaled-down experimentation for mobile mmWave propagation:
It has been experimentally demonstrated that the time-scale separation
assumption made by the current models of wireless propagation does not work for
mobile mmWave. This project will develop a measurement setup that uses small-
scale models for different environments of interest and take the measurements at
proportionally high frequencies. This novel framework enables accurate mobile
measurements, jointly at the RF and mmWave interfaces without having to build
actual real-world systems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Energy-efficient communication: Despite
the availability of huge bandwidths at the mmWave interface, it is not energy
efficient to utilize it fully at all times. Furthermore, connection setup and
beamforming can consume significant resources. To alleviate these challenges,
this project will carefully exploit the correlations across RF and mmWave
interfaces in order to maximize the achieved rate per unit power consumed. One
of major goals is to handle fast mmWave beamforming completely in the analog
domain.&lt;br/&gt;3. Low-delay communication: Taking into account the high
variability of mmWave channels, this project will develop a framework to jointly
manage the queues at the RF and mmWave interfaces. The associated delay
minimization and queue management schemes explicitly take into account the
processor read/write speed relative to the mmWave link rates.