* 1618631
* TWC: Small: A Moving Target Approach to Enhancing Machine Learning-Based Malware Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Guanhua Yan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 349,906.00

The ever-growing malware threats call for effective, yet efficient, mitigation
techniques. Machine learning offers a promising solution to malware defense due
to the scalability and automation that it brings. Machine learning techniques
are however not a panacea for advanced malware attacks where cyber criminals can
carefully craft malware features to evade detection. The root cause of such
attacks can be attributed to the passive nature of existing machine learning-
based malware defense systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project aims to enhance
these systems with a novel moving target strategy. Our method differs from
traditional methods that use feature selection schemes to search for a static
subset of features for malware detection or classification. In contrast, our
approach dynamically changes the features used to train a classification model
for predicting future malware attacks. To prevent adversarial correlation
analysis, our method uses a random walk technique to ensure that features used
across different predictive models have low mutual information. We further study
the effectiveness of the moving target approach in enhancing machine learning-
based malware defense under various evasion strategies by malware attackers. If
successful, this research will introduce a promising new strategy for mitigating
the ever-growing malware threats.