* 1618487
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Ultrascale WDM-based Datacenter Networks: Architecture Design and Control Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Huge data centers increasingly form the heart of the Internet. This project will
develop an optical-fiber-based network architecture for data centers, together
with associated network control algorithms, that is highly configurable,
scalable, and meets the requirements of future data centers. The proposed
architecture is hierarchical and uses low-cost passive optics at the lowest
levels of the hierarchy, and a combination of electronic and configurable
optical switching at higher layers, thus striking a balance between cost and
capability of optical systems and devices. Moreover, the use of passive optics
significantly reduces energy consumption, which has become an important
consideration in large data centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research plan
includes both architecture development and algorithm design,
including:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a Wave-Division-Multiplexing (WDM)-based DCN
architecture that is low-cost, scalable, and configurable, for meeting the
communication requirements of future data centers.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop dynamic
reconfiguration algorithms for changing the network topology in response to
changes in traffic conditions, in order to reduce the communication load on the
network.&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigate the use of passive optics in order to reduce
energy consumption, and compare different architectural alternatives in terms of
energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed architecture has the
potential to dramatically change the way that DCNs are designed, significantly
improving their scalability, robustness and energy efficiency. In addition, this
investigation will include: (1) dissemination of the results through journal and
conference publications to advance the field; (2) incorporation of new theory
and algorithms developed through this work into advanced graduate classes; (3)
development of experimental projects for undergraduate students; (4) technology
transfer to industry (including potential early adoption by an industry partner)
and (5) training of graduate and undergraduate students.