* 1618301
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Efficient Algorithms for Cycles on Surfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* David Eppstein, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 07/31/2019
* USD 159,987.00

Many computational problems start with a model that is a mesh or graph drawn on
a surface. A classic example is the representation of a physical object for use
in computer graphics systems by selecting points on the surface of the object
and approximating the surface with triangles whose corners are the selected
points: the points become the nodes and the sides of the triangles become the
edges of a graph and the graph can be viewed as drawn on the surface of the
object. When the surface is simpler, algorithms for manipulating a graph on the
surface are more efficient; a surface is more complicated when it has features
such as handles and holes. A common way to deal with these features is to
simplify the surface by cutting the surface open to remove the handles and
holes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop accurate and efficient
methods for simplifying surfaces in this way as well as for other closely
related problems. Because the problems are fundamental, new algorithms for them
will provide efficient pre-processing tools for a wide range of applications.
The PIs will involve graduate students in the research and, building on earlier
successes and the fostering of a welcoming research environment, endeavor to
recruit students from underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the above-described "cut-graph" problem as well as the
problem of finding the minimum cycle-basis (a minimum-cost way to represent all
the cycles in a graph) and the minimum homology-basis (a minimum-cost way to
represent all the handles and holes in the surface on which the graph is drawn).
For graphs on surfaces, these problems are very closely related. By considering
these problems together, the PIs will develop fundamental techniques that will
be translatable to other problems in these types of graphs. Cycle bases behave
significantly differently in graphs on trivial (handle-free) surfaces than in
non-trivial surfaces. For this reason, by further understanding the properties
of surface graphs through the study of these problems, the PIs will provide the
next step for algorithm design in surface graphs.