* 1618212
* SBE: Small: THE NEW SECURITY CALCULUS: Incentivizing Good User Security Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Sanjay Goel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 497,918.00

The threat and impact of cybersecurity breaches are felt throughout society with
massive financial losses to businesses and breach of national secrets. Human
behavior is increasing seen as a fundamental security vulnerability that is at
the center of many security breaches. Several approaches have been used for
improving user security behavior, including enacting information security
policies, providing security awareness training, and introducing penalties for
security violations; these approaches have not been very effective. In this
research, we are influencing human security decision analysis through direct
financial incentives and behavioral interventions such that the decision
analysis aligns with economic rationality.

The dominant theoretical frameworks used by researchers to improve information
security are Protection Motivation Theory and Deterrence Theory. These theories
suggest that users make rational security decisions by cognitively weighing the
relative gains and losses associated with their choices within a decision
calculus. They assume that users will respond rationally to perceived security
threats in the environment and to sanctions imposed on noncompliance. Users are
expected to internally regulate their behavior based on an understanding of
security threats and the consequences of risky behavior; however, in the course
of daily activities users often minimize the risks associated with their
behavior and may rationalize noncompliant behavior by perceiving that costs of
compliance outweigh benefits. We seek to improve security compliance by changing
the user?s security decision calculus. Drawing on principles of behavioral
economics, we use extrinsic rewards (i.e. financial incentives) to initiate
compliance, and psychological manipulations (nudges) to promote ongoing internal
regulation of security behavior, such that users sustain secure behaviors when
external incentives are no longer in place. The multidisciplinary nature of this
work enhances understanding of many information security issues and provides a
fresh perspective for research on behavioral security and security economics.