* 1618903
* RI: Small: Probabilistic Hierarchical Models for Multi-Task Visual Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Deva Ramanan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,989.00

This project studies biologically-inspired architectures for visual recognition.
The human visual system can perform a remarkable number of tasks, from
estimating the 3D shape of an object that is grasped to inferring subtle
differences between two similar makes and models of cars. Such diverse sets of
visual tasks are required of a range of autonomous agents, including self-
driving cars or humanoid robotics. Such autonomous platforms have the potential
to increase general welfare and health of the overall population. This project
attempts to build a computational model capable of such diverse visual tasks.
Motivated by biological evidence, this project explores the use of feedback
logic to enable such computational reasoning. The project provides research
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students and for increasing
diversity in the fields of computer and human vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on development of a unified hierarchical probabilistic model
that can be used to solve multiple fine-grained visual tasks. Feedforward
hierarchical models, of which the most ubiquitous are Convolutional Neural Nets
(CNNs), have demonstrated remarkable performance in recent history. This project
introduces hierarchical models for vision-with-scrutiny tasks, such as 3D
articulated pose estimation and part segmentation. Rather than focusing on
increasing performance on established benchmark performance, this research
provides a theoretical framework for analyzing bottom-up (feedforward) CNNs and
imbuing them with novel top-down reasoning capabilities. It does so by exploring
a link between three dominant but disparate paradigms for visual recognition:
feedforward neural models, generative probabilistic models (Boltzmann machines),
and discriminative latent-variable models (deformable part models). The models
introduced in this proposal allow CNNs to be used for large-scale multi-task
learning, where tasks span both coarse-grained tasks (such as rapid scene
categorization) and fine-grained tasks (such as 3D articulated pose estimation).
By addressing multiple fine-grained tasks with a single hierarchical
architecture, resource requirements for memory and speed are vastly decreased,
important for embedded visual perception applications such as autonomous robots
and vehicles.