* 1618868
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Helping Mobile App Developers Make Implementation Decisions Based on App Store Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Meiyappan Nagappan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 0.00

The growth of mobile apps in recent years has been aided by Frameworks,
Services, and Third Party Libraries (FSTPL), which provide support for user
interfaces, advertising, analytics, and other critical app functionality. These
FSTPLs enhance developer productivity, improve security, make key functionality
easily accessible, and modularize complex and error-prone components. Our prior
work shows that there is a tradeoff between the benefits of using FSTPLs and the
impact they have on end users; however, developers lack clear guidance on how to
manage these tradeoffs. Best practices that can be found online are generally
anecdotal and sometimes contradictory. For developers who wish to improve their
apps while maintaining the use of FSTPLs, there is no way to quantify or
estimate the magnitude or impact of their FSTPL related design and
implementation decisions. This motivates us to investigate techniques that can
help developers more accurately evaluate FSTPL tradeoffs. The results of this
investigation will advance the state of the art in software engineering
methodology and education, benefiting society by leading to the development of
apps with higher reliability and usability. For methodology, this will result in
techniques to help developers improve the quality of their apps. For education
it will enhance training of future software developers in using analytical
techniques to drive software design and implementation
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PIs will investigate
techniques to help app developers evaluate their usage of FSTPLs and their
impact on end users? experience. The proposed work will include the design of
techniques and methodologies for quantifying the way developers use FSTPLs in
their apps and correlating their usage with user ratings and reviews that will
be mined from the app stores. Within this project, the PIs will focus on two
thrusts. The first will be to design program analysis based techniques that can
measure and quantify the usage patterns of FSTPLs in mobile apps. The second
will be to perform empirical investigations by applying the program analysis
based techniques on apps from app stores and using statistical analysis to
understand relationships between the gathered data and various user feedback
based metrics, such as the ratings of apps, to learn best and worst practices
for using FSTPLs. The techniques and methodologies produced by these two thrusts
will allow developers to analyze their apps and determine if their usage of
FSTPLs could negatively or positively impact the user experience. The approach
will provide objective and quantifiable guidance to developers to make
refactoring choices, redesign components, and other such decisions about their
apps. Therefore developers will be able to understand how their design and
implementation choices affect the users? perception of their apps. More broadly,
the proposed work will define a methodology for guiding developers in making
design decisions and a way to tie these decisions to ratings based outcomes.