* 1618731
* NeTS: Small: Toward Wirelessly Rechargeable And Ultrasonically-networked Implantable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Matteo Rinaldi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this project is to develop the foundations for a new
family of Micro-electromechanical System (MEMS)-based miniaturized wireless
implants that are networked and recharged through ultrasonic waves. The
availability of low-energy micro-implants that communicate through low-power
ultrasonic communications will enable real-time wireless telemetry and re-
programmability while minimally affecting the implant battery life. Moreover,
ultrasonic wireless battery charging could virtually eliminate the battery life
constraint from the design of medical implants. For example, according to recent
studies, 9% of patients experienced complications following a cardiac battery
replacement. Lower power consumption and wireless battery charging would reduce
these risks, as well as replacement costs. The team will collaborate with
leading clinical experts to apply the proposed technology to different devices
in the medical field. The project will support and train two graduate students
who will become experts in the intra-body ultrasonic networking technology and
its applications. The project will be articulated into several basic research
tasks, and revolve around an underlying effort to design and develop a
miniaturized flexible sensing, processing, and networking platform (u-mote). The
u-mote will be built by integrating miniaturized low-power FPGAs and
microcontrollers to offer hardware and software re-programmability. The project
will first seek to design new arrays of micro-machined ultrasonic Aluminum
Nitride (AlN) MEMS transducers with bandwidth larger than 1 MHz offering
focusing and beamforming capabilities. The ultrasonic communication interface
will implement state-of-the-art communication and networking schemes that are
fully software-defined and composable through a set of modular libraries.
Finally, the u-mote will have new MEMS-based energy harvesting and ultrasonic
wireless recharging capabilities, and a novel zero-standby-power wake-up
interface.