* 1618493
* TWC: Small: Safeguarding Mobile Cloud Services: New Challenges and Solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,968.00

Mobile cloud technologies have begun to rely heavily on services known as Mobile
Back-end as a Service (MBaaS), including push messaging, data synchronization,
and mobile identity management. Many of today's popular apps have already
integrated push messaging services such as Google Cloud Messaging (GCM), Amazon
Device Messaging (ADM), and third parties like Baidu, to enable the apps to
receive notifications such as private messages, financial secrets or family
members' locations. Prior research has demonstrated significant security
weaknesses inside such services, endangering the information assets of billions
of mobile users. By exploiting flaws in services like GCM and ADM, and their
integration within popular apps such as Facebook, Google+, Skype, PayPal etc.,
an attacker could steal a mobile user's sensitive messages, install or uninstall
apps on her device, remotely lock out the user or even wipe out her data. This
project is studying security risks in such services in order to significantly
improve the security assurance of the new MBaaS computing paradigm. The team is
collaborating with industry to facilitate the transfer of research outcomes to
practical protections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the security
properties needed in individual components of mobile cloud technologies, the
researchers are modeling different MBaaS services. The models enable the
development of novel static and dynamic security analysis techniques, tailored
to the unique features of different service types. These techniques will allow
mobile cloud service providers to automatically verify security properties on
both cloud and device fronts, find problems within their systems, and improve
the security quality of their services. The researchers are also developing new
techniques to enable app vendors, users and app stores to automatically detect
threats to mobile clouds and protect their communication against the attempts to
exploit those services' weaknesses. The research covers push messaging for
Android, Apple, and mobile browsers, as well as other MBaaS services (e.g.,
identity management, data synchronization, and the platforms integrating them.)