* 1618648
* AF:III: small: Convex optimization for protein-protein interaction network alignment
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jinbo Xu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,994.00

High-throughput experimental techniques have been producing a large amount of
protein-protein interaction (PPI) data. Comparative analysis (e.g., alignment)
of PPI networks greatly benefits the understanding of evolutionary relationship
among species, helps identify functional modules and provides information for
protein function annotations. The research goal of this proposal is to study
optimization methods that can align PPI networks much more accurately than
existing methods. This proposal will apply several elegant and powerful
optimization techniques to understand the mathematical structure of the problem
and develop efficient alignment algorithms. This proposal will also develop
software implementing the proposed algorithms.

The proposed algorithms will be implemented as both a standalone program and
Cytoscape plugin so that they can be easily used by biologists. The resultant
software and plugin shall benefit a broad range of biological and biomedical
applications, such as protein functional annotation, understanding of disease
processes, design of novel diagnostics and drugs, and precision medicine. The
research results will be disseminated to the optimization, computer
vision/graphics and biology communities through a variety of venues. The source
code will be released so that it can be useful to other network analysis
researchers who want to adapt the code for their own research projects and to
other optimization method researchers who want to work on biological network
analysis. This project will train a few PhD students and summer interns, who
will receive training in the intersection of optimization techniques, network
biology and programming. Undergraduate and underrepresented students will be
recruited through our summer intern program, CRA-W and collaborators. The
research results will be integrated into course materials and used in an
Illinois online bioinformatics program that has trained many underrepresented
students.

This proposal will study a novel convex optimization algorithm for the alignment
of two or multiple PPI networks. This convex method distinguishes itself from
the widely-used seed-and-extension or progressive alignment strategy in that it
simultaneously aligns all the input networks and proteins while the latter
methods use a greedy strategy to build an alignment. A greedy strategy may
introduce alignment errors at an early stage that cannot be fixed later, but
this convex method can avoid this. Due to its simultaneous alignment strategy,
this convex method shall detect many more proteins that are functionally
conserved across all input PPI networks than existing methods and produce more
accurate pairwise alignments of multiple networks. This proposal will also study
a few methods to speed up the proposed convex alignment method, by making use of
special topology properties of PPI networks and exploring low-rank
representation of proteins. Finally, this proposal will implement the proposed
algorithms as a standalone software package and Cytoscape plugin to greatly
facilitate the application of comparative network analysis to biological and
biomedical science discovery.