* 1618784
* CHS: Small: Early Dyslexia Detection and Support at Scale to Help Students Succeed in School
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Maria Luz Rello Sanchez, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 567,999.00

At least 10% of the population has dyslexia, which results in difficulty with
reading and writing, and often leads to school failure (40% of those who drop
out of school have dyslexia). If people know they have dyslexia, they can with
effort train over time to overcome its negative effects. Yet even though we know
how to detect dyslexia, most children are diagnosed late because current
procedures are expensive and require professional oversight. The PI's goal is
for everyone to know as early as possible if they might have dyslexia; his
approach to achieving this goal is to make it easy, inexpensive, and even
enjoyable to find out. To these ends, he and his team plan to design
personalized game activities based on the detection results to target the
cognitive skills with which students need to practice most. Much of the research
into detection and support activities has thus far taken place in the lab; the
team plans to extend this work into the real world via wearable devices to help
people with dyslexia better read and write in the context of learning activities
outside of the classroom, e.g., in museums or at historic sites. The work will
build on the team's Dytective software, which the PI plans to publicly release
along with other tools that will be developed and refined as part of this
research. The team will work with community partners like dyslexia organizations
and schools, undergraduate and graduate students, and experts from related
fields to disseminate their findings as widely as possible, to nurture the
development of young researchers in this area, and to integrate their work with
other related efforts. In addition, new course modules on Dyslexia and Language
Technology will be added to the Human Factors course at
CMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches for detecting dyslexia require
either a professional psychologist or expensive brain imaging equipment (and an
expert to run it and interpret the results). The PI's approach to detecting and
supporting dyslexia uses a scalable web-based game. The method relies on human-
computer interaction metrics drawn from people playing games designed with a
linguistic and empirical understanding of the errors that people with dyslexia
tend to make. Machine learning over this data may allow for the detection of
dyslexia much earlier (and at much less expense) than would otherwise be
possible. Although the current research is informed by prior work characterizing
the origin of dyslexia and its linguistic manifestation, the intellectual
contribution lies instead in understanding how we can use data from game play to
detect dyslexia. This approach, once demonstrated, may generalize to other
areas, and the exercises that are found to be most useful in detecting or
supporting dyslexia may also inform our basic understanding of dyslexia.