* 1618895
* AF:Small:Collaborative Research:Kinetics and Thermodynamics of Chemical Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* David Soloveichik, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 249,928.00

Biology is replete with smart molecular systems that perform nanoscale assembly,
sense environmental stimuli, create chemical signals, and produce physical
motion - each of these tasks coordinated by information processing circuits
implemented with chemical reactions. Learning how to build artificial chemicals
that compute autonomously in complex environments would bring about
groundbreaking advances in manufacturing, chemical sensing, and medicine. The
theory of computation has proven invaluable in enabling information processing
in electronic man-made systems, and much-studied algorithms underlie the
behavior of everything from communication networks to video games. However, a
thorough understanding of the principles of chemical computation is still
lacking. The goal of this proposal is to use rigorous mathematical models to
investigate the capabilities and limitations of chemical information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will bring the fields of
physics, chemistry, biology, and computer science closer intellectually and
mutually enrich them. For example, conceptual frameworks and mathematical tools
capturing the manipulation of information at the molecular level may yield
critical insights into the design principles of evolved biological regulatory
networks. Further, understanding how information processing is possible in the
disordered world of chemistry could result in error-robust electronic computing.
The project will also contribute to the development of undergraduate and
graduate courses, which will train students to apply the principles of computer
science and electrical engineering in traditionally incompatible domains. This
will encourage the next generation of scientists to break through traditional
disciplinary barriers and create the scientific and engineering fields of
tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will answer foundational questions
about the computational power of chemical kinetics (chemical reaction networks).
How can chemicals be programmed to have desired behaviors? How much molecular
energy does such computation consume? How much "more computation" does every
additional chemical reaction enable? Recent advances in DNA nanotechnology
(strand displacement cascades) demonstrate that molecular systems of complex
functionality can be designed and constructed from the ground up. This proposal
will help precisely delineate the capabilities and limitations of this
technology, resulting in smaller, simpler DNA-based circuits. This proposal also
introduces a new paradigm, based on the laws of thermodynamics, for programming
DNA-DNA interactions. As chemical and biological systems are comprised of
molecules that are inherently information-rich and programmable, principles of
computer science will help design smart molecules.