* 1618220
* SHF: SMALL: Evolution of Self-adaptive Systems using Stochastic Search
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 550,825.00

Software systems are becoming more ubiquitous and critical to the functioning of
our lives. An increasingly important requirement is to maintain high
availability of these systems even in the face of changing requirements, faults,
and resources. To address that concern, system developers today incorporate
hand-written run-time adaptation strategies to automatically keep a system
functioning effectively. However, as software systems grow in both complexity
and ubiquity, and as the rate of technological change continues to increase,
manual approaches cannot keep up. We must instead treat the evolution of
adaptation strategies as a first-order concern. This research develops new
mechanisms to automatically adapt and evolve the adaptation strategies
themselves. Our high-level approach is to reuse previous domain or expert
knowledge to inform the construction of flexible strategies, able to adapt to
unanticipated changes and to various potential dimensions of system or
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future-generation software systems
will need to automatically optimize for multiple interacting, difficult-to-
measure, and evolving qualities, properties, and priorities. Existing work
provides methods for constructing complex software systems that can adapt to the
changing of certain circumstances such as changing environmental conditions,
infrastructure availability, or user demands,&lt;br/&gt;while continuing to
provide service at required quality levels. Our motivating insight is that
stochastic search methods are especially promising for&lt;br/&gt;self-adaptive
software systems, and in particular for tackling the evolution of self-
adaptation strategies, as evidenced in part by recent work that scales such
techniques to complex source-level software problems. This research develops a
principled foundation for the evolution of adaptation strategies in the self-
adaptive domain, using stochastic search. The resulting family of techniques
reuses, recombines, and otherwise builds upon previous knowledge about a given
system to adapt to four major potential change dimensions: (1) the system's
architecture and deployment; (2) the tactics that can be deployed in an
adaptation scenario, including mechanisms to choose between them and information
regarding their applicability, costs, effects, success likelihood, etc.; (3) the
system's quality goals, and their relative priorities; and (4) the environmental
assumptions that control the context in which the system is deployed. The
unifying factor in each of these strategies is the existence of previous domain
or expert knowledge that can be leveraged for evolving adaptive strategies
moving forward.