* 1618221
* TWC: Small: Privacy Preserving Cooperation among Microgrids for Efficient Load Management on the Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Yuan Hong, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 477,483.00

Smart grid integrates sensors and communication infrastructure into the existing
power grid to enable operational intelligence. The concept of microgrid is
emerging in conjunction with the smart grid wherein small segments of the grid
can be isolated into self-sufficient islands to feed their own demand load with
their local energy, e.g., wind, solar. To date, microgrids begin to develop
cooperative models for further improving the performance of global and local
load management, such as global/local load balancing, energy exchange, and power
transmission network topology design/upgrade with the integration of microgrids.
However, all the cooperation among microgrids requests them to explicitly share
their local sensitive grid operational information for global performance
optimization, and thus compromises the privacy of microgrids. Then, microgrids'
privacy concerns would impede the development and implementation of the
cooperative models such that significant benefits via microgrids' cooperation on
the power grid may not be available. This project tackles the privacy concerns
in such cooperation, and enables microgrids to efficiently manage their local
loads as well as facilitate the main grid to manipulate the global load with
limited disclosure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a suite of novel
privacy preserving cooperative models/techniques for distributed microgrids to
efficiently advance load management on the power grid. Provable privacy/security
is ensured in the end-to-end process of cooperation, including privately
analyzing data collected from different microgrids and privately implementing
the schemes/solutions derived from the cooperative models, by composing
cryptographic primitives with the secure multiparty computation (SMC) theory
and/or imposing defined rigorous privacy notions. Ensuring privacy protection
with rigorous standards will allow data to be collected and used in ways that
were prohibitive earlier due to the privacy concerns, and then improve both
operational efficiency and user acceptance. Load management via privacy
preserving cooperation further optimally allocates distributed energy and
minimizes the transmission and storage costs in a more secure, reliable and
efficient smart grid infrastructure. This project also integrates research and
education by exciting undergraduates to join the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math (STEM) research.