* 1618425
* SHF: Small: Efficient Parallel Execution of Irregular, Ordered Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Keshav Pingali, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2020
* USD 449,570.00

Most computers today consist of a collection of individual processing units
called cores that can execute an application co-operatively, reducing the time
required to produce the output of that application. However, current programming
languages were developed for sequential computers that have a single processing
unit, and they are not ideal for programming multicore parallel processors,
while existing languages and tools for parallel programming are very difficult
to use, requiring expert understanding of the computer hardware and system
software. This project's broader significance and importance is that it aims to
simplify the parallel programming of an important class of applications that
includes physical simulations, such as battle-field simulations, and analysis of
graphs, such as social networks. The intellectual merit is that the abstractions
and systems software needed to parallelize these applications efficiently on
multicore processors goes well beyond the state of the art, and if successful,
will lead to a significant improvement in our understanding of how multicore
parallel computers can be exploited effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally programmers have relied upon an abstraction
called Task Dependence Graph for exposing parallelism in applications. However,
dependence graphs cannot be used for emerging applications such as discrete-
event simulation of physical systems, e.g., colliding particles and modeling of
deforming materials using asynchronous variational integrators. Parallelization
of such applications is very challenging because of the complex behaviors
exhibited by tasks in such applications: for example, tasks may
&lt;br/&gt;create new tasks which must be executed before existing tasks due to
ordering constraints based on simulation-time causality, and the execution of
one task may change the dependences between existing tasks. The key insight
behind the project is that a data structure called the Kinetic Dependence Graph
(KDG) can be used to track dependencies in such applications, permitting safe
parallel execution at the cost of some book-keeping expense to maintain the KDG.
The programming constructs and systems implementations developed by the project
will be released publicly as part of the Galois system from the University of
Texas at Austin.