* 1618981
* AF: Small: Quantitative and Algorithmic Aspects of Semi-algebraic Sets and Partitions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 399,640.00

"Divide and conquer," a time-honored technique in computer science and
mathematics, partitions a problem into smaller pieces to make it easier to
solve. This project deepens the study of partitioning in two directions, both in
the context of semi-algebraic geometry -- which is the study of geometric and
topological properties of sets defined by real polynomial equalities and
inequalities.

The first direction is to systematize polynomial partitioning, which has
recently become a powerful tool capable of tackling many long-standing open
questions in the area of incidence geometry. In computational geometry, the
space or sets being partitioned are often complex but partitioning is by simple
objects: splitting by planes or cutting into trapezoids. Polynomial partitioning
allows high degree cutting polynomials, necessitating more precise degree-based
upper bounds on the topology of semi-algebraic sets and real varieties than the
ones known before, and leading to a very fruitful interaction between the fields
of real algebraic geometry and discrete geometry. The PI will develop new
techniques in semi-algebraic geometry to meet the new demands imposed on the
field by the developments in discrete geometry, and develop a new theory of
polynomial partitioning that can systematize their study and lead to new
applications as well.

The second is to generalize quantitative and algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry
to a much more general and geometric setting -- the category of constructible
sheaves. Constructible sheaves come with an underlying semi-algebraic partition
(on whose elements the stalks of the sheaf are locally constant). Kashiwara and
Schapira proved a fundamental theorem on the stability of this category under
the six standard sheaf operations (analogous to Tarski-Seidenberg principle for
semi-algebraic sets). The PI will study the quantitative and algorithmic
questions related to constructible sheaves. The complexity upper bounds and
algorithmic results would have wide applications.

The project will have impact in several areas of mathematics and computation --
including quantitative and algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry, discrete and
computational geometry, computational complexity theory and quantitative study
of the solutions to linear systems of partial differential equations. The
project will train a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in
quantitative and algorithmic real algebraic geometry and its modern
applications.