* 1618679
* AF: Small: Harmonic Analysis for Quantum Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ryan O'Donnell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The PI will conduct new research to advance the field of harmonic analysis of
Boolean functions. At a high level, harmonic analysis can be described as the
theory of using a particular mathematical tool, the Fourier transform, for
detecting, analyzing, and representing patterns in large data sets. Applying it
in the context of Boolean functions refers to the case where the data comes from
0s and 1s, the basic building blocks in computer science. Harmonic analysis of
Boolean functions has proven to be a powerful tool in computer science, with
application to theories of machine learning, error-correcting codes,
cryptography, privacy, optimization algorithms, and distributed computing. Part
of the aim of this project is to further develop the mathematical and computer
science foundations of harmonic analysis of Boolean functions. Another aim of
the project is to expand its scope to include further applications in the field
of quantum computation. If and when quantum computers are built, it is known
that they will be able to break cryptographic codes that are secure today; this
is fundamentally due to their ability to efficiently perform Fourier transforms
on huge data sets. However the full potential power of quantum computation is
not well understood, and building quantum computers remains a major engineering
challenge. The project will investigate these issues, analyzing the advantages
of quantum computers over classical ones, and understanding how to more
efficiently test components of quantum computers. A final key outcome of the
project will be scientific and educational training for computer science
graduate students at Carnegie Mellon University, as well as wide dissemination
of the research produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; At a more technical level, the
project has several major-stretch-goals that will be used to guide the research
in harmonic analysis of Boolean functions. Included among these are conjectures
of Aaronson and Ambainis concerning the influence of variables on low-degree
Boolean functions, and on the decision tree complexity of checking correlation
of a function with its Fourier transform. Proofs of these conjectures would
yield new complexity results delimiting the power of quantum computation versus
classical computation. Another major technical goal of the project is to develop
the theory of learning and testing an unknown quantum state.