* 1618563
* CSR: Small: Performance and Fairness with Multiple Page Sizes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Emmett Witchel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 516,000.00

Modern computing workloads such as machine learning, big data analytics, and
scientific computing require enormous memory capacities. The system software
that manages memory was designed for much smaller systems, and consequently, it
imposes hefty performance and power penalties on modern systems. The time has
come to pay this technical debt. This work comprehensively redesigns operating
system and virtual machine memory management to accommodate large memories,
enabling applications to obtain the performance and efficiency promised by
current hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is a set of
principles and a framework for the operating system and hypervisor to
transparently support small and large memory pages. Large memory pages (e.g.,
2MB pages for the popular x86 architecture instead of the standard 4KB) can
provide significant performance benefit by dramatically reducing address
translation over- heads. However, their support and adoption has been hindered
by fundamental management problems arising from fragmentation and poor
visibility into memory accesses. Current large page management suffers a variety
of pathologies such as memory bloat and unfairness across processes and/or
virtual machines, and system administrators generally disable large pages in
production systems. A framework that relies on managing contiguity as a first-
class resource and on tracking utilization and access frequency of memory pages
will enable an OS to coordinate its currently disparate mechanisms, avoid
performance pathologies, and enable applications to enjoy the performance
benefits of large pages.