* 1618898
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research:Practical HTTPS Traffic Manipulation At Middleboxes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Feng Qian, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2019
* USD 208,978.00

Use of encrypted Web traffic is growing at an unprecedented rate. While
enhancing user privacy, the Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTPS) makes it
difficult for middleboxes that are commonly used by Internet service providers
and mobile carriers to operate, because numerous beneficial middlebox functions
(e.g., caching, web page optimization) rely on accessing the unencrypted traffic
content. To overcome this challenge, this project develops a system aiming for a
practical, ready-to-deploy solution that allows middleboxes to selectively
inspect and manipulate HTTPS traffic while still respect the privacy
requirements of users. This research will lead to new and continuous innovations
in network services that are hard or impossible to achieve today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system has two prominent features. First, it is only
deployed at client hosts as an operating system (OS) service, as well as on
middleboxes. In addition to being transparent to applications, it does not
change the encryption protocol or anything on the server side. Therefore, the
system can be easily deployed by, for example, regular OS update pushed by
mobile carriers. Second, the system allows clients to control what information
the middlebox can access. Doing so provides least privileges to middleboxes for
performing their functions. In addition, the proposed system is easy to use,
secure, and incurs low overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing these
technologies will facilitate our understanding of the possible design space to
allow coordinated, secure, and efficient manipulation of HTTPS traffic,
ultimately leading to improved Internet user experience and privacy. The PIs
will incorporate knowledge and results developed in this project into both
undergraduate and graduate courses in networking, mobile computing and network
security.