* 1618234
* SHF:SMALL:Pushing the Limits of Transparent Specialization
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

For many years, microprocessors took advantage of how Moore's Law (smaller
successive generations of transistors) and the fact that they consumed less
power to build better performing chips. Due to fundamental limitations it is no
longer possible to cost-effectively make smaller transistors or significantly
reduce their power consumption. This research project develops future
microprocessors that are organized differently and more effectively using
limited transistors to provide better chips. The main idea this research project
explores is a way to tailor certain parts of a chip to certain tasks, thereby
making each component very small and power-efficient. A program's execution
moves from one such component to another, each being tuned for that phase of the
program. The curriculum enhancements will provide students significant
experience in designing hardware. This research will help steer microprocessor
designs in novel ways to sustain performance improvements and help sustain
information technology leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific approach
taken by this research is a unique and novel form of specialization called:
behavior specialized acceleration (BSA). This is a paradigm that exploits
program behaviors and their inter-relationship to hardware microarchitecture. It
is workload domain agnostic. Specializing for program behaviors is advantageous
both because fewer accelerators can target a large variety of codes, and because
these behaviors are typically analyzable by a compiler, meaning their use can be
transparent from programmers. In particular the research will develop a chip
organization that includes an ExoCore fabric and an Endocore fabric. The ExoCore
fabric is a processor core organization that uses behavior specialization to
transparently improve the execution of general-purpose workloads. The Endocore
fabric employs different behavior specializations and attempts to support
computationally-intensive domains using a single hardware architecture and well-
defined software interfaces. This research develops mechanisms, an FPGA
prototype of a family of ExoCore and EndoCore designs, their accompanying
compiler, and detailed performance evaluation.