* 1618369
* CSR: Small: Provably Correct Design of Observation for Fault Diagnosis and State Estimation under Privacy and Network Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Anak Agung Julius, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 469,247.00

Information is key in the operation of cyber-physical systems. Consider, for
example, the task of designing a monitoring system that can detect faults during
the operation of a safety critical cyber-physical system, such as the power
grid. To do so, the monitor needs to collect enough information from the cyber-
physical system that can distinguish potential faulty operation from normal
operation. On the other hand, practicality and privacy limit the amount of
information that can be collected. For example, the number of sensors that can
be deployed may be limited. Or, the system owner may not wish to share certain
information. This project addresses the issue of determining how information can
be extracted from the operation of a cyber-physical system to enable fault
detection and control, while respecting limitations such as
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will address a number of fundamental
research questions. Q1: Can the right inference be made using the available
information, for the purposes of fault diagnosis and state estimation? Q2: What
state measurement or observation can be made available to facilitate the answer
to Q1 without violating privacy constraints? Q3: When the information is
transmitted through a non-ideal communication network, resulting in transmission
delay or limited bandwidth, how does it affect Q1 and Q2? This project will
develop a framework that provides provably correct answers to all of the
questions above. Provable correctness is derived from a model-based approach.
The questions are cast in this framework, and obtain provably correct design
procedures for state measurement (including software defined sensors and online
monitors), state estimation, and fault detection and isolation. The theoretical
outcomes from this project will be evaluated and implemented on a number of
applications/testbeds, including a smart building testbed, power system
networks, and biological signaling networks. Successful outcomes from this
project may impact the design and operation of complex cyber-physical systems
where distributed sensing, state estimation, and fault detection are used. The
evaluation and implementation activities in this project will elucidate more
concrete ways the theoretical results can be applied to such systems.