* 1618955
* TWC: Small: Efficient Traffic Analysis Resistance for Anonymity Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 507,795.00

Internet users concerned about their privacy, including whistleblowers and
dissident citizens of totalitarian states, depend on reliable means to access
Internet services anonymously. However, recent events publicized in popular
press demonstrate that these services offer little privacy and anonymity in
practice. For example, recent subpoena requiring Twitter to provide connection
details of suspected Wikileaks supporters showed that governments can readily
discover the network identities of Web users. To restore and promote free speech
on the Internet, there is a need for systems of communication that protect users
from identification through their Internet activity---even from powerful
adversaries such as state actors. The proposed research will enable this through
design, implementation, and deployment of anonymous communication networks that
prevent eavesdroppers from identifying the source, recipient, or content of
Internet communication.

Network anonymization services like Tor provide a higher degree of protection
than direct communication with Web sites like Twitter, but are not designed to
withstand traffic analysis (a technique that the British intelligence agency
GCHQ is actively pursuing to deanonymize Tor users). While several researchers
proposed designs for low-latency, traffic-analysis resistant anonymity networks,
the performance of these systems was discouraging. This project will investigate
anonymity network designs that are resilient to traffic analysis and that
exhibit an acceptable benefit-cost ratio under some set of realistic
assumptions. The project will leverage three key ideas: (i) combine trusted
infrastructure (for mixing traffic) with untrusted P2P nodes (for scalability);
(ii) incorporate the notion of zones to give users the ability to select the
jurisdiction in which they trust their proxies to run; (iii) leverage
empirically observed properties of communication workloads to develop optimized
designs that provide acceptable performance/cost trade-offs. The goal is to
produce networks that provide anonymity guarantees under a strong adversarial
model for file sharing, Web traffic and real-time communication (VoIP), and that
work for both fixed-line and mobile environments.