* 1618803
* SBE: Small: Cybersecurity risks of dynamic, two-way distributed electricity markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Peter Wilcoxen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 344,184.00

The U.S. electric grid is being transformed from a one-way channel delivering
electricity from central power plants to customers at set prices, toward a
distributed grid with two-way flows of information and electricity and dynamic
distributed markets. The benefits of creating distributed markets for
electricity are potentially great. Consumers can participate as buyers and
sellers in these markets, utilities can reduce costly peak electricity load and
risk of outages, and firms can be rewarded for innovation. However, along with
these potential benefits come significant cybersecurity and privacy risks.
Participants in distribution-level markets may be technically unsophisticated
and use energy management and communications systems that do not provide high
levels of security. The potential cost of a security breach that overloads or
shuts down large areas of critical infrastructure is immense. This research
identifies potential security and privacy risks associated with distributed
electricity markets, measures to provide an acceptable level of risk, and trade-
offs between risk reduction and performance of distributed markets. The results
will provide guidance to utilities, regulators and other participants in
designing effective and robust market structures with necessary security and
privacy protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is multidisciplinary,
including economics, computer science and public policy. It employs an
innovative mix of research methods, including interviews, modeling of market
structures, simulations using real world electricity use data, modeling of data
flows, and security threat analysis. A discrete event simulation framework is
used to model interacting agents that will comprise distributed electricity
markets and to estimate a cost function for the relative welfare cost of given
grid topologies and market policies. A software simulator is constructed and
tested using real electricity use data to vary parameters on multiple dimensions
and minimize cost. Security attacks are introduced into the simulations to
identify impacts on grid stability, market trust and privacy. The use of real
world data enables simulation of a wide array of different market structures and
interactions with a variety of bidding and response policies on the part of
distributed consumers/producers and market controllers. The research is
transformative in its development and use of modeling and simulation tools,
tested with real data, to identify security and privacy risks associated with
different market structures, security methods, and threat types.