* 1618542
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:  Concurrent Software Verification  with Rely/Guarantee Abstraction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Eric Koskinen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2018
* USD 249,641.00

It is now widely recognized that increasing the reliability
of&lt;br/&gt;concurrent software is one of the most important scientific
and&lt;br/&gt;technological challenges in the emerging era of multi-core
and&lt;br/&gt;distributed computing. The last decade has seen substantial
advances&lt;br/&gt;in automatic verification technology to improve the
reliability of&lt;br/&gt;sequential programs, and software tools that can be
applied to large &lt;br/&gt;industrial code bases. Unfortunately, the underlying
technology of &lt;br/&gt;such tools cannot be directly applied to concurrent
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates scalable techniques
for automatic verification of &lt;br/&gt;concurrent software. The approach uses
thread-modular decomposition of &lt;br/&gt;the overall problem that does not
completely decompose to the granularity &lt;br/&gt;of an individual thread.
Since base components may exhibit concurrent &lt;br/&gt;behavior, the
investigators develop analysis algorithms for these base components
&lt;br/&gt;so that they can be automatically proven correct with respect to
their environment&lt;br/&gt;description and vice-versa. This work yields
automatic verification tools that &lt;br/&gt;exploit richer notions of modular
reasoning about parallelism, thereby offering &lt;br/&gt;improved scalability
and robustness over previous approaches. The project team&lt;br/&gt;includes
graduate and undergraduate students.