* 1618083
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: A Fast and Flexible Transport Architecture for High Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Sachin Katti, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Modern datacenter networks and private wide area networks underpin cloud
computing. Today, due to the lack of flexibility, operators end up over
provisioning their networks significantly to avoid performance bottlenecks. This
project will make these networks more efficient and more tuned to the
application's needs. Specifically, this investigation explores a weighted
transport abstraction as a flexible and robust substrate for systems that
optimize a network's bandwidth allocation. The proposed research revisits a
classic theoretical framework in this space, Network Utility Maximization (NUM),
and develops a novel and practical distributed algorithm for NUM that is
significantly faster than prior approaches, and is thus applicable to modern
high speed networks such as datacenter fabrics. This project seeks to design and
build a flexible transport architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
architecture has two main technical components: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Weighted Transport: Instead of using flow rates to control the bandwidth
allocation, this research develops a transport based on weights. To tune the
bandwidth allocation, flows adapt a weight field in their packet headers; each
link then divides its bandwidth among contending flows in proportion to their
weights. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Fast Utility Maximization: This project
leverages the weighted transport to design a network fabric that can be
dynamically tuned for different bandwidth allocation objectives such as
minimizing flow/coflow completion time, or service-level fairness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to interact closely with companies that can
influence standards and build commercial systems using the proposed ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;The education plan includes the incorporation of this research's
findings into the undergraduate and graduate curricula and offers an opportunity
to take a "top-down" approach to teaching transport architectures with a focus
on key bandwidth allocation objectives and how they affect real applications.
The course material will be made widely available through MIT OpenCourseWare and
on the MITx MOOC.