* 1618502
* AF: Small: Non-revelation Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jason Hartline, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Mechanism Design governs the design of protocols for problems of allocation-of-
goods to strategic (i.e., selfish) agents and has applications in both computer
science and economics. Such allocation problems are all around: advertisers
compete in an auction through online search engines to post their links beside
query responses; Internet traffic competes for router access; elementary
students compete for a limited number of openings in an elite magnet school.
These processes can aim to achieve different objectives: search engines want to
maximize revenue from ad sales; the Internet wants to minimize the total
communication delays of all users; school districts want to respect fairness in
school assignments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, research in mechanism
design focuses almost exclusively on mechanisms that are simple for the agents,
requiring that it is in each agent's best interest to truthfully reveal its
preference. Such mechanisms are known as revelation mechanisms. The mechanisms
that result often both have complex rules and are dependent on detailed
assumptions about the environment. This project develops the theory for design
and analysis of non-revelation mechanisms, which may require strategic
optimization by the agents, but are simple and robust. Broader impacts of this
project include contribution to the economics literature, development of theory
that informs the design of mechanisms in industry, and the training of
undergraduates and Ph.D. students who will use the developed skills in software
development jobs and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a
number of foundational questions in non-revelation mechanism design. First,
simple non-revelation mechanisms may have parameters that need to be tuned to
the environment and this environment may not be stationary. For example, both
supply and demand may be evolving. A goal of the project is to understand
families of mechanisms that both have good performance and can be tuned directly
from historical data from the mechanism, and to identify statistically efficient
procedures for performing this tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, an
especially robust criterion for design is that the mechanism perform well under
any environmental conditions; i.e., without any parameterization. The project
will investigate the design of robust non-revelation mechanisms and quantify the
extent to which robust guarantees for non-revelation mechanisms may be better
than the best robust guarantees possible for revelation mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, in non-revelation mechanisms, where truthful
revelation is not an agent's best response, agents will need to take actions
strategically. Agents may find strategically good actions may only come after
some trial and error, e.g., via learning algorithms. When all agents are
behaving thus, the resulting actions will be correlated. The project aims to
study the performance of mechanisms under such natural dynamics and their
convergence properties.