* 1618822
* TWC: Small: General and Modular Secure Computation in the Offline-Online Paradigm
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Hemanta Maji, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 531,999.00

Secure multi-party computation (MPC) allows mutually distrusting parties to
securely compute over their private data. The goal of this project is to provide
novel MPC solutions that are efficient and simultaneously support operations of
varying complexity on the input under their respective native representations.
Driven by efficiency goals, this project studies the theory of MPC protocol
design in the offline-online paradigm. The outcomes of this project have the
potential to produce practical and scalable MPC protocols that find applications
in diverse fields like privacy-preserving data mining, mechanism design and
distributed linear algebra computations.

This project defines the theory of computational correlations, leverages
security guarantees to argue computational hardness results, and introduces the
concept of computational channels in design and analysis of practical obvious
transfer protocols. This theory could enable the transfer of the mature toolkit
of information-theoretic techniques to the computationally bounded setting.
Training the next generation of cryptography research and security professionals
is a central goal of this project. The initiatives include design and
development of new courses and course materials for undergraduate and graduate
courses, and engagement of minority and women students in research. The project
also develops active learning materials for the dissemination of knowledge.