* 1618275
* STARSS: Small: Automatic Synthesis of Verifiably Secure Hardware Accelerators
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Gookwon Suh, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 266,667.00

Specialized hardware accelerators are growing in popularity across the computing
spectrum from mobile devices to datacenters. These special-purpose hardware
engines promise significant improvements in computing performance and energy
efficiency that are essential to all aspects of modern society. However,
hardware specialization also comes with added design complexity and introduces a
host of new security challenges, which have not been adequately explored. This
project is developing ASSURE, a design automation framework that synthesizes
verifiably secure hardware accelerators from high-level programming languages.
The automatic high-level synthesis flow provides considerable benefit in terms
of productivity and ease of verification. The project also includes educational
components such as integration of hardware security topics into the computer
engineering curriculum and ongoing high-school outreach efforts through a week-
long summer program for underrepresented minority high-school students.

ASSURE leverages and builds on the recent advances in high-level synthesis
(HLS), which compiles behavioral specifications into optimized register-
transfer-level circuits. Unlike recently proposed security-aware HLS methods,
ASSURE further provides formal mechanisms to verify that the desired security
properties of the synthesized accelerators are indeed guaranteed. Specifically,
two major research thrusts are being explored: (1) developing an HLS tool that
allows a designer to specify a security level for inputs/outputs of an
accelerator, and express restrictions on information flows between security
levels as a security lattice; and (2) creating a security checker that enables
an independent and formal verification of the information flow security
properties of an automatically generated hardware accelerator.