* 1618786
* STARSS: Small: Defending Against Hardware Covert Timing Channels
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Milos Doroslovacki, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,564.00

Safeguarding sensitive user information stored in computer systems is a fast
growing concern, especially as computers are universally used everywhere from
national defense to mobile phones. Malicious hackers have found unscrupulous
ways to steal sensitive information largely by exploiting the vulnerabilities in
existing hardware and software. Among the many forms of information leakage,
covert timing channels exfiltrate secrets from a trojan process with higher
security credentials to a spy process with lesser credentials by exploiting the
access timing of system resources. Such covert timing channels are elusive since
they communicate indirectly through timing modulation without leaving any
physical trace in memory. By detecting the presence of covert timing channels
and defending against them, our project offers significant benefits to society
through preventing undesired sensitive data leakage to malicious parties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three central objectives of this project are to: 1.
Investigate the science behind the construction and operation of hardware covert
timing channels, 2. Devise mechanisms to detect hardware timing channels, 3.
Mount cost-effective, runtime defense strategies to undermine the reliability of
covert timing channels. We investigate scientific ways to identify key indicator
events, and analyze their roles in the operation of covert timing channels. We
design mechanisms to capture the runtime system behavior, and detect the
presence of a covert timing channel. Finally, to prevent information leakage, we
use hierarchical, multi-level defense strategy where we estimate the agility of
the adversary by measuring the defense?s effectiveness after deployment, and
automatically recalibrate our defense to decimate the timing channel activity.