* 1618444
* CHS: Small: Supporting Stigmergic Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,931.00

This award supports development of theory and tools to improve the coordination
of distributed teams, i.e., groups of geographically-dispersed individuals
working together over time towards a common goal. The separation of distributed
work generally makes it harder for team members to work together effectively.
However, when work products are shared via a computer system, team participants
can see the work produced by remote colleagues as easily as from those who are
local, and the work can provide information to support team coordination.
Specifically, prior research suggests that free/libre open source software
(FLOSS) developers use the software code they are developing as a basis for
coordinating their work, a phenomenon known as stigmergic coordination.
Stigmergic coordination can be more effective and efficient than coordination
through explicit discussion, so there could be benefits if it can be used more
broadly. The goal of the project is to study FLOSS developers to understand how
stigmergic coordination works and to develop a system to enable its use in other
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this study will be done
in two phases: first identifying the socio-technical affordance enabling
stigmergic coordination in FLOSS development teams (as exemplars of distributed
teams) and similar settings, and second, testing the emerging theoretical
understanding by implementing and assessing a system to support stigmergic
coordination of distributed work in a new domain. The study will have several
expected intellectual contributions. First, the empirical study should provide
evidence for (or possibly against) stigmergic coordination as a mode of
coordination in distributed work. As well, the study will identify possible
negative outcomes from the use of stigmergy. More importantly, the study will
identify socio-technical affordances that enable the use of stigmergy. Knowing
these affordances will provide a basis for designing shared-work systems that
support stigmergy. They will also help in understanding the possibilities and
limits on the transfer of coordination mechanisms from open content creation
teams to other domains. The study will have several broader impacts. First,
being able to implement a novel mode of coordination could be transformative for
the conduct of online work and computer-supported work more generally. Second,
if it seems that reliance on stigmergy is off-putting for certain potential
group participants (women in particular), then the project can study how that
happens and potentially mitigate the huge gender gap currently observed in FLOSS
development participation in particular and in online groups more generally. The
software system to be developed will be released as open source for use in
future research (thus contributing to the infrastructure for research) and
potentially for use by distributed workers (thus potentially benefiting
society).