* 1618303
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coupling Computation and Communication in FPGA-Enhanced Clouds and Clusters
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Martin Herbordt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2020
* USD 240,992.00

The introduction of Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) to accelerate
clusters of servers in datacenters and clouds provides a great, immediate
opportunity to leverage a new technology in high-end computing. With their
flexible logic and native massive communication capability, FPGAs are ideal for
high-performance computing in the post-Moore?s Law world. Since the hardware
adapts to the application higher efficiency can be achieved, and since FPGAs are
hybrid communication/computation processors, they can be interconnected directly
chip-to-chip. Large-scale communication can consequently proceed with both
higher bandwidth, lower latency, and less processor impact. These features are
crucial to enhancing performance beyond current levels. The proposed design
allows for useful processing while data is in flight in the network resulting in
reduced software overhead in parallel middleware and reduced network congestion.
The key tenets of the research are to achieve programmable, intelligent
acceleration of applications while emphasizing overlap of communication and
computation at low latency, while also cutting substantially software overhead.
The research project, FC5 (an FPGA framework for coupling communication and
computation in clouds and clusters) has several thrusts. First, hardware support
for FC5 and investigation of methods of configurability in FC5 to reduce
communication latency and support computing in the network are studied. A second
outcome is a prototype version of the Open MPI open source version of MPI-3.1
parallel middleware that utilizes FC5 to deliver the features and performance
enhancements involving data movement between and within servers, mathematical
data reductions, and bulk data reorganizations. Third, proof-of-concept versions
of multiple FC5 software models, including direct hardware access, a transparent
MPI-in-OpenCL, and an API-based mechanism that exposes essential functionality.
Finally, because FC5 is evolving rapidly with major new announcements expected
imminently, continued refinement is essential. At least two model applications,
Molecular Dynamics and Map-Reduce, will be used as test cases. With the
continued consolidation of computing services into the cloud, the potential
broader impact is to increase both the scale and availability of parallel
applications. The broad range of uses of cloud and cluster computing for
commercial, government, and academic applications means that acceleration
offered will have a widespread impact applicable across many sectors. The
growing acceptance of high performance computing in industry (e.g., fast machine
learning) is one particular potential commercial sector that will be enhanced by
this project.