* 1618318
* CIF: Small: Taming Convergence and Delay in Stochastic Network Optimization with Hessian Information
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Jia Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 10/31/2017
* USD 317,896.00

With the rapid integration of massive amounts of data and new network devices,
today's network infrastructures are being stretched to their limits. As a
result, recent years have witnessed a critical need for developing fast-
converging distributed stochastic network control and optimization algorithms to
increase throughput and reduce delay. This research program addresses the
challenge of distributed control and optimization for next generation complex
network systems, where the rapidly changing network states (e.g., network
topologies, channel states, queueing states, etc.) necessitate fast-convergence
and low-delay in distributed optimization algorithms. Based on the
investigator's recent research on network control and optimization that
leverages second-order Hessian information (SOHI), this research will develop a
series of new distributed algorithmic techniques that offer orders of magnitudes
improvements in both convergence speed and queueing delay compared to the
traditional approaches, while attaining the same provable network-utility
optimality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigator?s research
tasks in this project are organized around three inter-related research thrusts
that exploit different degrees of SOHI: i) Heavy-ball-based joint congestion
control and multi-path routing (partial SOHI); ii) Primal-dual interior-point
second-order congestion control and multi-path routing (full SOHI); and iii)
SOHI-based distributed control and optimization algorithm designs. This research
project takes an integrated and holistic approach that draws techniques from
areas of mathematical modeling, optimization theory, control theory, queueing
theory, and stochastic analysis. The research project will not only advance the
knowledge in the algorithmic design for next generation complex networks, but
will also serve a critical need in the general networking research community by
exploring new frontiers in SOHI-based network control and optimization.