* 1618272
* CIF: Small: Approaching Capacity in High Throughput Communication Systems with Incremental Redundancy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2019
* USD 439,057.00

The growing ability to generate digital information and the hunger to consume
that information create a need to communicate information at ever-higher rates.
Free-space optical and millimeter wave wireless communication systems strive to
achieve rates exceeding 100 Gbps. Optical fiber supports terabit-per-second
communications. These systems require high-speed decoding circuits that
currently sacrifice performance to meet latency requirements with available
computational resources. This research develops new techniques for high-
throughput communications with a goal of achieving theoretical performance
limits while meeting latency requirements with reasonable complexity. In
addition to providing a new path for practical solutions for high-throughput
systems, the broader impacts of this research include the training of graduate
students to support continued leadership of the United States in communications
technology as well as hands-on research experiences for undergraduates to
maintain the pipeline that will supply our country?s continuing need for
diverse, well-trained, and innovative engineers.

This research explores a new paradigm in which many low-complexity decoders work
in parallel, decoding variable-length codes with short average block-lengths.
Fixed-length codes with short block-lengths cannot approach the Shannon
capacity, but variable-length codes with short average block-lengths do approach
capacity. Variable-length codes are traditionally implemented with feedback so
that incremental redundancy is transmitted only when requested by the receiver.
This research transmits incremental redundancy without the use of feedback,
utilizing techniques such as network coding and ergodicity to deliver redundancy
only to those parallel decoders that need it. The problem of delivering
incremental redundancy without feedback is framed as a joint source-channel
coding problem with side information at the receiver. The primary goal of this
research is to produce low complexity systems that can approach capacity at high
throughput.