* 1618145
* CIF: Small: Ensuring robustness of communication between networked energy harvesting nodes
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Venkatachalam Anantharam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Solar energy, ambient radio frequency energy, and mechanical vibrations, among
others, provide opportunities for energy harvesting from the environment.
Typically, it is feasible to store some of the harvested energy in a
rechargeable local battery for future use. Energy harvesting devices are
therefore expected to soon play a major role as components of networks
monitoring critical infrastructure, such as transportation networks and the
smart grid. This development is also synergistic with the growth of the Internet
of Things, with the number of devices connected to the network being two orders
of magnitude more than what we have today. The development of energy harvesting
in the context of critical infrastructure technologies is of central importance
to the national interest and its development in the context of the Internet of
Things offers profound benefits to society. The educational component of this
project includes training graduate students, exposing undergraduate students to
research, and transitioning the results of the research to core graduate and
undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project
addresses the fundamental communications challenges posed by energy harvesting
sensing networks in both the context of monitoring critical infrastructure and
the Internet of Things. The research develops systematic techniques to design
communication networks of sensing energy harvesting nodes that are robust to the
variations in the energy harvesting process. The appropriate models to use
depend on the relation between the time scale of the energy harvesting and the
time scales inherent to the physical system being sensed, estimated, and
controlled. This project studies both information theoretic and packet-drop
models, corresponding respectively to fast or slow time scales for energy
harvesting relative to the dynamics of the physical system.