* 1618653
* CIF: Small: Hybrid analog-digital schemes for joint source-channel coding of digital sources
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Javier Garcia-Frias, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 403,168.00

This project aims at the development of novel schemes for high throughput
transmission of digital sources over noisy channels for a wide range of source
and channel environments. The research effort will result in significant
advancements in communications systems, including the case in which the data
presents temporal or spatial correlations. Since multiple data sets, such as
sensor networks and medical data, present this type of structures, this project
has the potential to impact society as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this research is to study the application of hybrid analog-digital joint
source-channel coding schemes for the transmission of digital sources over noisy
channels. The proposed hybrid schemes consist of two sub-blocks concatenated in
parallel: First, a digital-to-analog encoder, which will produce either real
numbers or many multiple discrete points from the input bits. Second, a digital
encoder, which will produce coded bits from the input bits. The key idea is to
take advantage of the analog component of the hybrid scheme to achieve high
throughput communications, and robustness against changes in the channel
conditions, something that is challenging with standard digital channel codes.
On the other hand, the use of pure digital-to-analog encoders would lead to
significant error floors, with the consequent performance degradation. However,
thanks to the use of the digital encoder sub-block, these error floors can be
substantially reduced to achieve an excellent performance. Hybrid analog-digital
practical coding systems have not been applied for the encoding of digital
sources. The development of these techniques is of great interest in practical
applications such as image and video coding, sensor networks and medical
applications.