* 1618920
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Can LTE &amp; WiFi Live Happily Ever After?
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Monisha Ghosh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 203,000.00

There is a pressing need for more efficient use of existing spectrum to sustain
the explosive growth in wireless data. The two most common and widely used
broadband wireless access networks are cellular and Wi-Fi which traditionally
have operated in very different spectrum regulatory domains: cellular over
licensed spectrum allowing exclusive use whereas Wi-Fi has been designed for the
unlicensed bands where there is no interference protection by rule. This
difference has led to fundamentally different system architectures: cellular
systems are centrally controlled where users are allocated resources in
frequency and/or time in a way so as to minimize intra-cell and inter-cell
interference. Wi-Fi on the other hand, has been designed to operate in an
environment where interference between like and unlike systems must be
tolerated. Of late, there has been increasing interest in deploying systems
originally intended for licensed, cellular bands in the unlicensed bands that
are currently primarily used by Wi-Fi, with minimal changes. This creates a new
and largely under-explored heterogeneous interference scenario: a scheduled
system (cellular) coexisting with a collision avoidance protocol (Wi-Fi).
Currently, multiple coexistence solutions have been proposed by industry
players, often reflecting existing vested interests and selective use-cases and
test scenarios that promote one side or the other. An unbiased study of these
various solutions is necessary to settle the ongoing debate on this issue, and
can have vital impact on the usage of a large swath of spectrum under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, this fundamental
coexistence problem between dissimilar systems will be studied in an unbiased
manner, using analysis, simulation and experiments. The research will have three
main thrusts and a parallel experimental plan that focuses on system level
simulation complemented by a hardware test-bed. Prior to developing schemes for
fair sharing, the very concept of fairness needs to be defined suitably. This
will be the focus of the first thrust where air-time, throughput and access are
the fairness metrics that will be evaluated. The second and third thrusts will
propose, analyze, simulate and test coexistence schemes that cellular systems
can deploy to ensure fair sharing with Wi-Fi, and that Wi-Fi can deploy to
ensure fair sharing with cellular. The latter research area is necessary since
in the unlicensed spectrum Wi-Fi does not have any priority over other systems
as long as both obey the the Federal Communications Commission rules. The
experimental software and hardware platforms will be used to test the
coexistence schemes developed in the project. The results of the project,
including software code and data sets, will be made public on an ongoing basis
and also be used to influence standardization and regulations governing
coexistence in the unlicensed bands.