* 1618706
* SHF: Small: Accelerating Graph Traversal on GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* H. Howie Huang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2021
* USD 449,929.00

Graph algorithms are crucial to a wide range of big data applications from
social network analysis, biological network analysis and simulation, to
cybersecurity. Analyzing such graphs has important practical usages, e.g.,
providing targeted recommendations for e-commerce, as well as identifying person
of interest and suspicious behaviors in social networks. Graph-based approaches
rely heavily on a number of traversal methods, e.g., breadth-first search serves
as one of the most significant building blocks for many graph algorithms. This
project advances the state-of-the-art in graph traversal by achieving
exceptional performance on both a single graphics processing unit (GPU) and
large GPU-based supercomputers. New techniques developed in this project enable
many graph applications to run efficiently in data centers, bringing enormous
benefits to a number of scientific domains. New educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students are also enabled by this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although GPUs provide both massive parallelism and
high memory bandwidth ideal for running graph algorithms, unleashing their full
power to achieve high-performance, highly scalable graph traversal remains
extremely challenging. The main obstacles are highly unbalanced workload and
irregular data access, both inherent to data-driven graph algorithms. To address
this challenge, this project develops a set of novel techniques that not only
remove several performance bottlenecks, but also optimize data access,
communication, and task management for graph traversal on GPUs.