* 1618038
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: GOALI: Multiscale CAD Framework of Atomically Thin Transistors for Flexible Electronic System Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Han Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Establishing the foundation for electronics technology based on atomically thin
two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as layered transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDCs), may prove to be transformative in many technological areas relying on
flexible electronic and nanoelectronic systems. This project will establish a
critical knowledge base for future 2D TMDC electronics technology for a broad
range of applications, such as low power computing, flexible display, and
wearable electronics. The project has a direct industrial impact through the
respective collaboration and technology transfer between the participating
universities and the industrial partner. It will also offer interdisciplinary
research opportunities for training graduate students, as well as undergraduate
and high school students, in a collaborative research environment between
university and industry, and provide valuable resources for research and
educational community by disseminating web-based learning modules, simulators,
and experimental data on TDMC-based electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While TMDC
materials are promising for many potential applications in nanoelectronics and
flexible electronics due to their mechanical bendability, atomically thin
thickness, and excellent intrinsic carrier transport properties, major gaps
exist on translating early science of such materials into practical circuit and
system technologies. The objective of this project is to develop compact model
and circuit-simulation platform for new 2D TMDC-based devices and systems, and
to explore its applications in flexible and wearable electronic systems through
experimental demonstration and collaboration with IBM T. J. Watson Research
Center as the industrial partner. The proposal will undertake the following
tasks: (i) develop a multiscale simulation framework that integrates atomistic
device simulations with compact circuit models for TMDC transistors, (ii)
fabricate, characterize and simulate basic TMDC circuits, (iii) model the
variability and defect mechanisms and their correlations in TMDC transistors,
and (iv) design and experimentally demonstrate TMDC driving circuits for
transparent flexible display.