* 1618963
* SHF: SMALL: Parallelization and Memory System Techniques for Heterogeneous Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Donald Yeung, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Traditional discrete GPUs have demonstrated dramatic performance gains over
CPUs, but the improvements have been limited to simpler codes with massive
parallelism. Recently, computer manufacturers have been producing heterogeneous
microprocessors in which a CPU and GPU are integrated on the same die. Such
processors provide shared memory between the CPU and GPU, and fast CPU-GPU
communication. These features potentially enable acceleration of new types of
computations, allowing the GPU to gainfully execute smaller loops and to support
more complex codes. This project investigates techniques for exploiting
heterogeneous microprocessors and to realize their benefits. If successful, the
project will enable most programs, not just those with massive parallelism, to
utilize GPUs. The project will also provide valuable training to both graduate
and undergraduate students, and improve graduate-level
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the research side, the project will pursue
the following research directions. First, it will create a suite of benchmarks
exhibiting complex loop nests that demonstrate the new capabilities of
heterogeneous microprocessors. Second, the project will also develop novel
parallelization schemes for the new benchmark suite. The parallelization schemes
will map multiple levels of parallelism to CPU and GPU cores simultaneously to
fully utilize the compute resources in a heterogeneous microprocessor. Third,
new cache coherence protocols will be developed that efficiently support the
bulk producer-consumer communication that occurs as finer-grained computations
migrate from CPU to GPU and back. And finally, adaptive memory address mapping
schemes will be investigated that exploit DRAM page locality for CPU accesses
and channel-level parallelism for GPU accesses.