* 1618936
* NeTS: Small: Small Terahertz Cells
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 328,998.00

With the ubiquitous use of wireless technology today, we are experiencing a
severe shortage of spectrum. The terahertz frequency band (100 GHz to 10 THz) is
a largely unused part of the spectrum that can potentially be used for high rate
short-range wireless links thus easing the spectrum pressure to some degree.
However, this frequency band suffers from large signal attenuation with
distance, resulting in a need for highly directional transmissions (or pencil
beams). This research identifies fundamental challenges in implementing such
directional transmissions for providing coverage in rooms and other short-range
application domains. Additionally, the project examines the problem of
allocating spectrum resources to mobile users given the highly directional
nature of coverage, which causes a spatial dependence on frequency availability.
The impact of this work is broad: it addresses the fundamental problem of
spectrum scarcity by examining a hitherto unexplored part of the spectrum and it
will impact the emerging 5G wireless standard. The PI will also teach a graduate
seminar class on terahertz communications, thus impacting
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project describes the frequency and angular
dependence of using dense antenna arrays to provide highly directional coverage
across the terahertz spectrum. A consequence of this behavior is that as a user
moves even a few feet, the data rate can drop by orders of magnitude, unless
coverage is planned carefully. This project presents a systematic approach to
studying the coverage problem for terahertz networks using clusters of dense
antenna arrays. The project also examines a novel approach of using lenses to
provide coverage. The first problem will be studied by building a detailed
terahertz propagation simulator, which includes models for dense antenna arrays
and models for mutual coupling effects (which are significant at this frequency
band). The latter approach will be studied using a large set of measurements.
Given these studies, the project will then examine the problem of providing
coverage to mobile users in rooms. Since spectrum resources show a spatial
dependence, the problem of ensuring users continue to receive their required
quality of service will combine resource allocation approaches with geometric
constraints. The outcome of this research will be a detailed understanding of
the terahertz communication channel as well as a set of tools and measurements
that can be employed by other researchers in the field.