* 1618919
* RCN: EcoHealth Net 2.0: A One Health approach to disease ecology research &amp; education
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Christine Johnson, Ecohealth Alliance inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,897.00

EcoHealthNet 2.0 is global research coordination network led by EcoHealth
Alliance and a strong array of scientists and institutional partners from the US
and abroad. The global health community is facing increasingly complex
challenges related to infectious disease. The majority of emerging diseases,
such as Ebola virus, Zika virus, SARS and pandemic influenza originate in animal
populations. Many disease outbreaks occur when people alter their environment
(e.g., agricultural expansion, deforestation) such that contact between
wildlife, livestock, and human communities is increased. Currently, scientists,
public health practitioners, and policy makers are not adequately prepared to
address complex global health challenges due to limited opportunities for
interdisciplinary training at undergraduate, graduate or professional stages.
The EcoHealth Net 2.0 project is designed to change the current science
education landscape and develop a new generation of interdisciplinary scientists
who will be better prepared to study, prevent and respond to environmental
changes and infectious disease. This project will develop and deliver content to
thousands of students and educators on a global scale, mentor ecohealth research
scientists, and create lasting connectivity among scientists and policy makers
from different disciplines as they advance in their careers and face complex
challenges in global health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EcoHealthNet 2.0 will connect
world-class research scientists from fields of medicine, ecology, veterinary
medicine, epidemiology, microbiology, anthropology, climate science, data
science, and economics with undergraduate and graduate STEM students from around
the world to advance One Health research and education. The program has three
core activities: (1) Didactic training: Selected lectures will be hosted at
partner universities coupled with three 1-week workshops that will provide
multidisciplinary educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students from the US and abroad. Workshops will teach applied skills in fields
of disease ecology, science communication, and policy, providing in-person
contact time with working professionals and research scientists. Lectures will
be publicly webcast, reaching thousands of students and educators globally. (2)
Experiential learning: Undergraduate and graduate students will be competitively
selected to participate in mentored research projects that teach One Health
principles and research methods. (3) Professional networking: Participants will
be connected to scientific agencies and professional science and policy
associations such as the USGS National Wildlife Health Center, the US Agency for
International Development, the Institute of Medicine, the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization, the International Association for Ecology and Health,
and the One Health Alliance of South Asia.