* 1618551
* CIF: Small: Source Separation with an Adaptive Structure for Multi-Modal Data Fusion
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Tulay Adali, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Armand Makowski
* 05/31/2021
* USD 461,642.00

In many fields today, information about a given phenomenon is obtained through
different types of acquisition techniques and experimental conditions, and the
availability of such multimodal data has been growing. Joint analysis of this
data---its fusion---promises a more comprehensive and informative view of the
task at hand, and, if probed carefully, may open new venues and answer questions
we might not have even thought of asking when working with a single modality.
There is now significant activity in data fusion in disciplines spanning medical
imaging, remote sensing, speech processing, behavioral sciences, and
metabolomics, to name a few. A common challenge across multiple disciplines is
determining how and to what degree different datasets are related, i.e.,
identifying the common and distinct subspaces across multiple datasets in terms
of the information they provide for the given task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current work provides a powerful solution to this key challenge enabling
identification of the relationship among multiple datasets in a completely data-
driven manner such that both the common and distinct subspaces within each
dataset can be robustly identified. By combining this adaptive scheme with the
well defined but flexible framework of independent vector analysis (IVA), a new
powerful framework, IVA with an adaptive subspace structure (IVA-AS) is
developed for effective fusion of both the multiset and multimodal data. The
successful application of this framework is demonstrated using a unique medical
dataset that allows the study of commonalities and differences in brain function
while driving with distractions or under the influence of alcohol.