* 1618795
* AF: Small: Algorithms and Information Theory for Causal Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Leonard Schulman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project is concerned, firstly, with algorithmic and information-theoretic
aspects of Causal Inference. With the exception of some scientific data that is
gathered purely for knowledge, most data is gathered for the purpose of
potential intervention: this holds for medicine, public health, environmental
regulations, market research, legal remedies for discrimination, and in many
other domains. A decision-maker cannot take advantage of correlations and other
structural characterizations that are discovered in data without knowing about
causal relationships between variables. Historically, causality has been teased
apart from correlation through controlled experiments. However there are several
good reasons that one must often make do with passive observation: ethical
reasons; governance constraints; and uniqueness of the system and the inability
to re-run history. Absent experiments, we are without the principal arsenal of
the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet there is a special class of
systems in which it is possible to perform causality inference purely from
passive observation of the statistics. For a system to fall in this class one
must be able to establish on physical grounds that certain observable variables
are statistically independent of certain others, conditional on a third set
being held fixed; the formalism for this is ``semi-Markovian graphical models".
It is known which semi-Markovian models fall in this class, subject to the
assumption of perfect statistics. From this starting point there remain
significant theoretical challenges before these ideas can have the greatest
possible impact on practice. Some of the challenges to be addressed
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The PI will aim to quantify how the stability
(condition number) of causal identification depends on the various sources of
uncertainty (statistical error; numerical error; model error) and as a function
of the structure of the graphical model. The purpose is both to understand what
inference is justifiable from existing data, and to impact study design so that
data with the greatest leverage is collected. For the former objective, in
particular, the PI seeks an efficient algorithm to compute the condition number
of a given semi-Markovian model at the specific observed statistics. For the
last objective the PI seeks an efficient algorithm to compute the worst-case
condition number of a given semi-Markovian model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Existing causal identification algorithms, applied to data inconsistent with the
model (which is unavoidable due to statistical error, and normally also due to
model error), will yield an inference inconsistent with the model. The project
will help to understand if projection onto the model may improve
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) One of the obstacles to use of existing
methods is that they require sample size exponential in the size of the
graphical model. The project aims to determine when it is possible to infer
causality using only the marginal distributions over small subsets of the
observable variables; this will reduce sample size and likely improve condition
number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) In the majority of semi-Markovian models,
causality is not identifiable. This leaves open however the possibility of
determining (or giving a nontrivial outer bound for) the feasible interval of
causal effects. No effective algorithm is currently known for this problem, and
we wish to provide one. Such an algorithm could be used to show that an
intervention is favorable despite the effect not being fully
identifiable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(5) The project aims to lift the causal-
inference algorithm to time series, as well as study the connections with the
distinct techniques (Granger causality and Massey's directed information)
normally used in this setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secondary emphases of the
project include broader research in theoretical computer science. In particular,
studying connections between ``boosting" or ``multiplicative weights" methods
used in algorithms and machine learning, and their variants which arise out of
selection or self-interest in the system dynamics of ecosystems (``weak
selection") and economic marketplaces
(``tatonnement").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inseparably from the research effort, the
PI will train students and postdocs in these and related areas of the theory of
computation.