* 1618893
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Privacy-Preserving Autonomous Vehicle Sharing Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Xiaohui Liang, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,994.00

Over the past several years, the automobile and technology industries have made
significant leaps in bringing computerization and automation to car driving.
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) have the potential to fundamentally improve
transportation systems by dramatically reducing crashes, assisting traffic
flows, reducing travel time and energy consumption, providing critical mobility
to the elderly and disabled, and making vehicle sharing convenient, popular, and
necessary. This project studies the architecture and privacy issues related to
autonomous vehicle sharing (AVS) that can revolutionize our transportation
experience by providing novel time-sharing and ride-sharing services. The time-
sharing services allow AVs to be shared by different users at non-overlapping
time periods, while the ride-sharing services allow AVs to be shared by users
taking similar trips during the same time period. With autonomous driving
techniques, the quality of both services can be significantly enhanced to
benefit commuters. However, the time- and ride- sharing systems need to
communicate with users to organize shared vehicles, which is not risk free.
Massive information on users' activities can be exposed in case of privacy
breach. Existing privacy-preserving techniques cannot be applied effectively and
efficiently in AVS due to problems and requirements unique to AVS, e.g.,
location- and time- sensitive trips and multi-user coordination. This project
addresses the unique privacy problems raised by AVS and proposes effective and
efficient privacy-preserving techniques, which can promote AVS among users.

The research in this project will have major technological impacts on privacy-
preserving AV sharing services. The project will study the privacy-preserving
task matching problem for the time-sharing service and the privacy-preserving
trip searching problem for the ride-sharing service, while computation and
communication overhead, trip delays due to unexpected conditions, costs of
transitional trips, users' social preferences, and different privacy protection
levels will be considered. The proposed research activities will trigger further
research in other applications such as social networks, vehicular ad hoc
networks, smart grid, and electric vehicles communications, where privacy is an
important factor. The results from this research will be disseminated through
conference and journal publications, online documents, and software release.
Seminars to high school and community colleges students will be offered in the
Boston and Cookeville areas, and presentations regarding the proposed research
will be delivered to demonstrate how science and engineering can enhance quality
of life in order to stimulate the students' interest in technology. Students in
under-represented groups will be encouraged to participate in the proposed
research activities.