* 1618800
* CIF: Small: Algebraic Network Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Bobak Nazer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 527,495.00

The demand for data services has grown exponentially over the past decade,
driven by data-hungry applications such as mobile video, and is forecasted to
accelerate through the next decade. To keep up with this demand, new
infrastructure is being built at a rapid pace, leading to denser, more complex
deployments. Concurrently, mobile processing power has increased dramatically,
which opens the door for the inclusion of more sophisticated communication
techniques as part of developing standards. Within this context, network
information theory acts as a powerful theoretical framework for assessing
techniques across complex network topologies and setting benchmarks for
practical deployments. Recent efforts have uncovered examples of techniques that
sit outside this classical framework, and exploit the algebraic structure
inherent to multi-user communication to attain higher performance. This project
will develop an algebraic network information theory that unifies classical and
modern communication techniques, and can serve as a foundation for future
information-processing networks. The project is complemented by several
educational and outreach activities, including workshops, summer schools, and
tutorials.

This project aims to take a comprehensive view of algebraic, information-
theoretic techniques for efficient communication across networks. The
overarching goal is to develop an algebraic network information theory starting
from the accessible concepts of joint typicality and discrete memoryless
channels and sources. The project is organized into three thrusts. The first
thrust outlines a unifying problem statement based on joint typicality as well
as algebraic packing and covering lemmas. The second thrust pursues a
fundamental understanding of the limits of optimal decoding. Finally, the third
thrust aims to transport geometric insights from lattice-based codes to obtain
new bounds and algorithms for linear codes.