* 1618814
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: A Scalable and Efficient Optical Map Assembler
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Simon Puglisi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 397,461.00

Optical mapping is a laboratory technique for constructing ordered high-
resolution optical maps from stained molecules of DNA. The popularity of this
type of data has amplified because the commercial production of the data has
improved in terms of quality, expense, and throughput. For example, BioNano
Genomics released a new generation of optical mapping technology called the Irys
System in 2015, which has been used to uncover diploid variation in the human
genome. However, the raw optical mapping data, called Rmaps, is not inherently
useful by itself and must be first assembled into a genome-wide optical map; a
computational process that has very few nonproprietary solutions. The optical
map assembly problem that aims to stich together the Rmap data into a genome-
wide optical map has some similarities to genome assembly that aims to build
contiguous sequences corresponding to the genome of interest from short sequence
reads. Although this similarity exists, there are some significant differences
that have prevented the direct application of genome assemblers to this latter
problem. The main objective of this proposed work is to build a scalable and
efficient optical map assembler through the exploration and adaptation of genome
assembly algorithms and methods. This research objective will be enhanced by an
education plan that aims to broaden the participation in computer science by
creating research opportunities for female graduate students, as well as, high
school senior students. The plan is to redevelop the existing bioinformatics
graduate course so that it: (1) can be cross-listed with the Department of
Biology and thus, increase the female enrolment, and (2) will be project based
and thus, produce supportive relationships between female students. The team
will conduct comprehensive surveys of graduate students in the redeveloped
course, as well as the other graduate courses in computer science, to determine
whether the changes are impactful. We plan to disseminate our findings to other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even with significantly high coverage and
various insert sizes, genome assembly and structural variation detection are
tenuous computational processes using short read data alone due to repetitive
regions in the genome. Optical maps, which are ordered genome-wide high-
resolution restriction maps that specify the positions of occurrence of one or
more short nucleotide sequences, are one such type of data. The raw optical
mapping data identified by the image processing is an ordered sequence of
fragment lengths. The (unassembled) optical mapping data produced by the system
are referred to as Rmaps and are synonymous with sequence reads in standard
genome sequencing. Optical mapping has gained popularity due to (1) the ability
to automate the generation of the data; and (2) its use in several large
sequencing projects---including the sequencing projects of goat, budgerigar, and
Ambler trichopoda. With this popularity comes the growing need for means to
analyze optical mapping data. The goal of this proposed work is to build an
optical map assembler that is efficient for genomes of various sizes that will
accept as input a set of Rmaps and return an assembled genome-wide optical map.
Thus, we have divided this larger goal into the following intermediate research
objectives that we plan to tackle in succession: (1) Develop a Rmap error
correction method; (2) create a robust alignment algorithm; and (3) create a
succinct graph representation of a genome wide optical map. Our algorithmic
contributions are not limited to optical mapping data but can be extended to
other type of data, e.g., PacBio and genetic linkage maps. We will actively
engage in knowledge transfer through these research objectives and our outreach
and education plan. These efforts will redevelop a bioinformatics course in
order to attract a greater number of female students and foster collaborative
relationships, and continue an ongoing high school outreach program. In addition
to these activities, we will survey the students in the redeveloped course and
other graduate classes to see whether the changes were impactful, and mentor a
senior high school student researcher during the summers.