* 1618628
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Rethinking Erasure Codes for Cloud Storage: A Quantitative Framework for Latency, Reliability, and Cost Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Tian Lan, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

This project aims to develop an analytical framework that quantifies tail
latency and reliability of erasure-coded storage through investigation of novel
scheduling and repair strategies, mandating rethinking of erasure codes for
online storage. As erasure coding is increasingly adopted by large-scale storage
systems such as Microsoft Azure and Facebook, conventional approaches that
primarily rely on system design heuristics has become inadequate in pushing the
performance boundaries in terms of latency and reliability optimization.
Quantifying tail latency and reliability of an erasure-coded storage that
employs dynamic workload scheduling and online repair is an open problem. There
exists little work illuminating the design space via mathematical
crystallization of key tradeoffs and associated engineering "control
knobs".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable a joint optimization of
latency, reliability and storage cost, which mandates rethinking of erasure-
coded storage optimization and service pricing models. This proposal will
concentrate on the following specific aspects: (1) Investigating a family of new
probabilistic scheduling policies and extend order statistic analysis to derive
closed-form bounds on tail latency for erasure-coded storage with arbitrary
configurations, general service-time distributions, and potentially
differentiated service classes. (2) Through a novel reliability metric, Time to
Data Loss, The research will investigate online repair strategies that
significantly improve reliability using a class of bandwidth-efficient codes,
enabling a tradeoff between repair timeliness and reliability optimization. (3)
Employ the theoretical analysis in this research to pursue a holistic solution
that jointly optimizes reliability, latency, and storage costs over seven key
control dimensions: choice of erasure codes, chunk placement, network resource
allocation, cache management, dynamic scheduling, pricing, and online repair
strategy. (4) Integrate the proposed framework with current cloud systems to
bridge the gap between the theoretical results and practical systems. By
developing new analytical models and algorithms for joint optimization of
latency, reliability, and storage cost, the project will mandate rethinking of
erasure-coded storage design and service pricing models. It will produces novel,
interdisciplinary curriculum modules for teaching both these theories and
systems.