* 1618605
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Geometric and Topological Algorithms for Analyzing Road Network Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Brittany Fasy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 171,824.00

The project aims to develop theoretically grounded, effective methods for
analyzing data associated with road networks -- using graphs that represent road
networks as a framework for analyzing network data. Thanks to the spread of GPS-
enabled devices, trajectory data has become ubiquitous. Many other sources,
including census data and crime statistics, have addresses or geographic
locations that link to an underlying road network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms with mathematical guarantees will be developed
to align trajectories to the network under natural and realistic properties of
true trajectories, to reconstruct road networks from trajectory and density
data. It will also provide two frameworks for comparing data-endowed networks at
different levels. While the problems of trajectory alignment, map
reconstruction, and map comparison have attracted a lot of attention in the GIS
community, most approaches are ad-hoc, provide no quality guarantees, and are
limited to post-hoc analysis. This project will provide novel theoretical
foundations combining approaches from computational topology and geometry, and
will further advance the state-of-the-art of the field of topological /
geometric data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will continue to combine
educational and research activities through this project. Students will be
tightly integrated into the research and practical implementation of this
project, and will be trained in integrating geometric thinking, algorithms
development, and (trajectory) data analysis. The combination of such skills is
increasingly important in data science. Topics involved in this project will
enrich the course material and curriculum development at each of the three
institutions.