* 1618300
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Towards Energy-Efficient Privacy-Preserving Active Authentication of Smartphone Users
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Gang Zhou, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 204,349.00

Common smartphone authentication mechanisms such as PINs, graphical passwords,
and fingerprint scans offer limited security. They are relatively easy to guess
or spoof, and are ineffective when the smartphone is captured after the user has
logged in. Multi-modal active authentication addresses these challenges by
frequently and unobtrusively authenticating the user via behavioral biometric
signals, such as touchscreen interaction, hand movements, gait, voice, and phone
location. However, these techniques raise significant privacy and security
concerns because the behavioral signals used for authentication represents
personal identifiable data, and often expose private information such as user
activity, health, and location. Because smartphones can be easily lost or
stolen, it is paramount to protect all sensitive behavioral information
collected and processed on these devices. One approach for securing behavioral
data is to perform off-device authentication via privacy-preserving protocols.
However, our experiments show that the energy required to execute these
protocols, implemented using state-of-the-art techniques, is unsustainably high,
and leads to very quick depletion of the smartphone's battery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the state of the art of privacy-
preserving active authentication by devising new techniques that significantly
reduce the energy cost of cryptographic authentication protocols on smartphones.
Further, this research takes into account signals that indicate that the user
has lost possession of the smartphone, in order to trigger user authentication
only when necessary. The focus of this project is in sharp contrast with
existing techniques and protocols, which have been largely agnostic to energy
consumption patterns and to the user1s possession of the smartphone post-
authentication. The outcome of this project is a suite of new cryptographic
techniques and possession-aware protocols that enable secure energy-efficient
active authentication of smartphone users. These cryptographic techniques
advance the state of the art of privacy-preserving active authentication by re-
shaping individual protocol components to take into account complex energy
tradeoffs and network heterogeneity, integral to modern smartphones. Finally,
this project will focus on novel techniques to securely offload computation
related to active authentication from the smartphone to a (possibly untrusted)
cloud, further reducing the energy footprint of authentication. The proposed
research will thus make privacy-preserving active authentication practical on
smartphones, from both an energy and performance perspective.