* 1618595
* CSR: Small: Exploiting the Potential for Fine-Grained Memory Management via a Virtual Memory Framework Enhanced by Page Overlays
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Todd Mowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,714.00

Many areas of science and technology have experienced transformational changes
in recent years as a result of computing on extremely large data sets. To help
enable future breakthroughs in science and technology, we also need
breakthroughs in the ability of computers to efficiently perform data-intensive
computations. Perhaps one of the most important inventions in the history of
operating systems and computer hardware was the creation of virtual memory
support. Virtual memory support not only fulfilled its original motivation of
giving the operating system the flexibility to manage the hardware memory
resources in a way that is convenient for programmers, it also provided
unexpected benefits, such as enabling the 'copy-on-write' mechanism that
dramatically reduces the effective cost of duplicating large amounts of memory.
While virtual memory is a powerful tool, it has one major shortcoming: it
provides flexibility at only a relatively coarse granularity (e.g., 8KB "pages"
of contiguous memory). This research is exploring how a new technique for
eliminating this shortcoming can enable a number of new fundamental mechanisms
for performing data-intensive computations much more
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight in this project is that
through a modest extension of the hardware that supports virtual memory (called
'page overlays'), the benefits of virtual memory can be provided at a much finer
granularity: e.g., 32B rather than 8KB. This orders-of-magnitude improvement in
precision does not simply make existing virtual-memory-enabled optimizations
more efficient: it enables fundamental new optimizations that had previously
been impractical. For example, preliminary work has demonstrated that this new
page overlays mechanism can dramatically improve the performance of the 'copy-
on-write' optimization by enabling a new (much more efficient) 'overlay-on-
write' mechanism. This project is exploring how page overlays can enable six
additional fundamental new mechanisms for making data-intensive computations
faster and more energy-efficient. With these six new mechanisms, future computer
systems should be better suited to the increasingly data-intensive workloads of
the future.