* 1618336
* RI: Small: Using Automatically Generated Paraphrases and Discriminative ASR Training to Author Robust Question-Answering Dialogue Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Eric Fosler-Lussier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2021
* USD 458,000.00

Question-answering (QA) dialogue systems are useful in a broad range of contexts
where the primary role of a virtual character is to answer questions posed by
the human user. In QA-based dialogue systems, the primary interpretation task
can be framed as matching a user's question against a set of questions
anticipated by the content author. This project investigates for the first time
how methods for automatically paraphrasing anticipated questions can aid authors
in establishing a large set of expected question variants, making it possible to
dramatically enhance interpretation robustness for both chatted and spoken
language. By evaluating the project with an existing virtual patient dialogue
system and new virtual guide for Columbus, Ohio's COSI (Center of Science and
Industry) science museum, the project will enhance medical education and provide
an inspirational example of science in action to the children who attend the
museum. It also promises to enhance the effectiveness of short answer scoring in
educational software and commercial QA systems for frequently asked
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach is the first to
explore the potential of advanced automatic paraphrasing techniques to enhance
the robustness of interpretation in an easy-to-author QA dialogue system. By
employing paraphrasing at content authoring time, it becomes possible to take
advantage of and make explicit the author's knowledge of the space of
functionally equivalent questions, potentially leading to dramatic improvements
in interpretation accuracy; furthermore, doing so makes it possible to set up an
effective, task-relevant discrimination space for Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) training. To generate paraphrases, the project uses the grammar-based
surface realizer OpenCCG for lexico-syntactic alternations together with broad
coverage resources, vector space models of word meaning and multiword
alignments. To train discriminative ASR models that make a difference in
question interpretation, generated paraphrases are incorporated into the
semantic error rate estimation. Using data collected from medical students and
museum visitors, the project assesses the approach via its impact on
interpretation accuracy and qualitative measures of usability.