* 1618132
* SHF: Small: Efficient Formal Analysis of Evolving Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Sam Malek, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 515,170.00

Modern software systems are very complex and tend to evolve over time. Formal
specification languages and the corresponding analysis environments have shown
promise in aiding the engineers to reason about the properties (e.g., security,
reliability) of complex software systems. Despite their strengths, the reliance
of such formally precise techniques on computationally heavy constraint solvers
means that it can take a significant amount of time to verify the properties of
software. This research devises a novel, and fully automated technique for
efficient analysis of evolving software systems. The principles emerging from
this research provide the foundation for making formal analysis of evolving
software systems less expensive to conduct and more scalable, which in turn
enable the vibrant software industry to significantly improve the quality of its
products. The research produces a new breed of technologies with promising
benefits for reduced defect density in specifications, designs, and code,
achieved at reasonable cost, and within the constraints of real industrial
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An opportunity to reduce the analysis time is
presented by the fact that in a software development project, the formal
specifications representing the software are unlikely to change completely from
one analysis to the next. Unlike the existing analysis techniques that dispose
of the prior results in response to changes in the system specification, the
approach developed in this research automatically and efficiently updates the
analysis results, where solutions to a prior system specification are leveraged
to, among other things, narrow the space of values to be explored by the
underlying constraint solver for the revised system specification, thereby
greatly reducing the required computational effort. The intellectual merit of
this research is a suite of optimization techniques to foster bounded
verification of evolving software systems. The project advances the state-of-
the-art by making bounded formal verification of software more scalable and cost
effective, thereby expanding the domains in which such techniques can be
applied.