* 1618207
* NeTS: Small: Analytic Tools for Evolving Path-Based Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Mark Crovella, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,951.00

The Internet is collectively composed of tens of thousands of individual
networks, operated independently. Data flows from one network to another over
paths that reflect agreements between network providers to exchange traffic. The
ability of the Internet to connect computers around the world depends on the
establishment and maintenance of these paths using a complex set of protocols.
Hence, understanding the set of paths used in the Internet at any given time is
important for the Internet's continued smooth operation. Unfortunately there are
relatively few good metrics and algorithms for gaining insight into how the
Internet's paths are currently configured and how they are changing over time.

This project is developing new methods to address the lack of good path analysis
tools. Using these novel metrics and algorithms, this project's goal is to give
insight into a wide range of questions, including identifying when data traffic
may be being hijacked for malicious purposes, and when network operators shift
their business strategies. The project is developing metrics based on Routing
State Distance (RSD), and examining both micro-level questions (at the level of
individual Autonomous Systems (ASes)) and macro-level questions (at the level of
the whole Internet). At the micro level, the project is examining methods for
identifying co-managed ASes, unusually-routed ASes, and shifts in the routing
towards individual ASes. At the macro level, the project is assessing the
"flattening" of the Internet and large-scale trends in the factors that drive
unusual routing behavior. A key component of the project is the identification
of where and how to do active measurement to most effectively obtain information
about the global routing system.

Broader Impact. The methods being develop have potential to guide improvements
to Internet operation, which benefits society broadly. Results from this project
will be presented to network operators to help guide future understanding of
Internet routing. Additional broader impacts of this project are being felt
through educational development and continued support for under-represented
groups. As part of this project, the PI is developing learning modules and
exercises focusing on network analysis for inclusion in his course "Computer
Networks" as well as contributing modules for inclusion in the course "Tools and
Techniques for Data Mining" which he is helping to develop. The PI is committed
to the engagement of under-represented groups and women in his research, and
currently supervises two female Ph.D. students.