* 1618691
* RUI: Exploiting Innovative Radio Techniques for the Study of Plasma Turbulence and Structure
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2024
* Brett Isham, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,058.00

The award provides for the operations at Aquadilla in Puerto Rico an imaging
radio array that would provide an excellent diagnostic capability for observing
the radio wave effects generated by the powerful Arecibo Observatory heater in
the F-region ionosphere. The InterAmerican University Aquadilla imaging facility
would be capable of observing the spatial distribution of the heated region.
This array would also detect and track the motions of these waves generated by
the Arecibo heater system across the magnetic field line. It would also observe
the growth and decay of the wave structures emitted by the heated region. A full
time post-doctoral associate and the summer participation of three European
graduate students would be supported with this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award would support the use of the Aquadilla radio array in application to the
study of a wide range of radio wave emissions generated by the Arecibo
Observatory heating. The award would enhance the R&amp;D capabilities of the
atmospheric, space, and radio infrastructure at Inter American University and in
Puerto Rico, and would support STEM undergraduate education and the development
of graduate research programs. The project would promote collaborative use of
the facilities of the Arecibo Observatory by local students and faculty, thereby
supporting the longer-term future of the Observatory. The use and development of
the array will drive the development of new radio techniques and technologies.
Areas of technological application include imaging techniques, antenna
technologies, over-the-horizon radar, long-range communications, and space-based
communication and navigation. The work proposed here promotes the development of
shortwave radio technologies. Shortwave communications, which do not depend on
space systems, and of shortwave radar, against which stealth technologies are
largely ineffective, are important and strategic technologies.