* 1618244
* III: Small: Quantifying Multifaceted Perception Dynamics in Online Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Aron Culotta, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 471,992.00

Measuring public perceptions and how they change over time is a central problem
in marketing, public health, and politics. Traditional measurement methods rely
on surveys and focus groups, which can be costly and time-consuming. Online
social networks offer an attractive alternative: real-time perceptions can be
estimated from public, online activity and compared with an entity's
communications to quantify how public messaging affects perception. While prior
algorithmic approaches rely purely on text-based sentiment analysis, this
project will develop novel methods based on the insight that an entity's online
social connections are indicative of how they are perceived (e.g., "birds of a
feather flock together"). Thus, rather than typical one-dimensional measures of
sentiment, the project will instead investigate public perception with respect
to multiple characteristics of an entity (e.g., is it seen as pro-environment,
pro-health, etc.). A multi-faceted evaluation will be performed to study the
phenomenon of "greenwashing," a deceptive marketing practice in which firms
market their products or policies as more environmentally friendly than they
truly are. This project has the potential to enhance consumer protection by
exposing deceptive marketing practices.

The project will develop social network analysis algorithms to assess perception
of an entity and also language processing algorithms to quantify the
communications of an entity with respect to a perceptual attribute. The
approaches to both problems rely on innovative algorithms to measure the
strengths of the social and linguistic relations between public entities and
exemplar accounts that typify the perceptual attribute of interest. A key
advantage of the approach is its minimal requirement of human input, e.g., given
only a single keyword like "environment," the approach identifies suitable
exemplars and fits linguistic and perceptual models. The project will develop
novel machine learning methods for domain adaptation, positive-unlabeled
learning, and learning from label proportions in order to fit such models and
ensure they are robust to omitted variable bias. The models will be evaluated
using public Twitter and Facebook data to quantify the relationship between the
perceptions and online communications of brands and other public entities, with
a particular focus on identifying cases of greenwashing.