* 1618923
* CSR: Small: Elastic and Robust Cloud Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Patrick Eugster, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 485,504.00

The emergence of cloud computing is undoubtedly one of the major paradigm shifts
of the last decade in information technology, and one with substantial economic
impact. Indeed, the ability to rent computing resources on a need basis (as
opposed to acquiring and managing infrastructure provisioned for peak work loads
that may occur only rarely) supports many businesses of different kinds and
sizes. However, while cloud infrastructures allow computing resources to be
allocated and released very dynamically, developing software that leverages this
potential to automatically adjust its usage of resources to its workload (e.g.,
the number of client connections) and performance goals at runtime is a hard
task for software engineers. The goal of this project is thus to provide
programmers support in the form of a programming model and runtime environment
for developing such elastic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Devising such a
generic programming model is however very challenging as it must reconcile
simplicity (for programmers) with scalability (by facilitating parallelism and
distribution) and robustness (by handling partial failures). Unfortunately,
these properties may conflict. This project addresses the challenges through the
following contributions. (1) Programming model and language: a novel object-
oriented programming model variant called Atomic Events and Ownership Network
(AEON) is proposed. AEON combines a simplified object model to reason about
units of application state with a novel type of multiple ownership to streamline
interaction between these units, and a novel notion of events for atomic client-
server interaction. (2) Distributed runtime environment: a highly scalable and
decentralized runtime environment for AEON is implemented, with support for
dynamically adding and removing computational units, as well as for supporting
the restructuring of their relationships without hampering consistency or
conversely stalling progress. Heuristics to efficiently (re-)partition AEON
applications are also proposed. (3) Resource management and fault tolerance: a
resource management framework is leveraged for facilitating the mapping between
application units and underlying resources; it is augmented to provide a notion
of dependable resources achieving fault tolerance. (4) Evaluation: the developed
support is evaluated on a wide variety of applications and across different
cloud infrastructures. All developments are based on open-source software.