* 1618117
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Reputation-Escalation-as-a-Service: Analyses and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Haining Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 232,000.00

Living in an age when services are often rated, people are increasingly
depending on reputation of sellers or products/apps when making purchases
online. This puts pressure on people to gain and maintain a high reputation by
offering reliable and high-quality services and/or products, which benefits the
society at large. Unfortunately, due to extremely high competition in e-commerce
or app stores, recently reputation manipulation related services have quickly
developed into a sizable business, which is termed Reputation-Escalation-as-a-
Service (REaaS). As REaaS attacks grow in scale, effective countermeasures must
be designed to detect and defend against them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses REaaS from two aspects. First, it aims to understand the
economics of REaaS by conducting empirical studies of e-markets. Second, it aims
to develop defensive measures, which involve both technical approaches and
market intervention. The technical approaches focus on detection of REaaS from
e-markets, and novel detection techniques will be developed using content
analysis, machine learning, social ties, and graph theory. For market invention,
after a holistic analysis of REaaS, this research aims to identify its
bottleneck (the weakest link) and also measure the efficacy of intervention. The
outcome of this data-driven security research will enhance security education
with labs based on social-economic data analysis. The success of this research
will attract more attention of industry practitioners, government sectors, and
academia to jointly tackle the REaaS problem.