* 1618379
* STARSS: Small: Side-Channel Analysis and Resiliency Targeting Accelerators
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Today's computing systems are becoming increasingly heterogeneous, providing new
levels of computational horsepower and power efficiency. Hardware accelerators
are a key element in this trend, allowing compute-oriented code to be offloaded
to specialized hardware. Accelerators are starting to be used for security
services, where high-volume data is encrypted to ensure
integrity/confidentiality. However, the security of accelerators has only just
begun to receive attention. Issues such as information leakage through side
channels have not been addressed. Secure data will continue to grow in
importance as we enter into the era of the Internet-of-Things (IoT). This
project addresses national security needs, helping individuals, companies and
governments to protect their data.

This project develops new knowledge of the attack surface of accelerator devices
that are becoming attractive platforms for encryption acceleration. A new class
of resiliency approaches are developed to guard sensitive data and reduce the
attack surface. The project evaluates side-channel attack vulnerability on a
range of systems, including discrete GPUs, integrated APUs (devices with the CPU
and GPU sharing memory), and other classes of accelerators. The 3 classes of
attacks include: 1) timing attacks, 2) power analysis attacks and 3)
electromagnetic emanation attacks. Three resiliency mechanisms are studied: 1)
software obfuscation, 2) compiler-assisted modifications to address power/EM
leakage, and 3) hardware techniques that add significant timing noise. The
project develops tutorials on reliability issues present in accelerator devices.
The project provides multiple opportunities for undergraduates from under-
represented groups to engage in security-related research.