* 1618194
* SHF: SMALL: Collaborative Research: Improving Reliability of In-Memory Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jianhui Yue, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 186,414.00

Emerging nonvolatile memory (NVM) technologies, such as PCM, STT-RAM, and
memristors, provide not only byte-addressability, low-latency reads and writes
comparable to DRAM, but also persistent writes and potentially large storage
capacity like an SSD. These advantages make NVM likely to be next-generation
fast persistent storage for massive data, referred to as in-memory storage. Yet,
NVM-based storage has two challenges: (1) Memory cells have limited write
endurance (i.e., the total number of program/erase cycles per cell); (2) NVM has
to remain in a consistent state in the event of a system crash or power loss.
The goal of this project is to develop an efficient in-memory storage framework
that addresses these two challenges. This project involves undergraduate and
graduate students. All software artifacts and tools will be made available to
the wider research community. The work has broader industrial and economic
impact since it will help improve the reliability of data storage systems for
data centers and HPC applications.

This project will take a holistic approach, spanning from low-level architecture
design to high-level OS management, to optimize the reliability, performance,
and manageability of in-memory storage. The technical approach will involve
understanding the implication and impact of the write endurance issue when
cutting-edge NVM is adopted into storage systems. The improved understanding
will motivate and aid the design of cost-effective methods to improve the life-
time of in-memory storage and to achieve efficient and reliable consistence
maintenance.