* 1618837
* TWC: Small: MIST: Systematic Analysis of Microarchitectural Information Leakage on Mobile Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Berk Sunar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Smart phones have permeated all facets of our lives facilitating daily
activities from shopping to social interactions. Mobile devices collect
sensitive information about our behavior via various sensors. Operating systems
(OS)enforce strict isolation between apps to protect data and complex permission
management. Yet, apps get free access to hardware including CPU and caches.
Access to shared hardware resources result in information leakage across apps.
Microarchitectural attacks have already proven to succeed in stealing
information on PC and even on virtualized cloud servers. This project (MIST)
quantifies the vulnerability of mobile platforms to microarchitectural attacks
and develops countermeasures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIST systematically explores
which resources enable these attacks on the mobile platform, identifies
mechanisms that are essential to an attack, and quantifies the amount of
information obtainable from given resources. By making use of machine learning
techniques, methods for detecting malicious code exploiting microarchitectural
leakage are developed. To remedy microarchitectural attacks, MIST explores
countermeasures that can manage resources in a way that they are no longer
exploitable by side channels. In addition, tools that help app developers
prevent leakage when writing code processing sensitive information are provided.
The studied detection and prevention techniques apply to a wide range of
interactions as experienced in mobile computing today. Thereby, MIST helps to
secure personal information stored on mobile platforms with immediate benefits
to virtually all mobile platform users. Many of the envisioned Internet of
Things hubs build on the same platforms, further increasing the impact of this
research.