* 1618669
* III: Small: Indoor Spatial Query Evaluation and Trajectory Tracking with Bayesian Filtering Techniques
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Xiao Qin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,995.00

Today most people spend a significant portion of their time daily in indoor
spaces such as office buildings, shopping malls, convention centers, subway
systems, and many other structures. In addition, indoor spaces are becoming
increasingly large and complex. For instance, the New York City Subway has 469
stations and contains 233 miles of routes. In 2014, the subway system delivered
over 1.75 billion rides, averaging approximately 5.6 million daily rides on
weekdays. Therefore, users will have more and more demand for launching
location-based (spatial) queries for finding friends, objects, or points of
interest in indoor spaces. However, existing spatial query evaluation techniques
for outdoor environments cannot be applied in indoor spaces because these
techniques assume that user locations can be acquired from GPS signals or
cellular positioning, but the assumption does not hold in covered indoor spaces.
Furthermore, indoor spaces are usually modeled differently from outdoor spaces.
In indoor environments, user movements are enabled or constrained by entities
and topologies such as doors, walls, and hallways. Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) is a very popular electronic tagging technology that
allows objects to be automatically identified at a distance using an
electromagnetic challenge-and-response exchange of data. An RFID-based system
consists of a large number of low-cost tags that are attached to objects and
readers, which can identify tags without a direct line-of-sight through RF
communications. RFID technologies have become increasingly popular over the last
decade with applications in areas such as supply chain management, health care,
and transportation. In this project, the researchers consider the setting of an
indoor environment where a number of RFID readers are deployed in the indoor
space. Each user is associated with an RFID tag, which can be identified by a
reader when the user is within the detection range of the reader. Given the
history of RFID raw readings from all the readers, the research team is in the
position to design a system that can efficiently answer indoor spatial queries
and track trajectories of objects. The research results of this project will
improve the performance of numerous high value-added indoor applications and
hence benefit the economy of our country. In addition, the ability to be able to
locate people in indoor spaces will improve emergency response. The project will
promote teaching, learning, and training by exposing both undergraduate and
graduate students to mathematical and technological underpinnings in the field
of spatial data management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
team will develop an array of techniques to derive accurate object locations
from erroneous RFID raw readings for supporting indoor spatial query evaluation
and trajectory tracking. With accurate spatial query results and trajectory
information, many high level applications (e.g., indoor layout planning and
indoor location-based services) can be supported. This project will contribute
to the research community by piloting novel indoor data management techniques
that will accomplish the following goals: (1) develop and compare a number of
Bayesian filtering-based location inference methods for evaluating spatial
queries in indoor environments, (2) design novel indoor query evaluation
algorithms for various spatial query types such as range query and k nearest
neighbor query, (3) invent a hidden Markov model-based approach for indoor
object trajectory tracking, and (4) implement a simulation toolkit and a
prototype system, where all the components will be integrated for performance
evaluation. All the research results and publications will be available on the
project web site (http://www.eng.auburn.edu/~xqin/Indoor.htm).