* 1618685
* RI: Small: Functional Object Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Tao Ju, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 440,000.00

Humans can effortlessly infer functionalities of objects in a scene and interact
with them. In facing a cabinet door, a human can instantly identify the location
of a handle, understand how to interact with it, and predict what the
interaction would cause in a scene. Understanding object functionality with full
consideration of interactions and dynamics is an essential but missing
capability in computing. The understanding of such object functionalities
facilitates novel applications in a broad spectrum. First, the project changes
how robots influences our society. Rescue robots becomes able to operate in
uncontrolled, unexpected, and disastrous environments to help the lives of
trapped victims. Home-robots becomes more deeply involved in our daily
activities, helping us from household chores to the care of the elderly in the
aging societies. The project enables to construct functional object models
easily for 3D printing, a technology that is already revolutionizing the world
through applications in art, fashion, human health-care, construction, and more.
At the emergence of virtual reality and augmented reality, where interactions
with the virtual environments are becoming more ubiquitous, this project also
enables to easily add "lives" to virtual assets and create "live" virtual
environments for better training and education.

This research studies a computational framework and algorithms to construct,
learn, and infer functional object models. The following two key observations
are at the heart of the project. First, objects are designed for optimal
functionality, and careful physics-based reasoning should automatically reveal
the information. For example, if the handle of a cabinet door is in the middle,
the door should slide-forward to minimize the amount of necessary forces and
torques. Second, functionalities are universal across object categories. For
example, an act of opening is not fundamentally different from cabinet doors,
laundry machines, ovens, to refrigerators. The approach discovers object
functionality by integrating segmentation, motion estimation, and kinematic
inference problems into a novel physics-driven formulation. The research team
develops algorithms to learn and infer object functionalities from images, RGBD
images, and 3D models. The project opens up a new frontier of research,
functional object modeling, as well as introduces a principled new yet general
computational framework incorporating physics.