* 1618096
* CHS: Small: Coordination of Opportunistic Actions to Produce Globally Effective Behaviors for Physical Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2021
* USD 496,380.00

This project will develop theory, algorithms, and example systems for motivating
large numbers of autonomous individuals to solve problems that require
coordination in the physical world. In these "physical crowdsourcing" systems,
people make small contributions toward a larger collective problem, such as
tracking animal species or air quality for citizen science projects or providing
rides or package delivery in commercial applications. In these systems,
opportunistically relying on people to do convenient parts of the problem causes
incomplete solutions, while directing people to do inconvenient tasks requires
high incentives. By modeling the timing and location of tasks, along with
knowledge of people's routines, the project will develop algorithms that make
use of ideas from decision theory to best decide when, where and to whom to
suggest tasks, in a way that balances individual convenience with system needs.
Doing this should increase people's willingness to participate, reduce the need
to incentivize participation, and create more complete, timely, and accurate
solutions to the collective problem. The investigators will develop several
prototype systems that address practical problems such as package delivery and
lost and found searches to demonstrate the effectiveness of their ideas; they
will also release a toolkit that allows other people to use their work when
designing their own physical crowdsourcing systems for solving both scientific
and practical problems of interest to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
will be carried out in three main phases. The first phase will develop
"incentive chaining", a strategy to encourage opportunistic contributors to
become more directable. Using an existing prototype for surveying tree species,
the team will model people's opportunistic contributions and routines, then
suggest relatively easy "nearby" tasks where others have contributed but where
further work is needed, building people's interest and capacity to contribute.
Once the nearby collaborative tasks are done, the system will direct these
experienced and motivated contributors toward new areas and tasks, which will in
turn become the "nearby" contributions that attract the next round of
contributors. The second phase will develop decision-theoretic hit-or-wait
algorithms to decide if and when to notify contributors about tasks, using a
community-based lost and found application. Building on the modeling of
behavioral routines, these algorithms will use sequential decision processes to
estimate the maximize total value of tasks that contributors will complete,
given individuals' history and current state, the system-determined value of
nearby tasks, and the system's estimate of how likely the contributor would be
to respond to a notification. The third phase will develop notification policies
that satisfy the system's quality of service needs while minimizing disruption
to contributors. To do this, the investigators will develop a supply management
framework that considers the pool of available helpers, the current task demand
and values, and a range of policies for making directed requests and evaluate it
in the context of a peer-to-peer package delivery system.