* 1618078
* CIF Small: Massive MIMO in the MM-Wave Range: The Theory of Making it Practical
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 496,285.00

Fifth generation cellular communications will critically depend on making
available large swaths of bandwidth in the mm-wave range. To enhance spectral
efficiency, and compensate for the large pathloss of the mm-wave bands, large
antenna arrays (massive MIMO) will be used at both the transmitter and receiver.
This project aims to develop new techniques to reduce both the cost and energy
consumption normally associated with such large arrays. Solving these problems
will be an important step forward for 5G, which in turn will be a cornerstone of
the presidential vision of a wireless broadband revolution in the coming years.
It will allow consumers to benefit from higher data rates at lower costs, and
network operators and equipment manufacturers to better leverage their
investment in mm-wave technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this work is
on hybrid analog/digital transceiver structures that combine analogue beam
forming based on second-order channel statistics (CSI) with digital beam forming
based on instantaneous CSI, a structure that has both practical and fundamental
advantages. The key point of the project is to tackle research questions that,
while inspired by practical requirements, are novel and deep challenges in
communication theory and signal processing. This project considers setups
involving hybrid transceivers at both the base station and the user equipment,
thus requiring optimization over matrices that change on different timescales,
with different dimensions, and are linked over channels that do not follow the
convenient, but unrealistic, simplifications commonly used. Another important
practically motivated challenge is the impact of the properties of the
propagation channel, which will be investigated through novel measurement and
parameter extraction methods.