* 1618823
* RI: Small: Lensless Cameras --- Enabling Novel Imaging Capabilities with Programmable Masks and Computational Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Aswin Sankaranarayanan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 358,000.00

This project develops fundamentally new types of cameras that are extremely thin
and flexible. Today, the primary technology for imaging and photography is by
using a lens to focus light onto a planar sensor. However, this design requires
a certain minimum distance - often, several millimeters - to focus the light
from the scene to produce a high-resolution image. In addition, lenses are
fundamentally incompatible for imaging on non-planar surfaces. By removing
lenses from the imaging system, this project designs cameras that have
thicknesses in the order of 100s of micrometers. This enables novel applications
in mobile photography, endoscopy, microscopy, and the internet-of-things where
there are stringent requirements on the thickness of the camera. Further, by
exploiting advances in flexible electronics, the project is building novel
camera designs for imaging on flexible and curved surfaces. The research in
lens-less imaging is also incorporated into outreach activities in middle and
high schools in the Greater Pittsburgh area, where workshops on camera building
introduce students to basics concepts in optics and engineering while inspiring
them to pursue a STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
designs for imaging at thin form factors and on curved and flexible surfaces.
This is achieved by placing a carefully-designed mask in close proximity to the
sensor. By analyzing the fundamental capabilities and limitations of mask-based
imaging, highly optimized masks and associated reconstruction algorithms are
designed to resolve scenes at high resolutions. Specifically, masks are
optimized to deliver high light-throughput while providing invertible scene-to-
sensor transfer functions. Programmable mask designs are also explored for
enabling a richer space of transfer functions that are capable of acquiring not
just images and videos, but also light fields. The research makes it possible to
characterize the fundamental limits of thin form-factor imaging and the
associated imaging architectures that achieve them.