* 1618520
* NeTS: Small: Infrastructure-free Robust Relative Localization of Vehicles on the Road
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2021
* USD 515,998.00

The automotive industry is undergoing a giant transformation as vehicles are
gearing up to take control of driving away from humans. This will lead to
reduced chance of accidents, stress-free driving, increased passenger comfort,
increased fuel-efficiency and reduced travel time. One of the most critical
pieces of information for enabling this vision of autonomous vehicles is
accurate determination of locations of nearby vehicles. The overarching goal of
this project is to develop robust approaches that are practically implementable
for fine-grained relative localization of nearby vehicles with no support from
the infrastructure. In particular, on-board sensing capabilities and RF (radio-
frequency) communication between vehicles will be leveraged. The key
distinguishing features of the project are as follows: 1) a comprehensive
approach to the problem of fine-grained vehicular localization while considering
legacy vehicles which is the most critical hurdle in rolling out autonomous
vehicles; 2) innovative physical layer techniques to achieve high accuracy
relative localization; and, 3) techniques to use noisy data collected by various
sensors and still robustly derive the locations of the vehicles. The project is
potentially transformative as it addresses the key question of accurate relative
localization of vehicles while considering practical challenges, which is
crucial for the autonomous driving technology. The broader impacts include
enhancing undergraduate and graduate curriculum. In addition, existing
collaboration with the automotive industry will be effectively leveraged for
obtaining guidance on the objectives and understanding the feasibility of our
solutions throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific inter-
related research thrusts are as follows. 1) Frequency-Pair based Analysis for
Single Antenna Vehicles: The key innovation is an approach that can robustly
tackle the distance estimation error and the vagaries of a real driving
environment using analysis of frequency-pairs. 2) Exploiting Spatial Diversity
in Multi-Antenna Vehicles: The key innovation of this thrust is that it uses the
spatial diversity offered by multiple antennas to increase robustness. 3)
Collaborative Vehicle-Map Construction in Presence of Legacy Vehicles: The key
innovation is to robustly fuse noisy information obtained through cameras
mounted on the participating vehicles.