* 1618677
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Sparse and Low Rank Methods for Imbalanced and Heterogeneous Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Vishal Patel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2019
* USD 249,152.00

In recent years, sparse and low-rank modeling techniques have emerged as
powerful tools for efficiently processing visual data in non-traditional ways. A
particular area of promise for these theories is visual recognition, where
object detection and image classification approaches need to be able to deal
with the highly diverse appearance of real-world objects. However, existing
visual recognition methods generally succeed only in the presence of sufficient
amounts of homogeneous and balanced training data that are well matched to the
actual test conditions. In practice, when the data are heterogeneous and
imbalanced, the performance of existing methods can be much worse than
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a comprehensive
framework for real-world visual recognition based on novel sparse and low-rank
modeling techniques, which will be able to deal with imbalanced, heterogeneous
and multi-modal data. Imbalanced data will be handled using convex optimization
techniques that automatically divide a dataset into common and rare patterns,
and select a small set of representatives for the common patterns that are then
combined with the rare patterns to form a balanced dataset. Heterogeneous and
multi-modal data will be handled using non-convex optimization techniques that
learn a latent representation from multiple domains or modalities.
Classification and clustering algorithms can be applied to the latent
representation. Applications of these methods include image and video-based
object recognition, activity recognition, video summarization, and surveillance.