* 1618953
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Developing Golden Speakers for Second-Language Pronunciation   Training.
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* John Levis, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

People who learn a second language (L2) as adults often speak with a persistent
foreign accent. This can make them less intelligible, more subject to
discrimination, and less confident when interacting with others. Surprisingly,
though, L2 learners rarely receive formal training in pronunciation, in part
because effective training must be customized to meet each learner's individual
needs. To address this gap, the investigators propose to develop algorithms to
synthesize a personalized "golden speaker" for each learner: his or her own
voice but with a native accent. The rationale is that, by listening to their own
golden speaker, learners can more easily perceive differences between their
actual and ideal pronunciations. This work focuses on developing the technology
for golden speakers, which the investigators plan to evaluate in the future as a
new tool for pronunciation learning systems. As such, this research can benefit
a large number of workers in the US who are non-native speakers of English,
particularly in higher education, health care and the technology sector. The
project also provides opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
conduct research in a multi-disciplinary team with expertise in signal
processing, machine learning, and language acquisition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types of golden-speaker model are proposed. The first
type is based on a reformulation of parametric statistical models for voice
conversion, where instead of force-aligning source (native) and target (non-
native) frames, they are matched based on their phonetic similarity. Several
similarity metrics are proposed, from vocal-tract-length normalization to deep
auto-encoders. The second type is based on a sparse representation of speech,
which models individual frames as linear combinations of phonetic anchors. This
requires new techniques to transform the constellation of anchors in the L2
speech to match the structure of native anchors (e.g., pairwise distances). Two
types of evaluation are proposed for the golden-speaker models: their ability to
interpolate phones not included in the learner's inventory, and the accent,
intelligibility and comprehensibility of the resulting speech, as rated by
native English listeners. For this purpose, the investigators propose to collect
a large speech corpus from multiple Spanish and Korean learners of English and
Indian speakers of English, each at different levels of English proficiency.