* 1618126
* III: Small: Enhancing Ontology Matching with Visual Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Abolfazl Asudeh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 516,000.00

An ontology is a representation of a domain, be it biomedical, business,
environmental, or others. In a world where data are predominantly heterogeneous,
ontology matching establishes correspondences between the concepts of two
ontologies, thus effectively bridging across two distinct domains or two
different representations of the same domain. Ontology matching is therefore a
fundamental tool for data integration, that is, for the creation of a
homogeneous gateway to disparate data. Ontology matching systems are made up of
several matching algorithms, called matchers. Different matching tasks require
different matchers, thus there are various configuration and parameter choices
to be made, resulting in a multi-dimensional problem where parameter tuning
requires considerable effort and expertise. However, most ontology matching
systems operate as a black box offering no insight as to how the output -- a set
of mappings among ontology concepts (called alignment) -- is generated. These
systems do not usually offer the opportunity to the domain experts to validate
automatically generated mappings, in order to gain control over the matching
process. In this project, visual analytics -- a combination of visualization and
analytics to facilitate ontology matching -- is used to aid in the process of
ontology matching. Users interact with a visual representation of the matching
process and validate mappings that are ranked by underlying analytical methods.
This project explores novel visual analytics methods and studies their potential
benefits. The research team is collaborating with partners in the biological
domain in order to ensure the practical relevance of the research. From an
educational viewpoint, the PI is spearheading a new Data Science curriculum in
Computer Science, which can incorporate the main aspects of the proposed
research and will train a graduate student and postdoc in this multidisciplinary
field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Driven by data integration needs in a wide range of
domains, the field of ontology matching has been prospering. However, the use of
visual analytics remains largely unexplored. The proposed research will combine
the power of visual analytics with ontology matching to: (1) open up the
ontology matching process so as to facilitate its configuration by domain
experts; (2) reduce the number of mappings to be validated by the experts so as
to achieve high quality results with minimum effort; and (3) investigate a
methodology to evaluate the benefits of combining ontology matching with visual
analytics. For the visualization design, a principled approach will be followed
that provides prescriptive guidance for determining appropriate evaluation
approaches, while for the manipulation of visualized data a taxonomy of
interactive operations will be used. Further, the design and analysis of the
workflow that describes the interactive nature of the overall process will
facilitate the study of the complex interdependencies between the data
manipulation and the visualization components. The project web site
(https://www.cs.uic.edu/Cruz/OntologyMatchingVisualAnalytics) will provide
access to research results and software will be disseminated via GitHub.