* 1618629
* TWC: Small: Intelligent Malware Detection Utilizing Novel File Relation-Based Features and Resilient Techniques for Adversarial Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Yanfang Ye, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 11/30/2019
* USD 481,693.00

Malware (e.g., viruses, worms, and Trojans) is software that deliberately
fulfills the harmful intent of an attacker. It has been used as a major weapon
by the cyber-criminals to launch a wide range of attacks that cause serious
damages and significant financial losses to many Internet users. To protect
legitimate users from these attacks, the most significant line of defense
against malware is anti-malware software products, which predominately use
signature-based methods to recognize threats. However, driven by considerable
economic benefits, malware attackers are using automated malware development
toolkits to quickly write and modify malicious codes that can evade detection by
anti-malware products. In order to remain effective, the anti-malware industry
calls for much more powerful methods that are capable of protecting the users
against new threats and are more difficult to evade. The broader impacts of this
work include benefits to the society at large by making cyberspace more secure
and resilient to cyber-attacks. The project integrates research with education
through curriculum development activities and engages graduate and undergraduate
students in research. It is also expected to increase the involvement of
underrepresented groups, including minority and women.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to design and develop intelligent and resilient
solutions against malware attacks. The project is focused on the following
research aims: (1) design novel relation-based features (e.g., file co-
occurrence, file co-location, and bundled installations) that are more robust
and harder to evade in malware detection; (2) design and develop an effective
semi-supervised learning framework utilizing both content-based and relation-
based features for malware detection; and (3) design and develop resilient
techniques against adversarial attacks on machine learning/data mining based
models. The techniques developed by this project will create a resilient
platform, at both feature and model levels, against adversarial malware attacks.
Furthermore, the proposed techniques are designed to be arm race capable, and
can be used in other cyber security domains, such as anti-spam, fraud detection,
and counter-terrorism. Through this project, a joint computer security lab will
be established which aims at creating innovations for intelligent and resilient
defenses against malware attacks as well as other cybersecurity threats.