* 1618768
* TWC SBE: Small: Towards an Economic Foundation of Privacy-Preserving Data Analytics: Incentive Mechanisms and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,999.00

The commoditization of private data has been trending up, as big data analytics
is playing a more critical role in advertising, scientific research, etc. It is
becoming increasingly difficult to know how data may be used, or to retain
control over data about oneself. One common practice of collecting private data
is based on "informed consent", where data subjects (individuals) decide whether
to report data or not, based upon who is collecting the data, what data is
collected, and how the data will be used. This model is becoming untenable, with
vague privacy policies and a behind-the-scenes data brokerage market becoming
the norm. In practice, there are two fundamental issues that need to be
addressed: (i) data subjects have no control of data privacy after transferring
private data to the data collector; and (ii) the data collector has sole ability
to protect users' private data. This project takes a new, market-based approach:
data subjects control their own data privacy by reporting noisy data, and data
collectors provide incentives in exchange for receiving more accurate data. This
research will enable a paradigm shift from the traditional practice of informed
consent for private data collection to a market-based approach where data
collectors have only the fidelity of data needed, reducing the potential damage
from data breach and giving data subjects greater control over use of their
private data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the problem under
consideration is studied in a game-theoretic setting, for general private data
models and for a variety of privacy notions, with focus on quantifying two
fundamental tradeoffs: the tradeoff between cost and accuracy from the data
collector's perspective, and the tradeoff between reward and privacy from a data
subject's perspective. The research tasks include (i) devising effective
incentive mechanisms for data collectors to collect quality data (controlled by
individuals) with minimum cost; and (ii) developing private-preserving reporting
algorithms that maximize data subjects' payoffs by taking both payment and
privacy loss into account. New theories and mechanisms developed in this project
will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information about this project can be found
at the project homepage http://inlab.lab.asu.edu/data-privacy/