* 1618310
* SHF: SMALL: Collaborative Research: Cloud Mentoring: Guiding Cloud Users for Cost Performance through Testing and Recommendation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 206,357.00

Cloud computing is growing rapidly, with businesses, institutions and
individuals moving their workloads to clouds. Cloud users benefit from low cost
ownership, a pay-as-you-go pricing model where they only pay for the procured
resource usage, and the ability to dynamically scale the resource usage up and
down. However, the applications running in clouds usually experience
unpredictable performance, which makes it extremely challenging for the users to
choose resource configurations that meet their cost and performance
requirements. This problem is further complicated as users do not have physical
control over cloud computers and are forced to make their decisions based on
convoluted cloud performance reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the need to support users in achieving their cost-performance
requirements as they port their applications to various cloud services. In
particular, the research is embodied in an envisioned testing and recommendation
system that determines proper resource management policies that meet performance
and cost requirements. By taking a software-testing-based approach, the research
provides solutions using only user-accessible information to satisfy user
requirements, addresses the limits of static analysis techniques that rely on
performance predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a testing and
recommendation system enables non-experts to port their applications to various
clouds in a cost effective way. The novel framework, testing and recommendation
approaches, data sets, and experimental infrastructure developed within the
project will be released open source to advance knowledge and understanding
within software engineering and cloud computing. The PIs will continue to
involve students of underrepresented groups and continue their involvement in
mentoring workshops for students.