* 1618931
* CSR: Small: A Unified Approach Toward User-specific Improvements of Quality of Experience for Video Streaming
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Yao Liu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 504,373.00

The number of users streaming mobile video over the Internet has increased at an
unprecedented rate throughout the past decade. Because video streaming is a
mainstay of mobile computing, it is important that the best possible experience
is delivered to users. Many mathematical algorithms have been proposed to
improve quality in video-streaming-related domains. Typically, the parameters of
these algorithms are established based on machine-centric indicators of video
quality. Although researchers have attempted to connect these indicators with
true user-perceived quality, in practice, there is often a disconnect. This
project aims to improve directly-measurable indicators of user satisfaction in
mobile video streaming by taking into account both individual user preferences
as well as a user's tolerance for less than perfect quality in a specific video.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will improve user-specific
indicators by connecting problems in video streaming with problems in multi-task
learning and collaborative filtering. These machine learning strategies are
especially effective for prediction when large amounts of data are available.
This effectiveness on large-scale learning fits well into this project's
proposed context of improving user-facing indications of satisfaction. These
indications include video abandonment, video session times, and collected
navigation commands. Unlike user-surveys, these metrics can be collected at
large scales through automated tooling in the video player. This research will
investigate strategies that combine these large scale measurements with
predictions from machine learning approaches toward selecting algorithm
parameters that produce the most improvement in user-facing quality. This
project will explore such parameter selection strategies in the context of
improving user-perceived dynamic adaptive streaming quality. It will also
explore such strategies to maintain a fixed level of user-facing quality while
reducing mobile display power consumption via backlight scaling. Demonstrations
of the approaches produced by this project will be featured in courses at the
PI's institution and will be used to draw undergraduate interest toward computer
science research.