* 1618347
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Techniques for Inferring Transmission Networks from Noisy Sequencing Data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Ion Mandoiu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 199,999.00

Many viruses encode their genome in RNA and exhibit high genomic diversity
within their hosts. Advances in sequencing technologies have made it feasible to
track viral transmissions and timely detect outbreaks on a global scale. The
goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive set of predictive
mathematical models and accurate computational methods for integrated analysis
of the massive epidemiological and sequencing datasets generated by emerging
molecular surveillance programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research results will be
broadly disseminated via journal publications and presentations at international
conferences, including the Workshop on Computational Advances in Molecular
Epidemiology organized by the PIs. Prototype implementations of developed
algorithms will be distributed as open-source packages and incorporated in the
cloud-based Global Hepatitis Outbreak and Surveillance Toolkit (GHOST) developed
at CDC. The project will provide ample opportunities for promoting participation
of women and underrepresented groups in bioinformatics and molecular
epidemiology research at GSU, UCONN, Georgia Tech and Tel Aviv University. An
important aspect of the project is to disseminate core concepts and ideas from
Computer Science and Computational Biology to wide target audiences including:
(1) teaching Computer Science, in an informal setting, to middle and high school
students, and (2) incorporating computational thinking into Life Science
curriculum at the undergraduate university level.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research and education activities will leverage the extensive expertise
of an interdisciplinary team comprised of computer scientists, mathematicians,
and molecular epidemiologists to develop accurate mathematical models and
computational methods for key problems in molecular epidemiology including
deconvolution and inference of viral variants from error-prone pooled sequencing
data, inference of relatedness between viral samples and transmission networks,
inference of transmission event times and network parameters, as well as
predictive modeling of transmission network dynamics. The team will carry out
extensive algorithm validation on massive molecular surveillance datasets
generated at CDC and develop robust prototype software implementations.