* 1618450
* NeTS: Small: Spectrum Sharing Systems for Wireless Networks: Performance and privacy challenges
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Konstantinos Psounis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,617.00

The rapid increase in the quantity and capability of consumer mobile wireless
devices has accelerated the growth in demand for radio frequency spectrum. In
recent years, to address congestion in allocated spectrum bands and allow for
continued growth opportunities, national and international regulators have taken
steps to identify new spectrum for use by mobile wireless services such as
cellular and Wi-Fi. Unfortunately, myriad other systems and services already
make use of spectrum in the frequency ranges that could be useful for mobile
wireless. With limited opportunities to open up new unencumbered bands for
spectrum hungry mobile wireless services, regulators are turning to spectrum
sharing among increasingly broad system types as their only recourse. In two
recent examples, the US Federal Communications Commission auctioned for cellular
services two bands used by meteorological satellite services and US Navy radars,
raising concerns about the interference to the incumbent services as well as the
ability of incumbent services to maintain the privacy of their operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a general framework for architecting
spectrum sharing systems and examining design trades rigorously. The design
goals of a spectrum sharing system will fall into three categories, namely,
performance, privacy and complexity. The project will conduct formal
optimization analysis to study the allocation of resources (time, frequency and
power) among the various networks in terms of the resulting utility of the
spectrum for those networks to maximize performance subject to interference
constraints. Since the operational information about wireless systems needed to
effect spectrum sharing, such as locations, frequencies, time of use, and
susceptibility to interference, may be considered sensitive, this project will
answer whether, under what conditions, and how a spectrum sharing system can be
designed to protect a critical level of privacy for the systems it enables. To
do so, the project will consider the scope of operational scenarios, adversary
exploitation techniques, and obfuscation strategies to protect privacy,
developing relevant metrics for the analysis.