* 1618693
* SHF: Small: Asked and Answered: Intelligent Data Science for Software Projects
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 515,902.00

Software and systems engineering projects accrue large amounts of development
data including requirements, design, code, test cases, and fault logs. When
combined with the power of software analytics this data could be used to provide
actionable intelligence to project stakeholders. For example, a developer might
ask to view all "safety-related code which is likely to exhibit runtime faults."
The proposed work will deliver a solution named Asked and Answered for Software
Intensive Projects (AA) and will support a broad range of analytic queries. To
foster the transition of AA to practice, the researchers will partner with
industry collaborators throughout the project and develop an open-source
framework facilitating the deployment of AA technology into an industrial
environment. A series of natural language Query Challenges will be designed and
disseminated and used to train Software Engineering students in a broad spectrum
of software analytics. Delivering the AA solution requires several non-trivial
challenges to be addressed. First, a natural language (NL) query interface will
be developed allowing stakeholders to issue queries in their own words and from
their own perspective on the project. These queries will then be transformed
into a structured, executable format. Heuristics and statistical inferencing
techniques will be adopted and interactive mechanisms will be designed to seek
clarification from the user when the query cannot be disambiguated
automatically. Software analytics will be integrated into the query mechanism so
that AA can respond to a wide range of analytical questions. AA will support the
dynamic composition of primitive functions into execution flows in order to
service a wide range of analytical queries. Finally, AA will deliver a query
engine capable of generating optimized query execution plans which take into
account the nuances of the domain - namely its heterogeneous data formats,
distributed tools, and the dynamic runtime requirements of analytic functions.