* 1618999
* CIF: Small: Dynamic Networks: Learning, Inference, and Prediction with Nonparametric Bayesian Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 465,439.00

Complex networks are all around us. They can be physical, biological, social,
and virtual. All the species in the world live in societies that can be
represented as networks. Almost all complex systems, natural or man-made, are
networks of interconnected components. The principal ingredients of all networks
are their nodes and the links among the nodes. Most networks change with time.
New nodes can be created and old ones can be eliminated. Similarly, new links
can be established and existing ones removed. The nodes can form communities
which they may leave later in time. The nodes may join another community or
create a new one. Communities can emerge and disappear. All these phenomena can
create very rich network dynamics. Understanding the common principles of these
dynamics, the time-varying network structures and the functionalities that
regulate network behaviors is of foremost importance in many fields of science
and engineering. The theory that addresses these phenomena is a part of Network
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main objectives of Network Science is
to exploit statistical signal processing for inferential modeling of physical,
biological, and social phenomena. The aspirations are to improve the
understanding and prediction of these phenomena. In this project the
investigator proposes to advance Network Science by introducing novel models for
dynamic networks and novel ways for making inference and learning about them.
The PI proposes to work with a methodology where the complexity of the network
model is not predefined a priori but instead, it is determined by the observed
data. Furthermore, the investigator proposes to work with Monte Carlo-based
methods that can meet the most difficult challenges of the models in terms of
their nonlinearities and dimensionalities.