* 1618603
* CCF-BSF: CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coding and Information - Theoretic Aspects of Local Data Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,823.00

This project studies fundamental problems in data coding that can improve the
efficiency of distributed storage systems by increasing data reliability and
availability while reducing storage overhead compared to existing industry
standards. The results of this research can benefit storage applications ranging
from financial, scientific monitoring, and signal processing to social networks
and sharing platforms. The new combinatorial, coding, and information theoretic
tools developed in this project will be incorporated in course curricula in the
respective institutions of the principal
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data coding with locality, the focus of this
project, is a rapidly developing area of coding theory that was initially
motivated by applications in distributed storage, and has links to many areas of
network science (e.g., index coding and network coding) as well as to computer
science. This project advances the theory and practice of data coding with local
recovery by investigating broad implications of the locality constraint in
coding problems. These include studying new error-correcting code families and
their decoding, fundamental limitations on the code parameters and capacity
bounds under the requirements of local data recovery. The newly designed coding
schemes developed in this project will be validated through implementation and
evaluation in simulated computer environment, aiming at enhanced performance of
data coding in current industry solutions.