* 1618118
* SHF: Small: End-To-End Test Data Analytics For Automotive Chip Production Lines
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Li-Chung Wang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Using automotive industry as the research driver, this project aims to develop
novel data mining solutions to address the challenge of reliable low-power, high
quality chip production by improving the effectiveness and reducing the cost of
testing them. While research in the data mining community focuses more on
developing generic approaches, this project focuses on developing dedicated
approaches, optimized for mining test measurement data. The techniques developed
in this project can complement and bring synergies to existing data mining
research. The technologies developed through this project will be transferred to
the industry, providing solutions to overcome the challenges in the automotive
chip sector. Furthermore, the research will be integrated with educational
activities to produce publications, curriculum materials, tutorials, and
software tools for broader impacts to the semiconductor industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In production, automotive chip products go through a
rather comprehensive test process to assure their quality. End-to-end test data
refers to all data collected in this process which comprises multiple stages,
starting from product manufacturing all the way to evaluation in an electronic
system. Analytics refers to the discovery, interpretation, and utilization of
knowledge extracted from the data. This research aims to enable effective and
robust analytics in order to improve product quality and reduce production test
cost. For effectiveness, novel software tools and methodologies will be designed
to automatically incorporate domain knowledge in the analytics. For robustness,
new approaches will be developed to determine the meaningfulness of data mining
results. From a practical perspective, solutions developed through the research
will benefit the semiconductor industry by facilitating the effective use of
large-scale data mining for test process optimization. From a scientific
perspective, this research will provide a deeper understanding of the
limitations with test data analytics and enable its robust implementation.
Overall, this project aims to develop the next-generation test data analytics
software, thereby enabling application of the research to diverse scenarios
encountered in semiconductor chip production test environments.