* 1618358
* NeTS: Small: Theory and Applications of Sparse Approximations of the Channel State Information in Wi-Fi Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Zhenghao Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 360,751.00

In this project, theory and applications of efficient approximations of the
Channel State Information (CSI) in Wi-Fi networks, which describes the key
characteristics of the wireless links, will be developed. The approximation will
exploit the underlying structure of the CSI and will require very few
parameters, resulting in highly effective CSI compression and measurement
methods, as well as new data transmission techniques, which will significantly
improve the efficiency of Wi-Fi networks and enable more applications and more
opportunities in education, public health, and business that increasingly depend
on the high speed and reliability of wireless networks. Fundamental issues that
will be addressed include: finding the theoretical explanation of the
approximation, designing fast CSI compression algorithms, designing more
efficient CSI measurement and prediction methods, and designing novel data
transmission techniques. The knowledge gained in this project will advance the
research field by revealing important features of a large class of wireless
channels that were previously unnoticed, and developing optimized methods for
such channels. Results obtained in this project will be used in classes related
to networking. Both graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
project, and students from underrepresented and minority groups will be actively
reached out to and recruited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by
an interesting experimental discovery, which shows that the CSI vectors in Wi-Fi
networks can be approximated very well in many case as the linear combination of
very few, such as 3, sinusoids, even when the number non-negligible paths are
much larger. Referring to channels with such SParse Sinusoid (SPS) approximation
as SPS channels, the goals of this project include: 1) understanding the
theoretical foundation regarding to the existence of the SPS approximation for
MIMO channels by studying the mathematical properties of channel and designing
fast CSI compression algorithms, 2) designing efficient CSI measurement and
prediction methods by exploiting underlying structure of the SPS approximation,
and 3) designing new data modulation techniques for SPS channels by exploiting
the simplified representation of the channel. The proposed algorithms and
techniques will be implemented in experimental platforms and tested in real-
world wireless channels. By removing the bottleneck caused by the high overhead
in CSI feedback and measurement, the outcomes of this research will be timely
solutions for Wi-Fi networks for better supporting MU-MIMO or massive MIMO. The
new data modulation techniques for SPS channels will likely improve the link
speed while reducing the complexity.