* 1618836
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Millimeter Wave Communications for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Ahmed Ibrahim, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2023
* USD 179,779.00

With the proliferation of bandwidth hungry mobile devices, dense deployments of
users, and the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, broadband
spectrum needs have been continuously increasing in recent years. The use of the
millimeter wave (mmWave) frequency bands is seen as a major way to address this
spectrum crunch problem since large amounts of licensed and unlicensed
bandwidths are available at these frequencies, leading to new standards being
developed for 5G cellular and Wi-Fi using mmWave. In parallel, there have been
unprecedented recent advances in commercial unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
technologies, which has resulted in their adoption in a wide range of
applications, such as disaster relief, agricultural monitoring, wireless
connectivity in rural areas, and hotspot connectivity for major sporting events.
The proposed research in this project aims to study the foundations of mmWave
communications in UAVs in a systematic manner using notions from wireless
networks, communication theory, optimization theory, and software defined radios
(SDRs), starting from channel sounding and characterization. The data collected
from this project will be made public and disseminated via the 5G Millimeter
Wave Channel Modeling Alliance. The project will train both graduate students
and undergraduate students across multiple institutions in an emerging area of
national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in any mmWave
communication is that beamforming needs to be used in order to overcome the path
loss. The use of mmWave on UAVs poses additional challenges and benefits. The
challenges are primarily due to limited battery life and weight carrying
capability of UAVs and the benefits accrue from the use of: 1) large bandwidth;
2) ability to implement 3D beamforming enabling improved spatial reuse; and 3)
harnessing the UAV mobility to perform dynamic UAV clustering and interference
management. The goal of this project is to address these fundamental challenges
via a unique research collaboration focused on developing the next-generation of
analytical and experimental tools for designing, modeling, optimizing, and
testing mmWave UAV networks. Specific areas of study will include: (i) novel
precoder designs for mmWave UAVs taking into account realistic propagation
characteristics derived from channel sounding experiments; (ii) equalizer design
for mmWave UAVs that trade-off beamwidth against equalizer structure; (iii)
multiple access design for mmWave UAVs: code division and time division multiple
access techniques will be revisited for mmWave UAV communications, for serving
users that are accessed by the same transmitter beam; and (iv) optimal UAV
placement for multi-hop wireless backhaul by investigating the use of UAVs as
flying relays.