* 1619271
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: On-Line Learning Algorithms for Path Experts with Non-Additive Losses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Manfred Warmuth, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

On-line learning algorithms are increasingly adopted as the key solution to
modern learning applications with very large data sets of several hundred
million or billion points. These algorithms process one sample at a time with an
update per iteration that is typically computationally cheap and easy to
implement. Additionally, these algorithms benefit from a rich theoretical
foundation. The objective of this research is to advance on-line learning by
broadening its applicability to a variety of applications including machine
translation, speech recognition, other natural language processing applications,
handwriting recognition, computer vision, bioinformatics, and many other areas
which can benefit the society. Expert skills and student talent will be combined
to create effective theoretical and algorithmic solutions and open-source
software tools tested experimentally that can benefit a wide community.

Most learning problems admit some structure. In such problems, experts can be
viewed as paths in a directed graph with each edge corresponding to a sub-
structure corresponding to a word, phoneme, character, or image patch. Current
on-line algorithms with path experts are limited to additive losses and
therefore are not applicable in many important applications where the loss is
non-additive. We will create the theoretical foundation for designing efficient
on-line algorithms for learning with path experts with non-additive losses. Such
non-additive losses are the relevant loss functions in most important
applications such as machine translation, speech recognition, pronunciation
modeling, parsing, image processing and other areas. Carefully designed weighted
automata and semiring tools will be used to devise on-line algorithms for path
experts with non-additive losses. The theoretical analysis of the algorithms
will be complemented by a thorough experimental evaluation in a variety of
applications.