* 1619697
* RAPID: How does nutrient availability alter coral bleaching, mortality, and recovery on Moorea coral reefs?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Sally Holbrook, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,988.00

Coral reefs have enormous social and ecological value but are killed by such
stresses as water pollution and unusually warm water, which can cause corals to
bleach and die. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has
predicted that the current warm-water El Ni√±o event is especially strong and
will likely bleach corals across the central and eastern Pacific during 2015-16.
Bleaching is most likely to occur in the central South Pacific, the location of
the NSF-funded Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research (MCR LTER) site,
starting in February 2016. The proposed research will support field experiments
and collection of key data at the MCR LTER site to address how the coming warm-
water event interacts with nutrient pollution to influence the prevalence and
intensity of coral bleaching. The investigation will focus on two aspects: (1)
island-wide patterns in bleaching and coral loss with respect to nutrient
availability across the landscape, and (2) how different forms and sources of
nitrogen-based nutrients can either facilitate or mitigate bleaching. The
project will assess the interaction of two major global change drivers on coral
reefs, elevated sea surface temperature and nutrient pollution. Results from
this work can inform resource managers and policy makers regarding the effects
of nitrogen enrichment in two different forms (nitrate vs. ammonium) from two
different sources (human- vs. fish-derived) on altering the probability
different types of corals will bleach during major warm-water events. Human
activities can enhance nitrate pollution directly, and lower ammonium enrichment
indirectly (via fishing or destruction of nursery habitat), both of which might
adversely affect corals by increasing the probability they will bleach. As such,
the project can provide much-needed information about how human
&lt;br/&gt;activities can impact coral reefs. The project will contribute to the
training of two graduate students who will participate in the field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient enrichment is a major anthropogenic
force altering coastal ecosystems worldwide, particularly in oligotrophic
systems such as coral reefs. Based on differences in how ammonium versus nitrate
enrichment affect the physiology of corals, some coral reef biologists have
speculated that under stress, nitrate enrichment from anthropogenic sources
should weaken the coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis, whereas recycled nitrogen
excreted by reef fishes could be beneficial. Thus, different forms of nitrogen
(nitrate vs. ammonium) and different sources of nutrients (fish-derived vs.
anthropogenic) can have fundamentally different effects on coral biology, which
may lead to contrasting effects on how they alter the susceptibility of coral to
bleaching from warm-water anomalies. Further, spatial heterogeneity in nutrient
availability could shape landscape scale patterns in the intensity of bleaching
and subsequent community consequences. This research will assess the interaction
of two major global change drivers on coral reefs, elevated sea surface
temperature and nutrient pollution. Two hypotheses will be tested: (1) that
nitrate enrichment from anthropogenic sources will increase the susceptibility
of corals to bleaching, and (2) that nitrogen in the form of ammonium will
reduce it. Given that much of the N enrichment on the reefs in the lagoons of
Moorea is of anthropogenic origin, the investigators further hypothesize that on
a landscape scale, corals in more nutrient enriched sites will incur greater
bleaching and bleaching-associated mortality compared to corals at nutrient poor
sites. These relationships will be explored for the three major genera in the
Moorea system (Pocillopora, Acropora, Porites), and then scaled up to explore
island-wide patterns of bleaching as a function of landscape scale heterogeneity
in nutrient availability. Crucial pre-bleaching data from field surveys and
WorldView-3 satellite imagery will be paired with subsequent post-bleaching data
to explore bleaching patterns in relation to gradients in nutrient availability
on the reef complex. In addition, a field experiment will be initiated prior to
the warm-water anomaly to test the hypothesis that different forms of nitrogen
will have contrasting effects on the likelihood of bleaching.