* 1619062
* SHF: SMALL: Multiphysics Simulation Algorithms and Experimental Methods for the Development of Cu/Graphene/TMD Hybrid Interconnect Solution
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Zhihong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

As integrated circuits (ICs) have progressed to finer feature sizes and higher
levels of integration, interconnect has become a major challenge in IC
technology development. Various interconnect solutions developed to date have
not yet been able to replace Copper (Cu) interconnects due to their limitations
in performance and/or difficulties in fabrication. In this project, novel
Copper, Graphene, Transition Metal Dichalcogenide (TMD) hybrid interconnects
will be demonstrated and explored by both simulations and experiments, which can
compete with Cu nanowires with the same dimensions, and meanwhile have the
potential to become the ultimate interconnect solution. The students who
participate in this work will be trained with a broad range of skills to sustain
future nanotechnology advancement. Education and outreach activities such as
inclusive curriculum and culturally relevant teaching, Nano Days in the Birck
Nanotechnology Center at Purdue, are also being developed to actively engage
women and under-represented minorities into Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The entire physical process that takes place
in a Cu/Graphene/TMD interconnect is yet to be fully understood. The challenge
is to understand intricate interactions between multiphysics phenomena involving
circuits, electromagnetics, materials, electron transport, and thermal diffusion
in a broad band of frequencies. Experimentally, a rapid low-temperature process
is critical to preserve the structural integrity of the Cu nanowires during
deposition and will be studied. To conquer the aforementioned challenges,
multiphysics simulation algorithms and experimental methods will be pursued. On
the experimental side, a low temperature chemical vapor deposition recipe, along
with a plasma enhanced process, will be developed. Electrical and thermal
transport measurements will be performed and correlated with simulations.