* 1619926
* Topics in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Per Kraus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 720,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Eric D'Hoker, Michael
Gutperle, and Per Kraus at the University of California, Los Angeles.

String theory remains the most promising candidate for the unification of the
fundamental forces of nature within a framework consistent with quantum
mechanics, the physics of the microscopic world. Developments in string theory
over the past few decades have spawned progress in many other fields, and the
subject continues to attract and inspire some of the brightest graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers in theoretical physics, thereby serving the
national interest by promoting the progress of basic scientific research and
training the next generation of scientists. The proposed research aims to deepen
our understanding of string theory, both through sophisticated calculations at
the frontier of string theory and through the exploration of new theoretical
ideas associated with possible unexpected behaviors for our universe. This
project will also have significant broader impacts. The PI's actively mentor
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. This includes holding group
meetings and organizing conferences with other universities in Southern
California, the latter serving to introduce junior physicists at UCLA to the
broader community of researchers. The PI's are also involved in outreach to the
general public, including visiting local elementary, middle, and high schools,
and interacting with the students.

At a more technical level, Professor D'Hoker plans to advance the subject of
superstring perturbation theory, focusing on two-loop amplitudes. Applications
include deducing new terms in the low-energy effective action of supergravity,
and studying implications for the theory at high energy. Professor Gutperle will
investigate aspects of entanglement entropy, including the effects associated
with non-local operators and spatial defects, metric structures associated with
entanglement, and the concrete calculation of the modular Hamiltonian. Professor
Kraus proposes further investigations into higher-spin gravity and its relation
to the conformal-block structure of theories with non-linear symmetry algebras.
He also plans to continue his study of the structure of black hole microstates.