* 1619617
* Thematic Semester on Probabilistic Methods in Geometry, Topology, and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Brian Rider, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2019
* USD 44,000.00

The Centre de Recherches Mathematiques (CRM) will organize a Thematic Program on
Probabilistic Methods in Geometry, Topology, and Mathematical Physics, held in
Montreal, Canada, during the period of August to December, 2016. The Program,
which will be the principal activity of the CRM in this period, is comprised of
five intensive week-long workshops. In addition, there will be lecture series by
three leading mathematicians: Nalini Anantharaman (Univ. Strasbourg), Yuval
Peres (Microsoft Research), and Scott Sheffield (MIT). The workshops will be
preceded by preparatory lectures for advanced graduate students. Numerous long-
term visitors and postdoctoral researchers will be hosted at CRM throughout the
seminar; this award provides support for junior US researchers to participate in
the program.

Probabilistic methods have played an increasingly important role in many areas
of mathematics. The CRM Thematic Program will cover a broad range of such
topics, including: geometric analysis on manifolds of metrics and applications
to spectral theory and quantum chaos; geometry of random metrics and related
problems in quantum gravity; applications of probabilistic techniques in partial
differential equations; eigenstate localization in random domains; probabilistic
results in number theory; random simplicial complexes and geometry of spaces of
triangulations and connections to geometric group theory, manifold learning,
topological statistics, and geometric probability; probabilistic methods in
3-manifold theory; random growth problems and random matrices, and their
connections to stochastic partial differential equations (such as the Kardar-
Parisi-Zhang equation) and to integrable discrete models. The program is
naturally interdisciplinary, with an emphasis on interconnections and cross
fertilization of ideas between researchers working in probability, geometric
analysis, spectral theory, group theory, topology, geometry, and mathematical
physics. Young researchers will be provided with an excellent opportunity to
learn from and interact with experts in these fields.

http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/en/index.shtml