* 1619611
* The Dynamics of Thin Current Sheets and the Triggering of Fast Reconnection in Different Plasma Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Marco Velli, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 366,000.00

This research aims to understand the triggering mechanism for some of the most
energetic events and beautiful light shows in the visible universe. Space and
astrophysical plasmas - the ionized gases constituting the greatest part of the
visible (baryonic) Universe - are responsible for a variety of observed
energetic phenomena from pulsar gamma-ray flares, to solar flares, to
magnetospheric substorms leading to Aurora Borealis. All of these processes are
characterized by a preliminary phase of energy storage, where magnetic field
energy is built up due to rotational, gravitational, or convective motions of
the plasma, followed by the sudden triggering of rapid energy release. Magnetic
reconnection, the splicing and reforming of magnetic field lines is thought to
be at the heart of most observed explosive phenomena. The results of this
research will allow a better understanding of the transition from stability to
the sudden release of magnetic energy, with the ability to predict the critical
parameters necessary for the transition in different astrophysical, as well as
laboratory plasmas. This research project?s broader impact includes a more
advanced understanding of this decades-old plasma physics problem both in
laboratory and astrophysical contexts, with applications involving future
laboratory experiments and advanced numerical computations, as well as NASA
missions.

The classic picture of magnetic reconnection involves current sheets, assumed to
be planar-like and concentrated very narrowly in the third dimension. Recently,
the slow, stationary reconnection scenario was transformed by the discovery that
such configuration is unstable to tearing at large values of the Lundquist
number, S, leading to one promising picture (a.k.a. the plasmoid instability) of
fast reconnection. The plasmoid instability of the planar current sheet has a
paradoxical feature, in that the instability growth rate diverges with S. Growth
rates which become arbitrarily large at high S therefore beg the question of how
a system transitions from stability to instability. This difficulty with
diverging growth rates was resolved recently by Pucci and Velli, who showed that
a limiting current sheet inverse aspect ratio separates slow and fast
reconnecting modes, a property they called "Ideal Tearing", or IT. As a
consequence, fast reconnection sets in in relatively thick current sheets and
all plasmoid instability scalings (number of islands etc.) require correction.
Such a scenario is promising in that it not only can explain observed fast
reconnection rates, but might also account for the reconnection trigger
mechanism. The present research program builds on the IT reconnection framework
and generalizes it to different plasma configurations in different regimes by:
1) extending the linear scaling theory to more general equilibria and two
dimensions including flows and kinetic regimes; 2) simulating collapsing current
sheet in 3D resistive MHD to study nonlinear evolution in configurations with
and without initial flows. The results will impact the understanding of
catastrophic energy release in natural and laboratory plasmas.