* 1619452
* CIF:Small:Collaborative Research:Statistics of slow mixing Markov processes: theory and applications to community detection
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Aleksandar Kavcic, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 499,468.00

Historically, the field of statistics developed around multiple independent
observations of phenomena. Yet progress in modern applications from biology to
social networks increasingly requires deeper understanding of observations that
are dependent. Dependent observations introduce biases unseen in independent
sampling. If not interpreted properly, they often lead to misleading
conclusions. This research develops a statistical framework to interpret samples
generated by dependent observations. The problem is then turned around to
develop algorithms that detect meaningful dependencies in data. Such algorithms
are used, for example, to identify genes working together, or find the extent to
which social networks are polarized on certain issues. Not only is this research
translated to classes, demonstrations and outreach programs, but also the
location in Hawaii is leveraged to reach out to underrepresented communities in
science and engineering, in particular, women and the Pacific Islander
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stationary properties of Markov processes may
not be very well reflected by finite samples, no matter how large the sample
size. This bias is often formalized as mixing, and is unseen in independent
sampling. This research analyzes Markov samples even before the samples reflect
the asymptotic stationary properties, and develops a framework for inference,
analysis and simulation of slow mixing Markov processes. Then, algorithmic
primitives based on coupling from the past are developed for the widely studied
task of community detection in a graph, where vertices are partitioned into
clusters so that intra-cluster vertices are connected tighter than those in
disparate clusters. As several resampling procedures in machine learning such as
cross validation and bootstrap are premised on independent sampling and have no
good analogs in the Markov setting, this research develops new resampling
approaches for potentially slow mixing Markov processes.