* 1619644
* Collaborative Research: Specification and Estimation of Exponential Family Random Graph Models for Weighted Networks
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Bruce Desmarais, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 17,813.00

Understanding the effect of network synergies on dynamic relational processes
plays an important role in a number of real-world research settings. Examples
include understanding what forms of monetary and social policy reduce the
instance of international financial contagion, and the role of different
physiological conditions on the activity levels of different interconnected
regions in the human brain. Statistical insights into areas such as these
require analytical methods which deal with both the presence and absence of ties
as well as tie strengths between units in networks. This project focuses on the
development and implementation of statistical methods and software for the
analysis of weighted (i.e., tie strength) network data. The generalized
exponential random graph model (GERGM) is a powerful tool for formulating and
testing hypotheses about networks. The project will advance the current state of
development of the GERGM by (1) developing a better understanding of the space
of network probability distributions that can be formulated with the GERGM;
developing Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods for estimation, which will broaden
the class of GERGM specifications for which estimation is feasible; (3)
developing special-case GERGM constraints that facilitate the study of
correlation matrices as networks; and (4) developing asymptotic theory regarding
the properties of the GERGM family. As part of this research, two illustrative
applications of the GERGM will be developed. The first one involves the analysis
of global environmental public policy networks, which offers insight into the
network properties of global environmental faction and cooperation. The second
application involves the analysis of neural activity networks in humans, which
aims to understand complex dependencies connecting regions of the brain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the recent explosion in the application of
statistical network models in fields as diverse as sociology, genetics,
neuroscience, political science, physics, finance, linguistics, and ecology, it
is expected that the statistical methods developed in this project will be
relevant to a number of different fields. One of the leading fields, in terms of
the prominence of weighted network data, is neuroscience. One of the aims of
this project is to contribute to the multi-agency initiative on Brain Research
through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies. This project offers two
additional contributions that will facilitate the statistical study of weighted
networks. First, this project will contribute and disseminate free and open-
source statistical software that permits user-friendly applications. Second, the
material developed in this project will be incorporated into graduate-level
research methods coursework and workshops.