* 1619383
* III: Small: Three-Dimensional Visualization and Analysis of Complex Dynamic Physical Phenomena
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Eugene Zhang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 357,798.00

The proposed research will develop techniques for visualizing complex dynamic
phenomena in a 3-dimentional space that can be represented as asymmetric tensor
fields. Vector fields appear in many science and engineering applications.
Traditional vector field visualization research focuses on the trajectory of
flow particles, i.e., their movement. This research formulates a visualization
framework that provides additional information on fundamental flow particle
motions including volumetric expansion and contraction, rotation, and angular
deformation. These motions have physical significance for many phenomena, such
as compressibility of the fluids, flow separation, rate of fluid mixing,
circular currents (e.g., eddies, tornadoes, hurricanes, etc.) and energy
dissipation. Effective visualization and analysis of dynamic complex physical
will enable improved industrial processes, energy conservation, weather
modeling, prediction and warnings. Students involved in the research project
will gain knowledge in computer science, scientific visualization, differential
geometry, abstract algebra, and algebraic topology and their research experience
will include working with collaborators from other science and engineering
disciplines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop
foundations for analysis of 3D asymmetric tensor fields, and incorporate it into
a multi-field framework for vector field visualization. This project will lead
to understanding the topological and geometric structures of 3D asymmetric
tensor fields by leveraging knowledge from vector field analysis and symmetric
tensor field analysis as well as applying and enhancing results from tensor
calculus, different geometry, algebraic topology, and dynamical systems. To
extract topological features reliably from asymmetric tensor fields,
mathematical formulations of these features will form the basis for curve and
surface extraction techniques. Research on effective 3D asymmetric tensor field
visualization techniques will explore and enhance 3D symmetric tensor field
visualization techniques as well as 2D asymmetric tensor field visualization
methods. Novel visualization techniques will be developed for multi-field
visualization for both a vector field and its gradient tensor field by extending
multi-field visualization techniques from scalar and vector fields. Research
results will be tested on data from a range of applications, including fluid and
solid mechanics, long-term climatology, and seismology. The expected results in
asymmetric tensor field analysis will enhance the fields of tensor calculus,
differential geometry, algebraic topology, and dynamical systems and may
scientific and engineering disciplines. Project results, including theoretical
analyses, numerical algorithms, visualization techniques, data sets and software
will accessible via the project web site (http://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~zhang
e/publications_NSF_asymmetric_tensor.html).