* 1619216
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Analytics on Edge-labeled Hypergraphs: Limits to De-anonymization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Negar Kiyavash, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Data analytics is a rapidly growing field, aided by the availability of huge
amounts of data and significant computing power. The immense potential of data
analytics to provide benefits to the society in application areas such as
health, economics, and finance, is reliant on the fundamental and urgent
challenge of protecting privacy of users. In this project, new theoretical
paradigms and approaches to address privacy vulnerability of users in network
environments in presence of big data are studied. The vulnerability results from
the indigenous structural dependencies in the network as well as the presence of
exogenous auxiliary information outside of the network that permits
deanonymization of the users. This project has transformative potential to
impact a broad class of applications where user privacy is critical. The
project?s inherently inter-disciplinary nature and real-world technological
potential complements the investigators? on-going efforts to engage more
students (especially women and minorities) to study topics at the intersection
of application and quantitative reasoning in the STEM disciplines.

The research is divided into three thrusts: (1) Development of information-
theoretic converses for deanonymization problem in random edge-labeled hyper-
graphs for adversaries with access to correlated information sources. Such
converses enable deriving necessary conditions under which the adversary cannot
deanonymize the system, no matter how much computational power or storage is
available. (2) Research practical achievable schemes: Besides tight (but not
necessarily efficient) achievable schemes required for calibrating the
converses, the design of practical deanonymization algorithms to quantify how
much attackers can learn when the released datasets do not meet the necessary
conditions of the converse, are explored. (3) Real-world evaluations: The
performance of the algorithms and their practical applicability are evaluated on
real world datasets.