* 1619067
* TTP: Small: Collaborative: Defending Against Website Fingerprinting in Tor
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Matthew Wright, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 05/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The more people use the Internet, the more they risk sharing information they
don't want other people to know. Tor is a technology that every day helps
millions of people protect their privacy online. Tor users -- ranging from
ordinary citizens to companies with valuable intellectual property -- gain
protection for the content of their online messages and activities, as well as
whom they interact with and when. For the most part, Tor is very secure.
However, it has a known vulnerability to an attack called website
fingerprinting. An attacker, such as someone eavesdropping on a wireless
connection, can analyze recognizable patterns in data that websites send to
visitors, potentially determining which websites a user visits. Studies have
shown that, in some situations, this attack can be successful up to 90% of the
time. Developers of Tor and a team of researchers will collaborate to build and
deploy new defenses against website fingerprinting, which substantially lower
attack accuracy without degrading user experience or increasing the costs of
running the system. By widely deploying such a defense, Tor's security is
greatly improved. This also provides an experimental platform and data that
other researchers can use for their own experiments, helping to further
strengthen Tor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous approaches to defending against
website fingerprinting increased latency, so that web pages load 2 to 4 times
slower than normal. To design an effective defense that doesn't unacceptably
slow browsing or increase bandwidth overhead, this project builds on a technique
called Adaptive Padding, which has shown promising results in preliminary work.
Adaptive Padding works by noticing distinctive gaps in data packets flowing over
the network between a website and Tor user and filling these gaps with extra
packets to obfuscate the website's fingerprint. The research team first
developed a platform for evaluating Adaptive Padding and other defenses in Tor,
allowing security experiments in the live Tor network without full deployment or
endangering user privacy. Leveraging this platform, the team performs extensive
experiments on website fingerprinting defenses and attacks, leading towards
deployment. The project focuses on defenses that can be practically deployed and
significantly improve user security. Since defenses meeting these requirements
have been understudied to date, this project enhances knowledge in this area.
Finally, the findings of the project are fully transitioned to Tor to make
Internet browsing safer and more secure.