* 1619550
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Aspects of Interior Problem of Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 11/08/2014,03/31/2017
* Hengyong Yu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 03/31/2017
* USD 20,263.00

One of the long-standing paradigms in computed tomography (CT) is that CT
detectors should be large enough to cover the entire cross-section of the
patient. The reason for this requirement is that, according to the classical
theory, image reconstruction from truncated CT data (the so-called "interior
problem") is non-unique. As a consequence, many aspects of truncated data
inversion have not been studied in literature. In this project the PIs will
theoretically analyze the problem of image reconstruction from truncated data
with minimal prior knowledge. Both transmission CT and emission tomography
(SPECT) with constant attenuation will be addressed. The PIs will study the
questions of stability of the reconstructions in 2D and 3D, characterize the
null-space of an integral transform arising in the interior problem, and analyze
eigenfunctions of certain singular Sturm-Liouville problems. The PIs will also
develop efficient algorithms for numerical solution of the interior problem.
These algorithms will be implemented and tested using both simulated and real
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, interior tomography is at the cusp of
being directly applicable in general medical imaging diagnostics. The confluence
of theoretical, algorithmic, computational, and technological advances gives the
PIs hope that interior tomography can move from the "drawing boards" to
practical medical imaging in the not so distant future. While there are still
some open research problems, the results obtained recently show that the
problems can be solved with a fairly high degree of confidence. If successful,
this study will provide theoretically justified and practically applicable two
and three-dimensional reconstruction algorithms for imaging a region of interest
inside an object (e.g., the patient) from truncated data. The broader impact of
the proposed research lies in the promise it holds for improvements in the
practice of clinical medicine and biomedical science generally, as well as for
industrial non-destructive testing. The most direct benefit is the reduction in
the x-ray dose to the patient; other benefits include less expensive scanners,
improved temporal resolution, increased scanner throughput, capability of
imaging larger objects, reduced system cost, etc.