* 1619632
* Next Generation In Situ Measurements of Stratospheric Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Terry Deshler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 365,759.00

Small particles in the stratosphere (10-30 km) affect the ozone layer that
protects live from harmful ultraviolet solar radiation and also affect climate.
These stratospheric aerosols are controlled by volcanic, natural and human
activities that produce sulfur containing gases or particles. The US has the
longest 40-year record of the vertical distribution of particles that has been
made over Laramie, WY that has been invaluable to calibrate models and validate
satellites. There is a prisoning need to continue this long-term record,
modernize the instruments - making them better, lighter and cheaper and maintain
US leadership in instrumentation and science. This proposal achieves this by
developing a compact modern commercial sensor and mentoring a young PI to take
over the leadership and transition operations to Boulder,
CO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project expands the long-term balloon borne
measurements of stratospheric aerosols up to 30 km to build upon a unique
40-year record of profiles of aerosol concentration and size. The site will be
transitioned from Laramie, WY to Boulder, CO and the plan includes the mentoring
a new leader (currently co-PI). The instrument payload will be modernized by
adapting a commercial optical particle counters (Lighthouse Remote 3104 clean
room particle spectrometer) that will extend the capability and reduce size,
weight and costs and enhance deployability. The aerosol profile is crucial for
the understanding of long-term stratospheric aerosol-chemistry interactions,
satellite retrievals and validation and troposphere-stratosphere coupling
response to climate change. The project was re-scoped to focus on the design and
validation of a next generation aerosol profiling system and build 2 prototypes
and perform limited flight-testing and validation against current instrument.
The project will also begin the transition of the activity to Boulder, CO
including hardware and a new PI. The transition effort should result in
competitive future science proposals and create long-term synergistic monitoring
of balloon borne aerosol, trace-gas and water profile measurements for
atmospheric chemistry, climate and satellite validation centered in Boulder, CO
and assert US leadership.