* 1619816
* CAREER: Combating Dark Silicon through Specialization: Communication-Aware Tiled Many-Accelerator Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Mark Hempstead, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 407,707.00

Researchers have predicted that, in the coming years, the computer industry?s
steady gains in computing performance will slow and even cease all together
because of a condition known as Dark Silicon. Dark Silicon is the result of an
increase in power density that will make it necessary to leave sections of a
microchip powered off. The consequences of Dark Silicon could be widespread,
limiting the increasing benefits all aspects of society---from medicine,
commerce to entertainment----have reaped from advances in computing. One
solution is specialization. With the advent of high-level synthesis tools
capable of generating circuits from high-level programming languages such as C,
it is now possible to realize specialized accelerators for any application with
10-100x the efficiency of general purpose microprocessors. The computing
industry needs new architecture paradigms to organize thousands of these
accelerators. This project envisions the computing platform of the future as
comprised of domain specific tiles, each with 10-100 specialized accelerators.
The research team will advance this vision with innovations in two aspects.
First, by inventing a new memory-interconnect subsystem capable of keeping these
specialized cores fed with data. Second, canonical tiles will be invented for
different application domains that can be studied by the wider research
community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team will study memory-interconnect systems
for tiles in a manner that recognizes the unique features of many-accelerator
architectures: intermittent usage of accelerators, bursts of communication, and
the need to share memory between specialized cores. While designing tiles of
many-accelerators, the team will develop a new description language that
describes the computation and communication capabilities of a tile and matches
them with a graph representation of the workload. To provide broader impact, the
tools, canonical designs, and models developed by this project will be made
available to the wider research community to enable the study and eventual
commercialization of specialized architectures. As increasing the technological
literacy of the general public is essential to cultivating responsible behavior,
the integrated educational plan focuses on all age groups: it reaches K-12
students through workshops and presentations; undergraduate and graduate
students through research opportunities and course offerings; and the greater
Philadelphia community.