* 1619563
* Nanosecond Pulse Discharges at a Liquid-Vapor Interface and in Liquids: Discharge Dynamics and Plasma Chemistry
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Terry Miller, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 384,000.00

This work will study plasmas, which are clouds or bubbles of ionized gas,
produced near liquid surfaces and in liquids at near room temperatures. Such
plasmas have significant potential for development of several emerging
technologies in biology and medicine for removal of organic contaminants from
water, activation of water for sterilization and disinfection, wound healing,
skin cancer therapies, synthesis of nanoparticles in liquids, as well as clean
energy technologies. Fundamental physical and chemical processes in these
plasmas are poorly understood, primarily due to lack of accurate experimental
data which will be obtained in this work. The results obtained during this study
will improve our understanding of these processes and are expected to have a
major impact on development of low-temperature plasmas for biomedical
applications, healthcare, and clean energy.

Fundamental kinetics of pulsed plasmas sustained at a liquid-vapor interface and
in liquids will be studied using the following methods: (i) Measurements of
electric field in surface ionization wave plasmas at a liquid-vapor interface.
These data will provide insight into surface ionization wave structure and
dynamics. (ii) Measurements of electron density and electron temperature in the
near-surface plasma. These data will quantify input energy partition among
different energy modes. (iii) Measurements of solvated electrons in the near-
surface liquid layer. These data will show how electrons are transported to the
liquid surface and penetrate into the liquid. These measurements may also
resolve the fundamental question whether the plasma may be generated directly in
the liquid phase. (iv) Measurements of species number densities in the plasma
near the liquid-vapor interface. These results will be compared with kinetic
modeling predictions to quantify the effect of electric field and electron
energy in the surface plasma on vapor phase plasma chemistry. This work will
yield quantitative insight into dynamics and kinetics of transient liquid-vapor
interface plasmas for which there is little experimental data, and make possible
confident prediction of their behavior.