* 1619629
* Northeast LSAMP Alliance: 2016-2021
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,489,835.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Connecticut (UCONN) will become the
lead institution for the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (NELSAMP) for the 2016-2021 project period. NELSAMP comprises this
institution and the following partners: University of Massachusetts-Amherst,
University of Rhode Island (URI), Northeastern University, and Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI). The alliance will expand to include Tufts
University in 2016 and will extend recruitment and retention interventions and
improved articulation strategies to several community colleges in the northeast
region. These community colleges include the MassBay Community College,
Community College of Rhode Island, SUNY Adirondack Community College, among
others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next five years, three interrelated
themes guide NELSAMP's efforts to increase URM STEM student enrollment,
retention, and graduation: 1) PARTNERSHIP: By building strategic partnerships
with other universities, schools, and organizations locally, regionally, and
internationally, NELSAMP will develop relationships that promote and disseminate
best practices; increase recruitment of URM students from community colleges,
technical high schools, and minority-serving school districts to baccalaureate
degree programs; and increase the resources available to URM students. 2) HIGH
EXPECTATIONS: NELSAMP students are expected to excel as both scholars and
leaders and will engage in research, international exchange, and internship
experiences to prepare them for roles as dynamic STEM professionals in industry,
government, and academia. 3) COMMUNITY BUILDING: NELSAMP builds communities of
learners that foster scholarship, collaboration, leadership, and service and
promote successful, productive relationships within and beyond the Alliance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alliance program evaluation findings assessing the
effectiveness of NELSAMP's strategies will be shared with the education
community to build the knowledge base and foster implementation of best
practices. In addition, the project includes a study to investigate how URM STEM
students' educational and career aspirations change and develop over time. The
study has the potential to provide the STEM education community valuable
insights on the post-college decision making processes of undergraduate STEM
students and suggest means by which institutions can promote greater numbers of
URM students to pursue graduate study in STEM.