* 1619785
* 42nd Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 02/28/2017
* USD 20,965.00

1619785-Ye&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has made an award in support of student
registration fees, keynote speaker travel and publication expenses associated
with the 42nd Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC) being held at
SUNY at Binghamton, Vestal, NY, April 5-7, 2016. The goal of NEBEC is to
stimulate collaborations and to promote bioengineering research and education
programs in the Northeast. The objectives of the meeting are to 1) To identify
new collaboration opportunities, 2) To develop a community to share ideas,
resources, and technologies, 3) To expose students to exciting research at the
cutting edge of biomedical engineering, 4) To encourage students to pursue
careers in biomedical engineering, 5), To introduce students to research leaders
and encourage interactions, and 6) To stimulate new interactions between
research groups in the Northeast. The theme of the meeting is "Biomedical
Frontiers for the 21st Century." Topics to be addressed include: 3D bioprinting,
cell manufacturing, nanomedicine and scalable nanobiomanufacturing, human brain
mapping, neuron science and engineering, stem cells &amp; regenerative medicine,
biomaterials, bio-MEMS, organ-on-a-Chip, biomedical devices, biomechanics,
systems biology &amp; synthetic biology, tissue engineering and computational
biology. These topics are covered in 3 Platform Sessions: 1) Regenerative
Medicine and Advanced Biomanufacturing; 2) Tissue Engineering, Bioimaging and
Engineering Biology; 3) Nanomedicine, Biomechanics, and Neuroscience/technology.
A fourth session is designed for student attendees: Career Development in
Biomedical Engineering &amp; Biotechnology. At least 400 attendees from 28 area
universities and approximately 20 respected keynote and plenary speakers will
participate in the conference. Workshops will focus on industry participation
and public advocacy needed to help translate basic biomedical research into
clinical treatments. The goals of the conference, including the emphasis on
student participation and career development, are well matched to programs
supported by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(CBET) Division.