* 1619661
* Data-driven Modeling of Equilibrium and Non-equilibrium Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Xiantao Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,867.00

An important issue in applied and computational sciences is to find the
essential reduced models to predict variables of interests from high-dimensional
complex dynamical systems. Given our advanced capability to collect big data, an
important challenge is to leverage the information carried by the data to
improve the modeling effort. Computationally, this requires adequate inference
of appropriate parameters such that their uncertainties are quantifiable. A much
more challenging yet important issue is to be able to make prediction in the
presence of external disturbances. This problem has a wide range of applications
such as in climate change science where one is interested to predict the climate
change statistics corresponding to exogenous forcing such as the volcanic
eruptions or even the anthropogenic factor such as the human activities. The
projects in this proposal are to address these issues. While the developed
methodology is aimed for general modeling of multi-scale phenomena, our focus
will be to improve the understanding and prediction of the deformation behavior
of graphene.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two projects are proposed: 1. Data-driven
reduced modeling paradigms to capture coarse grained statistical solutions of
the underlying dynamics. The methodology involves the Mori-Zwanzig formalism, a
precise description of the memory effect to take into account the interactions
between processes occurring on different physical scales, and a data-driven
numerical scheme for estimating the parameters of the stochastic reduced model.
2. Estimation of parameters in the reduced models to predict changes on the
statistical solutions in the presence of small external disturbances. This
project involves employing the Padè approximation on appropriate integral
operators and designing efficient algorithm to solve a system of nonlinear
equations that respect appropriate equilibrium statistics of the unperturbed
data, leveraging the formulation from the fluctuation-dissipation theory.