* 1619211
* TWC: Small: Hydra - Hybrid Defenses for Resilient Applications: Practical Approaches Towards Defense In Depth
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Franz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 499,981.00

In popular culture, cyber security is characterized as a cat-and-mouse game: an
attacker finds a new exploit, defenders find a corresponding countermeasure, and
the game goes on and on. Unfortunately, reality isn't far removed from this
fiction: most defenses are reactive to particular threats that have already been
discovered, and they are often combined on top of each other, without attempting
to integrate them. Combining disjoint security mechanisms in this manner often
has the effect that the individual costs of the mechanisms add up, so that at
some point it becomes impractical to add more. Biological immune systems in
nature do much better than this, combining an innate response against general
threats (such as bacteria and viruses) with a learned response against specific
previously seen threats. Moreover, the adaptive system doesn't appear to get
"slower" as it learns to handle new classes of pathogens. This research focuses
on "hybrid" defenses inspired by biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project investigates practical "defense in depth" approaches that synthesize
hybrid defenses that are greater the sum of their parts and that have lower
overheads than traditional layered security solutions. This is not trivial,
since one must ensure that combining multiple defenses doesn't create (possibly
hidden) feature-interaction conflicts, perhaps even leading to new
vulnerabilities that an attacker might exploit. The project's approach leverages
dynamic diversification, which intersperses randomization with program
execution. By rapidly switching between alternative versions of the program at
run-time, one can ensure that the flow of control never follows the same path
for two different executions of the same program, even when operating on the
same inputs. This technique provides the foundation for much of the proposed
research and offers probabilistic protection. The project will benefit all
domains in which computer security measures have traditionally been constrained
by performance considerations, including e-commerce, consumer software, and
mobile computing.