* 1619958
* Workshop: Managing Health Risks to Wastewater Workers from Ebola and Other Emerging Pathogens:  Science and Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jacqueline MacDonald Gibson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 49,981.00

1619958&lt;br/&gt;MacDonald Gibson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Ebola epidemic
highlighted a critical need to evaluate infectious disease risks to sewer repair
crews and wastewater treatment plant operators who could come into contact with
pathogen-containing sewage. Prior research indicates that domestic wastewater
contains a wide range of pathogens, from noroviruses to hepatitis A. Wastewater
workers are at increased risk of infectious illnesses compared to the general
population. This proposed workshop would engage scientists, wastewater utility
operators and managers, and government regulators in assessing available
evidence to decide how to protect wastewater and sewer workers from occupational
exposure to pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased risk of infectious
illnesses among sewer and wastewater workers is well established, but little
scientific evidence exists on the effectiveness of alternative measures for
reducing these risks. In order to develop evidence-based solutions, information
on job tasks that may lead to infectious disease exposure, potential wastewater
exposure volumes for each task, current occupational safety practices among this
workforce, and the potential for alternative safety practices to reduce risks,
is essential. This workshop will help fill these critical information needs. The
workshop will lead to four products: 1. Workshop report describing potential
tasks during which wastewater and sewer workers could be exposed to pathogens,
estimated exposure volumes for each task, current practices for protecting these
workers from pathogens, gaps between current practices and recommended
practices, and research needed to fill knowledge gaps; 2. Bayesian belief
network risk model for predicting infectious disease risks under alternative
risk management scenarios and for diagnosing the likelihood that an infectious
illness in a wastewater or sewer worker arose from occupational exposure; 3.
Peer-reviewed journal article assessing the magnitude of infectious disease
risks to wastewater and sewer workers, describing current infectious disease
prevention practices among these workers, analyzing the gaps between current and
best practices, and outlining research needed to improve the ability to protect
this population; 4 Poster of job tasks illustrating recommended personal
protective equipment for each wastewater and sewer job task in order to prevent
exposure to pathogens. This project will strengthen the evidence available for
protecting the health of the approximately 136,000 wastewater and sewer workers
in the United States. In turn, because wastewater treatment plants are one of
the main barriers to infectious disease transmission, protecting the health of
the wastewater and sewer workforce will contribute to ensuring public health in
U.S. communities.