* 1619245
* SHF: Small:  Hardware-Software Co-Designed Coherence: A Complete Coherence Solution for Performance-, Energy-, and Complexity-Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

As the benefits from transistor scaling slow down, future performance increases
in computing systems will increasingly rely on architectural advances. Today
processors use parallelism and increasing amounts of specialization to provide
this performance growth. An efficient memory hierarchy is key to achieving the
full potential of both of these techniques. The coherence protocol and memory
consistency model are at the heart of the complexity-, performance-, and energy-
efficiency of the memory hierarchy. Unfortunately, across a variety of systems,
coherence protocols and consistency models continue to struggle to obtain an
appropriate balance between complexity, performance, and energy consumption.
Recently, there has been work on hybrid hardware-software co-designed protocols,
exemplified by the DeNovo protocol, which takes a different approach, combining
the best of pure hardware and pure software protocols. The key insight is that
if software is disciplined, then it is possible to design more efficient
hardware. Multiple versions of the DeNovo system have successively relaxed the
software restrictions. Introducing such a new technology in classrooms to both
graduate and undergraduate students will better prepare them for future memory
trend and challenges. Disseminating the results of this research via
publications, seminars, tutorials etc. will bring new technology awareness to
the community and create more synergy among academia and industry. Â  Prior work
has established the potential for DeNovo as a general-purpose system with
significant advantages over the state-of-the-art. However, this work of
necessity has been limited to simple workloads. Consideration of DeNovo as a
viable system for widespread industrial adoption requires demonstrating an
integrated system that can run complex workloads (e.g., operating systems) and
legacy binaries. This project addresses the remaining research issues to achieve
this goal. Although this work is driven by considerations for hybrid hardware-
software coherence protocols, the intellectual contributions extend beyond those
protocols as well; e.g., integrated support for efficient, coherent data
accesses using a variety of disciplines ranging from completely unstructured to
highly structured, statically analyzable accesses; a systematic exploration of
relaxed atomics, a widely accepted difficulty in current memory consistency
models; and understanding concurrent data structures and system code in a
coherence neutral way.