* 1619673
* Colorado-Wyoming Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CO-WY LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2022
* USD 4,850,122.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The Colorado LSAMP (CO-AMP), which began in 1995, is
expanding its alliance to include two new partners in Wyoming to become the
Colorado-Wyoming Alliance for Minority Participation (CO-WY AMP). This
consortium of sixteen institutions is a unique reconstituted alliance with an
urban/rural dichotomy, encompassing a distance of 550 miles between two states.
CO-WY AMP will continue to work tirelessly to increase the representation of
underrepresented students in the Western U.S. by preparing them to excel in an
economically competitive global workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CO-WY AMP will
use Engagement, Capacity and Continuity: A Trilogy for Student Success (ECC
Trilogy) as a model to advance students in the sciences and quantitative
disciplines on all partner campuses, which include two research-intensive
universities, five high research universities, three comprehensive universities,
one liberal arts college, and five community colleges. The three factors of the
ECC Trilogy are defined as: engaging the student both academically and socially
to foster positive attitudes and increase subject mastery (Engagement);
preparing the student for fundamental knowledge necessary to advance (Capacity);
and providing access that offers resources necessary for advancement
(Continuity). CO-WY AMP will apply the trilogy model through the following
goals: &lt;br/&gt;1) Increase retention and subsequent attainment of
baccalaureate degrees;&lt;br/&gt;2) Increase the quality and quantity of
students transferring from 2-year to 4-year institutions by providing skill-
building interventions to strengthen students' mathematical knowledge and Summer
Bridge experiences to enrich STEM achievement;&lt;br/&gt;3) Facilitate pure and
applied undergraduate research experiences both domestic and international and
develop summer research experiences at both 2 and 4-year institutions;
and&lt;br/&gt;4) Expand capacity for preparation and matriculation into graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generating research study, namely
"the Mathematics Research Study", seeks to understand ultimately whether the
algebra skills of community college students could be improved using
cognitively-guided and self-reflective supplemental materials outside of the
classroom environment. The materials will be developed collaboratively by
community college algebra instructors, a mathematics education specialist, and a
cognitive specialist.