* 1619681
* Michigan Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (MI-LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Herbert Winful, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 09/30/2021
* USD 4,250,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (MI-LSAMP) was established in 2005 in response to the need for a
more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the State of Michigan. The MI-LSAMP currently consists of
four, 4-year institutions (University of Michigan, lead institution; Michigan
State University; Wayne State University; Western Michigan University) and two
community colleges (Mott Community College and Washtenaw Community College). The
goals of MI-LSAMP are to significantly increase the:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Retention and graduation of underrepresented students in STEM bachelor's degree
programs via comprehensive support programs and mentored research; &lt;br/&gt;2)
Number of students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups transferring to
STEM bachelor's degree programs; and &lt;br/&gt;3) Number of students from
underrepresented racial/ethnic groups pursuing graduate degrees in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals support NSF's strategic goal to
"cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce,
and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens." The goals will be
accomplished through activities such as pre-first year summer programs, faculty
mentored research, student-to-student mentoring, and a comprehensive 2-year
STEM-emphasis transfer program that will include a specialized curriculum and
the establishment of a complete wrap-around academic and social support at the
community college partner institutions. In addition, the community college
students would be afforded the opportunity to participate in a summer bridge
program between high school and their first year in community college and then
again the summer between community college and transfer to a 4-year institution.
The increased engagement with community colleges, greater involvement of faculty
mentors from diverse STEM disciplines, and heightened institutional commitment
to underrepresented students' well-being and success will produce higher rates
of retention and graduation; and moreover, lead to a more talented and diverse
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generating research study is
focused investigating the community college pathways to STEM Baccalaureate
degrees for students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups in STEM. The
overall supposition is that providing to underrepresented students clear and
unobstructed pathways through the college-level STEM curriculum of community
colleges into STEM programs at four-year institutions would result in increased
STEM baccalaureate degree production.