* 1619317
* NeTS: Small: Broadband Service Reliability: Characterization and Improvement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Fabian Bustamante, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 365,939.00

This project studies the reliability of broadband services, explores the
relation between reliability and users' quality of experience and investigates
edge-based solutions to improve reliability. It develops techniques and
investigates metrics to study and characterize reliability problems, and
algorithms to diagnose and localize their source, building on existing
infrastructure and data collected as part of the Federal Communications
Commission's Measuring Broadband America effort. This investigation explores the
impact of reliability problems on users' Quality of Experience (QoE), exploring
the value of possible proxy metrics for QoE (e.g., session time, traffic demand)
and the application of natural experiments and related designs to understand
their relationship at scale while controlling for most confounding factors. An
understanding of reliability problems, their impact and most common causes
should help in the development of readily deployable solutions that might
improve service reliability at the network edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
residential broadband network availability and performance improves, consumers
continue to migrate key services such as telephony, television and home
monitoring to over-the-top alternatives. This migration comes with rising users'
expectations regarding broadband reliability, which is a key factor of consumer
experience. Despite the rich history of reliability engineering, researcher have
very limited understanding of reliability in the context of broadband, from the
most appropriate metrics for characterizing it, to approaches for gathering
measurements or assessing their impact on users' quality of experience. When
reliability problems appear, troubleshooting them is nearly impossible -- there
is no principled approach to determining the source of the problem. The outcome
is increased frustration for users, growing management costs for Internet
service providers, and, ultimately, underperforming applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances undergraduate and graduate teaching,
involves undergraduates in research projects, reaches out to industry, provides
tools and first-of-its-kind datasets to researchers, and offers a data gathering
platform and data for the benefit of Federal and State telecom regulators. The
algorithms, tools, techniques and experimental approaches we will develop will
help users, operators and policymakers providing a firmer statistical footing
for future investment.