* 1619376
* RI: Small: To Ask or Not to Ask - A Foundation for the Optimization of Human-Robot Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Pradeep Sen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,554.00

A team of unmanned vehicles can have tremendous impact in areas such as disaster
relief, emergency response, and national security. Human operators are an
integral part of these missions. Given the complexity of the tasks, harshness of
the operation environments, and resource limitations, a fundamental
understanding of how humans and robots can best interact is crucial to a
successful operation. This proposal introduces a new multidisciplinary approach
for efficient human-robot collaboration on tasks that require a visual search in
the presence of uncertainty. The proposed methodology for characterizing human
visual performance also contributes to the field of human perception and
cognitive psychology. This proposal also has a significant educational component
targeting under-represented students of the central California area and UC Santa
Barbara.

A new methodology is proposed for predicting whether people can make a correct
visual decision for a given sensory input. The approach is based on training
convolutional neural networks using extensive input from Amazon Mechanical Turk
workers. This foundational understanding of human visual performance will have
significant implication for robotic field decision making. A new set of
mathematical tools will be developed for robotic field operation, given a proper
understanding of human visual capabilities. This enables a robot to properly
decide when to seek human help, when to rely on itself, and when to sense more.
Finally, the cost of communication is characterized, due to the space-varying
nature of link quality, which can significantly affect seeking human help. The
proposed theories and design paradigms will be validated using a robotic
testbed.