* 1619282
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Online Verification-Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 309,990.00

Increasingly, modern software on the web is richly extensible, accelerating its
evolution and dramatically reducing the time between development and deployment.
The intellectual merit of this research consists of challenging the false choice
between creating software that is extensible (easy to reuse and extend) and
software that is correct (meets its specifications). The new approach advanced
by this work, Incremental Verification-Validation, enables programmers to bring
domain-specific safely disciplines to extensible systems, by providing a
framework where these disciplines are communicated both precisely and usefully,
as executable code. The project's broader significance and importance consist in
changing the way programmers approach building correct extensible software for
the web. The research targets ECMAScript (JavaScript), enabling this research to
have a direct impact on the vast number of languages and systems that create and
use JavaScript. Further, the project represents a new collaboration across the
University of Colorado and University of Maryland, bringing together experts
across verification, incremental computing, and runtime systems. Finally, this
project benefits the graduate and undergraduate teaching mission at the
participating universities, as aspects of the project enriches the program
analysis and programming language courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incremental
Verification-Validation encourages programmers to co-design their systems with
executable specifications that check these systems dynamically, as they execute.
Moreover, unlike typical assertions, which execute dynamically and non-
incrementally, the proposed are subject to novel patterns that enhance their
performance: In regressive validation, verification partially discharges some
checks, dynamically rewriting the program with residual versions; in progressive
verification, online verification occurs in passes that each cache and reuse
work, to avoid from-scratch verification of facts that still hold from earlier
passes. Finally, to avoid forcing analysis programmers to reason about
incremental changes explicitly in each analysis that they create, the meta layer
expresses incremental computations implicitly, using an implicitly-incremental
meta language whose abstractions hide reasoning on a per-change basis.