* 1619433
* RI: Small: Speedup Learning for Online Planning Under Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Many complex stochastic planning domains such as logistics,&lt;br/&gt;emergency
response, resilient power grids, and robotics require the&lt;br/&gt;ability to
make high-quality decisions under tight time&lt;br/&gt;constraints. This project
addresses the need for high-quality, but&lt;br/&gt;computationally efficient,
decision making via new theory and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for speedup learning,
which will enable planners to&lt;br/&gt;learn to speedup their performance based
on prior planning&lt;br/&gt;experience. This speedup-learning approach is
loosely inspired by&lt;br/&gt;the fact that humans routinely learn to speedup
their reasoning&lt;br/&gt;processes with experience, without sacrificing
decision quality.&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, through speedup learning, an inefficient
planner that&lt;br/&gt;produces high-quality decisions will be transformed into
a much&lt;br/&gt;faster planner with little loss in decision
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves advancing speedup learning
for online planning&lt;br/&gt;under uncertainty on four fronts. First, the
speedup-learning&lt;br/&gt;problem is formalized by introducing the canonical
problem of&lt;br/&gt;Primitive Speedup Learning (PSL) and studying how PSL can
be used&lt;br/&gt;to solve various speedup objectives. Second, a novel
online&lt;br/&gt;planning framework, which subsumes many existing frameworks
and&lt;br/&gt;enables many potential speedup opportunities, is being designed
and&lt;br/&gt;developed. Third, the project is producing new speedup
learning&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for the new framework, which learn various types
of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge and that can exploit deep neural network
(DNN)&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Finally, the research is producing extensive
empirical&lt;br/&gt;evaluations including applications to the important problems
of&lt;br/&gt;power grid control, municipal emergency response, and
benchmark&lt;br/&gt;planning domains. The project has the potential for
significant broader impact on&lt;br/&gt;applications where time-sensitive
decisions must be made within&lt;br/&gt;stochastic environments. It will
directly contribute to advances in&lt;br/&gt;two applications in particular:
remedial action control in&lt;br/&gt;electrical grids to minimize cascading
power outages, and planning&lt;br/&gt;for municipal emergencies such as fire and
rescue operations in&lt;br/&gt;cities. The project will also serve to advance
graduate education&lt;br/&gt;through research assistantships and undergraduate
education through&lt;br/&gt;summer and academic term research experiences for
undergraduates. A&lt;br/&gt;special topics graduate course will be taught on the
area of&lt;br/&gt;planning and learning at Oregon State University and all
course&lt;br/&gt;materials will be open access.