* 1619857
* Cleaning, Organizing, and Uniting Linguistic Databases (the CLOUD Project)
* SBE,BCS
* 12/31/2015,06/30/2021
* maria polinsky, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 06/30/2021
* USD 27,898.00

Of the approximately 7,000 languages currently spoken in the world, linguists
estimate that nearly half will be extinct within the next century. Very few of
these languages have been well documented, but for the past two decades
researchers have been working with speakers of a variety of endangered languages
to preserve the rich data these languages possess. This data is invaluable for
language education efforts and for linguistic research on the incredible
diversity of the world's languages. Unfortunately, however, much of this data
resides in the personal files of these researchers, inaccessible to others
interested in the language, and not in a form that enables the data to be shared
easily. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COULD project (Cleaning, Organizing, and
Uniting Linguistic Databases), a partnership between Canadian universities
(Concordia and McGill) and Harvard University, is offering a solution to this
problem. The main goal of the project is to create a new universal data format
for language data, centralized online storage for this data, and a set of
related online tools which will allow users all over the world to collect,
preserve, and share language data more easily and more accurately. The project
will assist with the integration of previously collected data into this new
format, enabling this vast amount of linguistic data (currently only being used
by specialists) to be accessible to second language learners, community members
who would like to preserve their linguistic heritage, and other language and
culture enthusiasts, in addition to other researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts, the project is also of
particular importance for those languages that are in threat of disappearing
forever if the younger generations do not learn them. Non-linguists interested
in preserving a community's language (especially members of the community
itself) will be able to use the project's online tools to document their
language without relying on experts. In addition, the project's lesson creation
application will enable users to create learning materials, which are lacking
for many endangered languages, and will support communities in their efforts to
teach their language to younger generations.