* 1619896
* Exploring Carrier Spin Injection, Transport, and Trapping in Diamond
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 349,900.00

Methods to control interactions between individual atoms in solid state crystals
are important for next generation technologies that will encode information in
atomic spins. This project will pioneer a new approach for manipulating one
atom's spin conditionally on the quantum mechanical spin of another. Individual
atoms such as point defects in a diamond crystal lattice where a nitrogen atom
is substituted for a carbon atom, known as NV centers, will be used. Individual
NV centers will be controlled with optical and electronic pulses so they can
send spin-dependent signals to each other. NV centers in diamond are already
known to be valuable resources for storing and processing quantum information
locally. But there are still fundamental questions about how to build a network
that can shuttle quantum information back and forth between several NV centers.
This project addresses that challenge by using laser light and electric fields
to create a spin-dependent motion of an electric charge from one NV center to
another NV center. The understanding to be gained from this effort will help
with the effort to build components for new and more powerful types of computers
called quantum computers. Furthermore, the approach used here will pioneer
quantum computer components that use solid state devices operating at room
temperature to process quantum information. Besides the technological and
scientific advantages, the proposed research is expected to have a broad
educational outcome because it offers students a unique inter-disciplinary
scientific education and the ability to interact with a wide network of
collaborating labs. These activities gain special meaning at City College, a
minority serving institution with a uniquely diverse population of inner-city
students.

This research program explores the use of photo-generated charge carriers as a
bus to communicate between separate, non-interacting NVs within a diamond
crystal or nano-structure. Diamond is arguably an ideal platform for quantum
spintronics because it has inversion symmetry, contains a low concentration of
spin-active nuclei, and features one of the weakest spin-orbit couplings.
However, virtually no investigation of the carrier spin dynamics in diamond has
yet been carried out, because injection and detection of spin polarized carriers
through known strategies (e.g., optical excitation or ferromagnetic interfaces)
has proven difficult. This project circumvents prior complications via a
flexible scheme where NV centers alternatively serve as a source or a probe of
carrier spin polarization. Building on prior observations the initial goal is to
gain a fuller understanding of the physics governing the dynamics of charge
carriers, including photo-ionization, diffusion, and carrier trapping. With
focus on the NV center and substitutional nitrogen centers, the research plan
encompasses a broad set of experiments designed to explore deterministic
injection, transport, and capture of spin-polarized carriers. Special attention
will be devoted to the problem of coherent spin transport, particularly in its
ability to generate entanglement between qubits not interacting directly. While
the emphasis is on the phenomenology and physics, the research plan also calls
for various proof-of-concept devices conceived to gain adequate control of the
dynamics.