* 1619124
* CSR: Small: Big Memory: Exploring Memory Management Mechanisms and Policies for Rack-Scale Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Alan Cox, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,997.00

Large-memory applications, including data analytics, in-memory object caches,
and in-memory databases, are a major consumer of data center resources.
Moreover, these applications can effectively use more memory than a single
computer can provide. Traditional approaches to scaling these applications
involve parallelism across multiple computers. However, that may not use
resources cost-effectively, as the ratio of processing, networking, and memory
is determined by the configuration of the underlying computers, not the
application. This project explores disaggregated servers, or "rack-scale
computers". These servers consist of pools of processors, memory, and I/O
devices within a rack that can be flexibly allocated to virtual machines based
on the needs of their resident applications.

This project focuses on one aspect of disaggregated servers: managing a large
pool of memory within the rack. Specifically, using this pool to dynamically add
memory to and remove memory from virtual machines. This will enable applications
to handle bursty load without the need to spin up/down entire virtual machines.
In order to effectively manage memory across virtual machines, the hypervisor
will need a better understanding of how memory is being used, by both the guest
operating systems and applications. Therefore, we are exploring the interfaces,
mechanisms, and policies within and between the hypervisor, guest operating
system, and application that will enable the use of large disaggregated
memories. This research is one step towards rethinking what a computer is and
how to construct one that better serves data science and analytics applications
that can benefit from large amounts of memory.