* 1619584
* Kinetic Characterization of Three-Dimensional (3D) Magnetic Reconnection: A Transformative Step
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Li-Jen Chen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,001.00

This project will investigate the plasma and magnetic field conditions in the
micro-scale regions where magnetic energy is converted to plasma kinetic energy
during magnetic reconnection. Magnetic reconnection is, in effect, the breaking
and reconnecting of magnetic field lines, which is accompanied by an explosive
release of energy. This explosive energy release is an important component of
space weather disturbances in Earth's vicinity. Satellite observations and
plasma simulations will be combined to study the energy conversion process. The
science objectives of this proposal are closely aligned with the priorities of
the NSF-DOE Plasma Physics Partnership. As part of this program, NSF and the
Department of Energy (DOE) will collaborate in supporting the investigation. The
project will provide research training for a postdoctoral student, contributing
to the future scientific workforce. The results of this research into a key
energy conversion process in plasmas (magnetic reconnection) will be of interest
to scientific disciplines outside of Geospace, including the astrophysics and
laboratory fusion communities. In the longer term, new knowledge about the
triggers of explosive energy release during space storms will improve space
weather prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important element of the proposed
investigation is the synthesis of satellite observations of the space
environment and cutting-edge plasma simulations. The space data will be obtained
from a recently launched configuration of 4 satellites that form the
Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission. MMS is capable of measuring the state
of the electrons at two orders of magnitude higher cadence than any previous
space missions. This is vital in order to resolve plasma structures in these
very spatially limited regions as the satellites fly through. The simulations
will be done using a state-of-the-art 3D Particle-in-Cell (PIC) model optimized
to run efficiently on supercomputers. Significant advances in knowledge are
expected about: (1) plasma energization in various types of naturally occurring
3D magnetic and electric field configurations and (2) electric and magnetic
field structures and their self-consistent plasma flow patterns in reconnection
regions at the magnetopause and in the magnetotail.