* 1619696
* Analytical and numerical studies of gapless fractionalized phases and topological phases and their transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Olexei Motrunich, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on how electrons in solid materials organize themselves
as a result of the interactions among them. The way the electrons organize
corresponds to new quantum mechanical states of matter. Because of the
interactions among the particles, the quantum mechanical state of electrons can
appear to be composed of new kinds of particles with properties that may differ
dramatically from the properties of the constituent electrons or atoms. The PI
will study two archetypal examples: i) instances where the microscopic particles
interlock in such a way that it appears as if the entire system was comprised of
particles with properties that are fractions of the original constituent
electrons or atoms, e.g. even though electrons are indivisible the system of
electrons behaves as if it were comprised of particles having one-third of an
electron's charge, and ii) instances where the microscopic particles form an
unusual soup where the system behaves as if comprised of particles that have no
mass, which consequently can transport their exotic properties over long
distances. Similar states of matter can also occur in systems of very cold atoms
trapped in a lattice formed by laser beams organize themselves as a result of
the interactions among them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum mechanical states
in the first example underlie ideas of specific proposals for a new kind of
computer that manipulates quantum mechanical states to do computation. The
quantum mechanical states in the second example may hold insights into
understanding many technologically important materials, most notably high-
temperature superconductors. The electrons in superconductors self-organize into
a quantum mechanical state that can carry electric current without dissipation.
One of the main activities under this award will be to develop theoretical and
computational toolboxes for the discovery and characterization of such quantum
mechanical states in models and materials which may stimulate experimental
inquiry. This project includes mentoring and training students and junior
researchers at the frontier of condensed matter physics using a variety of
advanced analytical and numerical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in theoretical condensed matter physics to investigate phases of
quantum matter. Discoveries of quantum Hall fluids and also of numerous strongly
correlated materials unveiled the richness of possible quantum many-body
phenomena. The recent discovery of topological insulators together with advances
in strongly correlated systems have even emboldened the community to contemplate
complete classification of all quantum many-body phases. While great progress
has been made for non-interacting or weakly-interacting electrons, properly
describing strong interactions is crucial for any such larger endeavors, but
this is also where the available tools are quite limited. Duality approaches
have contributed significantly to understanding systems of strongly interacting
bosons, in particular of fractionalized phases. Tractable models, which are
either exactly solvable or numerically accessible, have provided another avenue
for explorations of possible topological phases. The PI will continue to combine
these approaches to construct explicit models that realize so-called symmetry-
protected topological phases and to discover their fractionalized counterparts.
The PI will study new phases that emerge as well as phase transformations
involving them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the goal of classifying gapped phases
may be in sight, there is a vast poorly understood terrain of gapless states in
strongly correlated systems, which are also of great experimental interest.
Examples include heavy fermion materials near criticality, strange metal and
pseudogap behaviors in high-temperature cuprate superconductors, composite fermi
liquid state of the quantum Hall fluid at half-filling, and gapless spin liquid
states in 2D organic materials. Recent advances in understanding three
dimensional symmetry-protected topological phases have shed unexpected new light
on this landscape: A long-standing problem of particle-hole symmetry of the
composite fermi liquid state was related to physics of strongly correlated
phases on surfaces of 3D topological insulators. At the same time, developments
in Density Matrix Renormalization Group has allowed numerical studies of the
composite fermi liquid with unprecedented detail. The PI will attack problems in
this context. The PI will examine broader application of the fermionic dualities
and investigate gapless fractionalized phases with emphasis on experimentally
motivated questions for candidate spin liquid materials and sharp questions in
controlled models. This project includes mentoring and training students and
junior researchers at the frontier of condensed matter physics using a variety
of advanced analytical and numerical techniques.