* 1619877
* Precision Phenomenology for LHC Run II : The Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Ciaran Williams, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 55,989.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ciaran Williams at the
State University of New York, University at Buffalo.

The newly upgraded Large Hadron Collider (LHC) represents one of mankind's most
technologically advanced and scientifically ambitious projects. By colliding
elementary particles against each other at high energies at the LHC, physicists
expect to learn about the fundamental building blocks of matter and their
interactions at higher energies and smaller distances than have ever been
previously explored. The LHC has just begun its second extended data-taking
period (Run II), and it is hard to envisage a more exciting time in particle
physics. Run II will test whether the recently discovered Higgs boson is fully
consistent with our current expectations, or whether it behaves in ways that
transcend our best current theories. Another primary aim of the LHC program is
to seek a microscopic theory of Dark Matter, which is currently poorly
understood, and to understand whether there exist any interactions of Dark
Matter with more traditional kinds of matter. Research in this area thus
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
laws. All of these analyses require precise theoretical predictions in order to
extract useful information from the data, and Professor Williams will carry out
detailed analyses along these lines. Specifically, Professor Williams will
perform new calculations using recently developed methods, which will result in
a much smaller theoretical uncertainty than those which have previously been
used. The results of his calculations will be released publicly to experimental
(and theoretical) users and will be utilized in experimental analyses.

More technically, Professor Williams will perform cutting edge calculations at
Next-to-Next-to Leading Order accuracy and implement these results into a
publicly available computer code, MCFM. The primary focus will be key LHC
processes such as diboson production and those related to studies of the Higgs
boson. Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) effects will be included, typically in
the form of anomalous couplings, allowing for applications in experimental
analyses. Prof Williams will also calculate the mixed QCD-EW corrections to
vector boson production, and implement the results into MCFM, allowing for an
improved measurement of the W boson mass, a crucial parameter in testing the
overall consistency of the Standard Model and thereby constraining the possible
new physics beyond.