* 1619892
* HIGH-ORDER INVARIANT DOMAIN PRESERVING NUMERICAL METHODS FOR NONLINEAR HYPERBOLIC SYSTEMS
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Bojan Popov, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,084.00

Many important physical phenomena are modeled by nonlinear systems of hyperbolic
conservation laws. When approximating such problems one encounters sharp
interfaces, contact discontinuities, shocks and other nonlinear wave
interactions. In such regions high order approximation methods are not stable
and exhibit oscillations. It is very important that these oscillations be
controlled because preservation of mass, positivity or boundedness of the
solution is critical in numerical simulations. Moreover, spurious oscillations
are known to promote convergence to nonphysical weak solutions or simply lead to
failure to produce an approximation. Any advance in this direction will have a
broad impact insofar the class of problems we want to address touches many
fields in engineering (mechanical, aerospace, nuclear, ocean, etc.), in
environmental sciences, in geophysics, in petroleum engineering, etc. Proposing
a novel robust approximation technique for solving nonlinear hyperbolic problems
developing shocks or sharp interfaces will have impact in every areas of science
and engineering where controlling or dealing with this type of phenomenon is
still an enormous challenge.

The main focus of this proposal to investigate and develop new high-order
approximation techniques for nonlinear hyperbolic systems on unstructured meshes
in any space dimension. The project will be organized around three main
objectives: (1) Development of high-order maximum principle preserving methods
for scalar conservation equations. The emphasis will be on the design and
analysis of numerical methods that are at least third-order in space and time.
Convergence estimates for some of these methods will be established; (2) Design
of invariant domain preserving methods for any hyperbolic system in any space
dimension on non-uniform meshes. The goal is to construct invariant domain
preserving methods that are at least formally second-order accurate both in
space and time. The objective is to have methods that preserve all the invariant
domains of the underlying physical system; (3) The last part of the project will
consists of extending the new methodology to systems with source terms like the
shallow water equations and radiative transport.