* 1619700
* Assessing the influence of lithology on the temporal-spatial variability of sediment transport and its relation to primary production in mountain streams
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Jay Well, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2021
* USD 411,897.00

Primary production provides the fundamental source of energy for most life on
earth, and therefore understanding what controls primary production is key to
understanding ecosystems. In streams, relevant research has focused mainly on
the influence of light and nutrients. The role of underlying geology and
sediment transport has not been as well explored. The algae that dominate
primary producers in headwater streams live on rocks. Flow events that mobilize
those rocks can scrape algae away and reset the system to low production levels.
Understanding controls on the frequency of sediment scour and abrasion in a
stream is therefore fundamental to understanding the dynamics of primary
production. This research project will contribute to a better understanding of
the coevolution of ecosystems and landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research project links fluvial geomorphology and stream
ecology. The goal is to determine: (a) how spatial variability in velocity and
shear stress affect sediment transport in gravel-bedded streams, (b) how these
affect primary productivity at reach and patch scale, and (c) what control
underlying bedrock lithology exerts on these processes. This project will couple
the use of a 2D model and the collection of field measurements in four sites in
the Oregon Coast Range. The sites have been selected based on similar climate,
light, nutrients, and temperature, but different lithology to isolate the
controls it exerts. The project is led by an early career Hispanic female
investigator. Collaboration with a local high school will provide a research
experience for teachers and involve Native American high school students.