* 1619993
* Development and analysis of high-order partitioned schemes for fluid-structure interaction problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Martina Bukac, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 187,946.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems arise in many applications, such as
aerodynamics, geomechanics and biomedical engineering. In hemodynamics, FSI
models have been used to describe the interaction between blood and arterial
walls. More precisely, numerical algorithms for fluid-structure interaction
problems can provide predictions in many cardiovascular diseases, such as
aneurysms or atherosclerosis. Since combining state-of-the-art algorithms with
non-invasive clinical measurement tools provides an innovative approach to
medical diagnosis and surgical decision making, there is an increasing demand
for fast and efficient numerical schemes to solve FSI problems. The PI will
develop and analyze a class of stable and robust high-order partitioned
numerical methods for FSI problems. The development of stable and efficient
algorithms for fluid-structure problems is crucial for performing patient
specific diagnostic tests, and this work will make a major contribution in
biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is a
development and analysis of a class of higher-order partitioned numerical
methods for interactions between an incompressible, viscous fluid and a thin,
elastic structure. The discretization in space will be performed using the
finite element method, and different partitioned methods will be proposed based
on the time discretization. In particular, algorithms will be developed based on
the kinematically coupled scheme (Project 1), the Strang operator splitting
approach (Project 2) and the Crank-Nicolson and Leapfrog method (Project 3).
Energy estimates and convergence rates will be derived for each proposed
algorithm. A comparison of all the proposed methods based on their performance,
stability and convergence properties will be made, allowing other researchers to
identify optimal algorithms for specific choices of parameter values. The
proposed algorithms, numerical analysis and simulation results will be published
and made available to the community. In that way, they will serve as a set of
reference data that can be used for model validation by other researchers.