* 1619371
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Global Event and Trend Archive Research (GETAR)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jefferson Bailey, Internet Archive
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 54,000.00

This project will devise interactive, integrated, digital library/archive
systems coupled with linked and expert-curated webpage/tweet collections,
covering key parts of the 1997-2020 timeframe, supporting research on urgent
global challenge events and initiatives. It will allow diverse stakeholder
communities to interactively collect, organize, browse, visualize, study,
analyze, summarize, and explore content and sources related to biodiversity,
climate change, crises, disasters, elections, energy policy, environmental
policy/planning, geospatial information, green engineering, human rights,
inequality, migrations, nuclear power, population growth, resiliency, shootings,
sustainability, violence, etc. Studying and addressing important global issues,
by scholars, the public, and K-12 students, will be enhanced through tailored
interfaces coupled with important collections that will be primary resources for
understanding the modern world and its challenges, as well as initiatives,
trends, and solutions.

Research will extend work on modeling trends, events, and sources, to guide
focused crawling, information extraction, tagging, and collaboration. Domain
experts will leverage rich event models, exploiting the generality of the 5S
framework (Societies, Scenarios, Spaces, Structure, Streams), extending from
word, n-gram, topic, concept, and language models. This research will enable
efficient assembly of knowledge bases, rapid prototyping of interfaces,
gathering/curation of collections with high precision and recall, and flexible
discovery in support of research and learning. Interdisciplinary research
advances will address digital humanities, web archiving, information retrieval,
natural language processing, machine learning, and the construction of valuable
interactive/collaborative interfaces. For further information see the project
web site at eventsarchive.org.