* 1619666
* WORKSHOP: Emerging Opportunities in Ceramic and Glass Science - A Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Katherine Faber, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 132,825.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Given the ever-increasing pace of
innovation in the 21st century, a workshop to identify emerging areas in ceramic
and glass science is warranted. A two-and-a-half-day forum brings together 45
researchers in glass and ceramic materials to share both expertise and vision to
define outstanding materials challenges. In preparation for the meeting,
participants suggest and evaluate discussion topics on-line to outline the
meeting agenda. In order to ensure that the workshop report has the most
comprehensive influence in and beyond the ceramics community, the Journal of the
American Ceramic Society, one of the top ceramic science journals, has agreed to
publish the workshop report, as an open access publication. The workshop will be
held in the D.C. area from Sept. 12-14, 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Details:&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on Emerging Opportunities in Ceramic and Glass
Science focuses on the most recent research ideas in four material classes:
amorphous materials, oxides, non-oxides, and composites. Based upon
presentations and discussion by 45 materials professionals, critical research
challenges are defined. The role of computational techniques for material design
and property prediction is highlighted. In addition, strategies of data mining
are explored as a tool for identifying new areas of study and opportunities for
crosscutting research. Participants for the workshop are selected from academia,
industry and national laboratories to provide the broadest possible input for
identifying emerging opportunities in ceramic and glass science. These include
underrepresented groups and a balance of participants over all career stages.
Among the 45 are researchers from outside the materials discipline included to
highlight crosscutting opportunities. The workshop report, slated for
publication in the Journal of the American Ceramic Society, provides the
Ceramics Program and related programs within the NSF's Division of Materials
Research with a compendium of needs, opportunities and activities in ceramic and
glass science.