* 1619901
* OP: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Simulation of Non-homogeneous Thin-film Photovoltaic Devices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Akhlesh Lakhtakia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

Solar cells are desirable as energy sources that neither use fossil fuels nor
produce greenhouse gases. They must be designed to efficiently absorb sunlight
and convert it to electricity. The solar cell needs to be sufficiently thick to
absorb light across the solar spectrum. To reduce this thickness, and so reduce
manufacturing cost, several layers of materials are used: first, to help light
penetrate the solar cell, and then to trap it inside. Some of these layers are
semiconductors in which electricity is generated, while others (for example, a
periodically corrugated metallic back layer) may help absorption by trapping
light near their surface. However, the amount of electricity generated by a
solar cell does not just depend on absorption, but also on the transport of
electrons within the layers of the solar cell. If the density of electrons
decreases during transport, thereby trumping any gain in sunlight absorption,
then a chosen light-management strategy will not be fruitful. The project team
will develop an integrated pair of computer models that simultaneously predict
the absorption of sunlight and the consequent electrical performance of the
solar cell using modern techniques from numerical analysis. The codes will
extend current simulation technology to allow for semiconductor layers with
properties that vary from place to place and allow fully three-dimensional
models of the device. Using their codes, the PIs will optimize device designs
for best electricity generation. Definitive predictions will be provided about
thin-film photovoltaic solar cells, thereby providing significant progress
towards inexpensive and sustainable production of electricity. These codes will
be made available to other photovoltaic researchers.

The overall model of the thin-film photovoltaic solar cell will have a photonic
submodel and an electrical submodel. In the photonic model, the quasi-periodic
Maxwell's equations will be solved using edge finite elements. To improve
flexibility, the PIs will analyze and implement a non-standard mortaring
technique to take care of quasi-periodicity. Compatible electrical models will
be analyzed and implemented using the Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin (HDG)
method on hexahedral elements for the non-linear convection and diffusion
problem governing drift and diffusion of electrical charge carriers. The HDG
scheme will require a novel analysis to understand this non-linear convection-
diffusion problem. Stability and convergence will be explored first for linear
convection-diffusion problems, and the methodology will then be extended to an
implicit-explicit time-stepping scheme for the drift-diffusion system. Besides a
full 3D model, the PIs will develop a 2D model assuming translation invariance
of the photovoltaic device in one transverse direction. The second step of the
proposed research is to use the new simulation capability to design optimal
nonhomogeneous thin-film photovoltaic solar cells via the Differential Evolution
Algorithm. This will optimize for maximal photovoltaic electricity-generation
efficiency. Additionally, domain and coefficient derivatives will be
characterized and implemented to allow the computation of sensitivities and the
use of gradient-based optimization. Detailed photonic-and-electrical modeling
with doubly periodic back-reflectors and non-homogeneous light-absorbing layers
will permit a major expansion of solar-cell design methodologies, besides
yielding optimal designs for maximal photovoltaic electricity-generation
efficiency.