* 1619524
* Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO) to Parity Capstone Operational, Research, Evaluation, Documentation and Institutionalization 10+ LSAMP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jean Andino, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2022
* USD 5,000,000.00

This long-standing LSAMP activity was designed to support a strong and vibrant
scientific and technological workforce through recruiting, retaining, and
graduating scientists and engineers from currently underrepresented populations.
The WASEO Alliance (one of the first projects sponsored by NSF?s Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation) utilizes a multi-contextual approach
involving project activities in student research experiences, the establishment
of peer networks, an emphasis on the social context of science, and development
of a culture of professionalism in students, to name a few areas. This multi-
contextual approach will be tested scientifically and documented for scaling up
nation-wide in order to continue our drive to increase the number of B.S.
degrees earned annually by underrepresented minority science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students. The project, in its final five
years of NSF support (2016-2021), will seek to increase graduation rates in
Arizona and Utah such that Alliance institutions will represent 33.8% of total
bachelor?s degrees to minority STEM students in Arizona and Utah. That
percentage would be roughly equal to today?s percentage of underrepresented
minorities in the general population of those states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
WAESO and its 13 Alliance partner institutions will continue to make
improvements to its innovative research, teaching, and academic support
interventions on behalf of undergraduate minority STEM students. These support
interventions have been developed over the past 24 years and rated highly by
external evaluation. In a very significant new addition, WAESO will initiate a
major knowledge-generating, social science educational research project to
scientifically study, test and evaluate the multi-contextual elements at work in
order to determine their positive impacts on student advancement and faculty
culture. The results of this research will contribute to our understanding of
the positive changes in WAESO institutions as a result of the LSAMP program; and
how the program components of the WAESO LSAMP lead to minority STEM student
success. Project outcomes will, in turn, point the way toward a successful
scaling of these best practices to a regional and national level.