* 1619893
* RAPID- The implications of El Nino-related bleaching on coral recruitment in Moorea
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2017
* USD 89,385.00

This research explores the effects of the 2015-16 El-Niño on coral reefs in
French Polynesia where the US National Science Foundation supports a Long-Term
Ecological Research site. El Niño brings a diversity of unusual conditions to
the Pacific Ocean, but for coral reefs the most important effect is caused by
seawater warming during the summer. Bleaching, the process causing corals to
lose color and die, is a dramatic example of the negative effects of El Niño on
reef corals, but high temperature also has insidious effects through impaired
reproduction and poor recruitment of baby corals. As a result, El Niño
conditions are likely to be associated with a degraded ability of coral reefs to
regrow following disturbances, potentially preventing a full recovery, or
favoring substantial changes in the community that develops. This research
builds on the unrivalled history of LTER investigations in Moorea to ask how
coral recruitment is affected by El Niño, as measured by the number of baby
corals arriving to the reef, the number of baby corals that grow, and the kinds
of communities that develop as a result of these events. The study involves
fieldwork conducted in Moorea by faculty and graduate students, during which
settlement tiles will be installed and monitored for baby corals, baby corals
will be evaluated for overall "health", and natural and artificial reef surfaces
will be quantified for community development. The results of this study will
help to understand how marine ecosystems are responding to the spectrum of
natural and human-related disturbances to which they exposed, including global
climate change, and will improve the capacity to understand in what form coral
reefs in US waters and throughout the world will survive the coming century. The
project creates unique opportunities for graduate students to work in an
international context, where they will conduct research promoting STEM careers,
an appreciation of diverse tropical ecosystems, and the role of climate change
in modifying ecosystem dynamics. The broader implications of this project will
be strengthened by integrating the results into life science curricula at local
high schools, in part by utilizing settlement tiles from Moorea in classroom
exercises staffed by California State University Northridge graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the effects of the 2015-16
El-Niño on coral recruitment in Moorea, French Polynesia, where coral reefs have
been studied since 2005 thought the Moorea Coral Reef LTER. Time-series research
supported by this program provides a unique historical context against which the
ecological effects of the upcoming El-Niño can be gauged. As coral bleaching
negatively affects coral reproduction, and previous El Niño events have been
associated with globally-depressed coral recruitment, it is reasonably to
hypothesize that coral recruitment in Moorea will change in magnitude (i.e.,
declining density) and type (i.e., taxonomic composition) over the next year.
These possibilities have important implications, because coral recruitment
mediates community resilience to disturbances, and modulates the trajectories of
future reef development. In this 12-month project, a program of mensurative and
manipulative experiments will be conducted to addressed four hypotheses: (1)
coral recruitment will be depressed following El Niño-related seawater warming,
(2) warming will affect post-settlement success of corals, (3) for Pocillopora,
the effects on coral recruitment will be modulated through density-dependent
processes, and (4) the resulting recruitment perturbations will modify
trajectories of coral community development. The results of this research will
have general application in revealing the demographic processes determining the
response of coral reef communities to recurrent pulse disturbances such as El
Niño events.