* 1619728
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Crowdsourcing-Based Spectrum Etiquette Enforcement in Dynamic Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Ming Li, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 329,279.00

The radio spectrum is becoming an increasingly valuable natural resource
nowadays, while it has been shown that much of the spectrum is underutilized in
existing licensed bands. To enhance spectrum utilization, dynamic spectrum
access (DSA) has been envisioned as a set of promising new spectrum management
paradigms, such as spectrum trading/auction and opportunistic spectrum access.
While DSA and programmable cognitive radios enable a much higher flexibility of
spectrum access, due to the openness of wireless medium, it is also susceptible
to various forms of misuse or abuse. For example, unauthorized transmissions
without a valid license, or secondary transmissions that intentionally disobey
the interference constraints set by the primary users (radios). The misusers
will not only gain higher throughput for themselves, but also harm the
efficiency of spectrum access operations of normal users (radios). Therefore,
enforcing spectrum access rules or etiquettes is crucial to ensuring the
ultimate success of the DSA paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a framework for etiquette and rule enforcing in dynamic spectrum
sharing environments. The main idea of the proposed research is to engage
community users (radios) to detect misuse, and identify and punish unruly
devices. By crowdsourcing the tasks of monitoring neighborhood radio access
behaviors to many cognitive radio devices, multiple benefits can be gained: 1)
the potentially large number of participating devices can result in much larger
detection coverage and accuracy; 2) no pervasive dedicated trusted
infrastructure or hardware is needed; and 3) the fact that every device could
possibly be a monitoring device leads to a much stronger deterrence to
misbehaviors. The interdisciplinary research plan consists of four major
components: 1) an optimized crowdsourced passive radio traffic monitoring
framework to detect access misbehavior in the vast DSA spectrum; 2) techniques
to identify misbehaving cognitive radio devices using physical layer
identification, even when the signal waveform can be adaptively modified; 3)
techniques for immediate punishment of spectrum misuse through adaptive friendly
jamming which exploits multi-functional re-configurable antennas; and 4)
incentive mechanism design via auctions to ensure user participation in each
task of crowdsourced etiquette enforcement. The success of this project will
benefit multiple current and future application domains deploying DSA,
especially those that require critical information protection, such as
healthcare, transportation, energy, public services, emergency, and military
services.&lt;br/&gt;