* 1619346
* NeTS: Small: Designing Agile and Scalable Self-Healing Functionalities for Ultra Dense Future Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ali Imran, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,012.00

Cellular networks are subject to cell outages of several types. Complete outages
are often caused by equipment malfunctions; partial outages or degraded
performances are often caused by parameter mis-configurations. Outage rates are
proportional to cell density and base station complexity. Both of these factors
have been consistently on rise from 1G to 4G. Current semi-automated approaches
to cell outage management have proven inadequate and highly inefficient even for
today's network, and are surely unfeasible for future cellular networks marked
by ultra-dense cell deployment and mounting complexity. If no intervening
measures are taken, cell outage management may become a primary challenge for
future cellular networks, such as 5G. To remedy this, this project will develop
an Advance Cell Outage Management (ACOM) framework for fully automating cell
outage detection and compensation in future ultra-dense, heterogeneous cellular
networks. ACOM will be built by developing and integrating three novel
solutions: 1) Autonomous Macro Cell Outage Detection and root cause analysis
(MOD); 2) Autonomous Small Cell Outage Detection and root cause analysis (SOD);
and 3) Autonomous Heterogeneous Cell Outage Compensation (HOC). In ACOM, the
outage detected and diagnosed by MOD and SOD will be exploited by the
optimization process in HOC to transform future ultra-dense, heterogeneous
cellular deployments into fully self-healing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key
distinct features of ACOM will include agility, stability and flexibility to
accommodate varying user densities, cell sizes, and radio channel conditions,
and ultra-dense deployments of small cells. The proposed plan lies at the nexus
of profiling, anomaly detection, prediction, sparse matrix completions,
multidimensional scaling, and dynamics handling. It employs machine learning,
optimization, and game theory. Project outcomes will be validated using data
from real network data while leveraging a full scale outdoor 5G testbed. If
successful, this project is certain to make strong impact on all aspects of
evolving digital society that count on reliability of cellular networks. Another
key impact of this project is that it offers strong workforce training in a
highly sought-after multi-disciplinary skill set needed to conduct proposed
research, while ensuring participation of women and other underrepresented
groups, and K-12 outreach. The project will also leverage collaboration with
national and international stake holders in the cellular ecosystem to maximize
its impact on standardization.