* 1619651
* EAGER: Developing an Imaging Tool to Investigate the Dynamics of Nanoparticles in 2D
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Thomas Russell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 02/28/2018
* USD 358,301.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions, dispersions and gels play
an important role in life and the physical sciences. These systems are important
in areas ranging from the traditional, such as agriculture and cosmetics, to the
cutting edge, such as new materials and nanomotors. This project will develop a
new imaging technology that will allow us to visualize the motion of nanometer
scale particles with high resolution for long periods of time. These studies
will open a large number of opportunities in the imaging of nanoscopic materials
across a range of materials areas. These include the crystallization of polymers
in ultrathin films, polymer nanoparticle-composites, the diffusion of
nanoparticles in gels, in situ monitoring of separations of nanoparticles and
polymers, in operando monitoring of electrochemical cells for battery
applications, 2D phase separation behavior, glassy and jammed nanoparticle
assemblies, the dynamics of nonequilibrium systems, and in the monitoring of
nanomotors, where propulsion is provided by chemical reactions. These studies
will open pathways to addressing some of the most longstanding problems in
materials and provide insight into controlling non-equilibrium packing of
materials, including the dynamics and ageing of glassy materials, to
structure/property relationships of glassy materials, and, ultimately, to the
parameters that lead to rare events, like the unjamming of particles which can
impact materials science but, also, area as far-reaching as geoscience, where
such unjamming phenomena, as in the unjamming of tectonic plates, lead to
earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a visualization protocol, along with the design of analysis
routines and a revolutionary SEM sample cell to explore the dynamics of 2D
assemblies of nanospheres (NSs) and nanorods (NRs) as the areal density of the
nanoparticles (NPs) increases, bringing the NPs from a low density liquid state
into a jammed or glassy state; along the way, structures and structure dynamics
will be monitored at unprecedented spatial resolution. Imaging with electron
microscopy provides the most valuable direct information on nanoscale structure.
However, studies of typical solvated particles are limited by the high vapor
pressure of the solvents which limits both spatial resolutions and the temporal
duration of the studies. We will utilize ionic liquids (ILs) as an alternate
platform to monitor solvated soft material dynamics by electron microscopy
eliminating the need for a liquid cell. The proposed studies will advance our
knowledge by developing instrumentation, versatile sample cell, and imaging
software, to tackle a long-outstanding, truly grand challenge in materials
science and physics, i.e., the nature of glassy and jammed systems. Through the
development of the instrumentation and experimental protocols, we will gain
insight into the dynamics of jammed and glassy materials, quantify the real-
space structural rearrangements arising from NP interactions, and elucidate the
heterogeneous nature of dynamics in glassy materials, a topic of intense
theoretical interest.