* 1619868
* Measurements of sound velocity and density of core materials by combination of dynamic and static methods
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2022
* USD 400,008.00

Earth's metallic core is the engine of the planet, providing the energy to
generate its magnetic field and the driving force for plate tectonics. The
properties the core control the function of the engine. It is fundamentally
important to understanding the physical and chemical properties of the core in
order to understand how our planet works. The density and velocity profiles of
the core have been derived from seismic observations. Accurate measurements of
density and velocity of core iron-alloys under simultaneous high pressure and
temperature are required to derive meaningful composition models of the core.
Dr. Yingwei Fei investigates the density and sound velocity of core materials
over a wide pressure-temperature range by combining static and dynamic
experimental methods. The results will be used to develop a comprehensive core
composition model. The study will promote interdisciplinary research and
significantly advance knowledge of the Earth's core and its influence on the
dynamics processes of the planet. The projects will provide training in
interdisciplinary research areas for graduate students and postdoctoral
associates. The high-pressure techniques developed through the project will have
general applications for synthesis of advanced materials, particularly super-
hard materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to obtain
the best measurements of the density and sound velocity of core materials in the
Fe-S-Si-O system by combination of static high-pressure compression and
shockwave experiment. The proposed projects include (1) measurements of density
and sound velocity of a Fe-9wt%O alloy and Fe-3wt%S-3wt%Si-3wt%O mixture by
shock compression, and (2) additional measurements of density and sound velocity
of an Fe-9wt%Si alloy by static and dynamic compressions. The proposal outlines
a new approach to define the density and velocity of the end-member alloys whose
compositions are close to the estimated core composition in a binary system. The
data obtained in a suite of binary systems can be interpolated in a small range
for a multi-element core composition that includes Fe, S, Si, and O. The
interpolation will be further tested against new experimental measurements on a
multi-element composition (Fe-3wt%S-3wt%Si-3wt%O), and ultimately narrow down
the core composition range that is consistent with the geophysical observations.