* 1619955
* EAGER: Collaborative: Predictive Maintenance of HVAC Systems using Audio Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Ravi Srinivasan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2018
* USD 29,819.00

Acoustic sensing-based preventive maintenance approach focuses on mapping
auditory information, captured from mechanical systems in buildings, to their
health status and probability of impending failures. An important application of
this methodology is reducing energy waste in commercial heating, ventilating,
and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, which accounts for over 42% of the total
U.S. commercial building energy usage. The outcome of this project is a robust
acoustic sensing technology that has a high accuracy in predicting actual
failures of HVAC systems. This research will be integrated with new user
interfaces that will allow building managers to virtually navigate the equipment
and appliances in large buildings (or collections of buildings), and to quickly
identify potential failures.

This EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial applications: (a) ensuring privacy, and (b) minimizing false
positives in predicting equipment failure. This project develops acoustic signal
acquisition and processing techniques that preserve the privacy of everyone and
everything that is susceptible to privacy violations due to continuous acoustic
monitoring. The proposed collaborative research enables buildings to be
retrofitted with a low-cost, acoustic sensing solution to monitor its HVAC
systems to predict their impending failures. A major goal of this project is to
reduce false positives when making these predictions that are primarily caused
by inadequate modeling of sounds from a faulty component, inadequate modeling of
different types of faults, and errors in sound source recognition. Furthermore,
this project creates a foundation for the next generation of intelligent systems
that autonomously monitor equipment and predict failure.

The project engages University of Florida and University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill to augment research capability in conducting visualization-based
dynamic assessment of HVAC systems, and building low-cost, embedded device-based
centralized HVAC monitoring systems. With a cloud-connected network of embedded
audio monitoring devices deployed in the University of Florida campus buildings
for running acoustic processing and classification tasks, this novel and
transformative technology is aimed at identifying and solving challenges in
large-scale, commercial-grade deployment of such systems in real world
scenarios. This project will engage an industrial partner to develop privacy-
preserving algorithms, build test environments, and guide commercialization
aspects of this technology.