* 1619918
* FEW: Transformative Food Technologies to Enhance Sustainability at the Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Jeyamkondan Subbiah, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,988.00

1619918 Subbiah, Jeyamkondan

Taking the food science and technology perspective, this workshop will lay
groundwork for research collaborations focused on the Food-Energy-Water nexus.
The workshop is scheduled for February 22-24, 2016 at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln. Food, energy and water (FEW) systems are highly
interconnected, and there is an urgent need to enhance understanding of how
these systems are coupled. The food and bioprocessing industries offer an
important opportunity to reduce water and energy use in this complex, coupled
system, as solutions can target a relatively small number of establishments
having a large impact. The overall goal of this workshop is to drive innovation
by bringing together a diverse group of researchers, practitioners, and
stakeholders from academia, industry, and government agencies to identify gaps
and research needs in the area of transformative food technologies, which will
enable all of these stakeholders to develop methods to improve food safety,
reduce the amount of water and energy consumed, reduce the waste produced by the
food processing industry, and enhance the sustainability of the FEW system.

To bring this goal to fruition, the objectives of the workshop are to: (1)
Describe the state-of-the-science in food sanitation, waste reduction
technologies, and transformative technologies using process design and modeling;
(2) Identify the technological, socioeconomic, and behavioral barriers that must
be transcended in the food and bioprocessing industry; and (3) Provide a process
and venue for scientists, engineers, and stakeholders to creatively and
collaboratively generate research ideas for transformative technologies to
enhance sustainability in the industry and associated FEW systems.