* 1619184
* NeTS: Small: Sustainable Wireless Communications with Optimal Utilization of Renewable Energy and Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sujit Dey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The massive increases in wireless devices and data are expected to lead to
significant increases in energy consumption and carbon emissions of future
wireless networks. The problem will be exacerbated by a growing number of off-
grid base stations powered by diesel. This project addresses the sustainability
of future wireless networks by significantly reducing the use of electricity and
diesel in running wireless base stations, and thereby carbon emissions. While
various techniques have been proposed to reduce power consumption of wireless
networks, this project will address the challenging problem of efficient and
cost-effective use of intermittent renewable power sources like solar and wind
power to minimize grid/diesel power consumption while ensuring no adverse impact
on user experience. Additionally, the project will demonstrate the feasibility
of solar-powered small cells, significantly enhancing wireless connectivity in
rural or remote areas, and enable unplanned and rapid deployments in urban
areas. The resulting software and testbed will facilitate future research in
renewable energy for wireless networks, and a new course on sustainable
communications. The PI will work closely with University of California-San Diego
Center for Wireless Communications industry members to validate the techniques
developed, and facilitate adoption in their products which will lead to adoption
of solar and wind energy sources to power future generations of wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will introduce the concept of using
data storage in user devices to transfer surplus renewable power to surplus data
stored, to be utilized during periods of deficit renewable power to reduce
electricity/diesel, with no need for energy storage. It will be enabled by a
novel dynamic base station resource allocation technique which can indirectly
impact data rate. This, in turn, will affect the data stored at user devices and
also the base station power consumed, depending on surplus and deficit periods,
without affecting user experience. A second technique will be developed for use
of an additional low capacity energy storage at the base station to further
enhance utilization of the temporally varying renewable power. The technique
will simultaneously decide to use project will also develop new dynamic user
association and transmit power adaptation techniques making use of spatial
variations in renewable power between neighboring base stations to minimize
total grid electricity/diesel consumed for heterogeneous networks, including
showing feasibility of solar-only powered small cells. A simulation framework
and testbed will be developed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
approaches.