* 1619884
* Efficient Methods for Large-Scale Self-Concordant Convex Minimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Quoc Tran-Dinh, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,840.00

The literature on the formulation, analysis and applications of convex
optimization is ever expanding due to its broad applications in signal
processing, machine learning, statistics, and other fields of data science. In
theory, many convex problems have a well-understood structure, and hence state-
of-the-art first order and interior-point methods can obtain high accurate
solutions. In practice, however, modern applications present a host of
increasingly larger-scale and nonsmooth optimization problems that can render
these methods impractical. Fortunately, recent advances in convex optimization
offer a surprising new angle to fundamentally re-examine the theory and practice
of large-scale convex optimization models in a unified fashion. Successful
development of the PI's ideas will have several broad impacts in data analysis
and computational science. While existing state-of-the-art approaches focus on
certain classes of convex problems, the PI strongly believes that the approach
proposed in this project can be expand to cover a wide range of unexploited
convex optimization applications. The obtained theory and methods can be
specified and customized to solve various problems in different fields,
including massive data analysis, machine learning, high-resolution imaging
science, operations research, networks, and control. Successful real-world
applications and software development can create a major impact to practicians
in academic and industry. The PI's broad collaborations are expected to make a
significant progress in the application of convex optimization techniques.
Several research topics in this project will be integrated into graduate
training programs through special topic courses and PhD research directions,
whereas undergraduate training activities can also benefit from this research
via internship training and interdisciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on exploiting and
generalizing a prominent concept so-called self-concordance to develop new
efficient convex optimization techniques to attack two classes of large-scale
convex optimization problems, and will be integrated into three work packages
(WPs). WP1. Composite self-concordant convex optimization: While existing convex
optimization methods essentially rely on the Lipschitz gradient assumption which
unfortunately excludes many important applications such as Poisson and graphical
learning models, the PI instead focuses on the self-concordance structure and
its generalizations. Such a concept is key to the theory of interior-point
methods, but has remained unexploited in composite minimization. Grounded in
this structure, the PI will develop novel and provable convex optimization
algorithms for solving several subclasses of large-scale composite convex
problems. He also plans to generalize this self-concordant notion to other
subclasses of problems such as logistic loss functions and entropy models to
cover a broader range of applications. WP2. Constrained convex optimization
involving self-concordant barriers: Various constrained convex applications are
integrated with a self-concordant barrier structure, while other convex
constraints often have a "simple" structure. Existing general-purpose convex
algorithms solve these problems by mainly employing either a standard interior-
point method or an augmented Lagrangian framework. The PI alternatively
concentrates on exploiting special structures of these problems using the theory
of self-concordant barriers and combining them with both the interior-point idea
and the proximal framework to develop new and scalable algorithms equipped with
a rigorous convergence guarantee, while offering a parallel and distributed
implementation. WP3. Implementation and applications: This WP aims at
investigating the implementation aspects of the proposed algorithms and
upgrading the PI's SCOPT solver. The methods developed in this project will be
validated through three concrete real-world applications: image processing
involving Poisson models, graphical learning problems, and large-scale max-cut
and graph clustering problems.