* 1619948
* U.S. Science International Collaborations and Contributions to EcoSummit 2016 "Sustainability: Engineering Change"
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* William Mitsch, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

1619948 (Mitsch). This is a grant in assistance for international travel for
U.S. scientists and engineers, the preponderance of them being early career, to
participate in the EcoSummit 2016 in Montpellier France on August 29-September
2, 2016. The goals are: 1. To support the participation of these scientists and
engineers in two specific invitation-only special sessions: 2. To develop at
least two special issues in international journal(s) related to the theme of
EcoSummit 2016: Sustainability and engineering change; and 3. To attract young
U.S. environmental scientists and engineers to an international dialogue on
ecological engineering for landscape sustainability and climate variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than half of the funded participants will be female
and six of the funded participants will be from EPSCoR states. Participation by
USA scientists and engineers in this event will provide a stimulus to their
research programs on sustainability, ecological engineering, landscape
management, and climate variability. Those from the USA who attended EcoSummit
2012 in Columbus US have related the incredible opportunity that these
ecosummits provide and the international connections that they made for
enhancing their research. U.S. scientific research in ecological engineering,
watershed management, and mitigating and adapting to climate variability will be
especially enhanced.