* 1619679
* I-Corps: iCloak: Privacy Preserving Individual Location Sharing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Li Xiong, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

As location information is frequently used for location based applications,
mobile users' fear of privacy breach continues to escalate. Current mobile
operating systems only provide users with minimal access control, either to
block or allow location access, which are ineffective and inefficient in
mitigating the privacy threats. Customers are forced to give up their location
privacy in exchange for use of location based services or give up location based
services in order to protect their location. In this project, the I-Corps team
investigates and implements a new customizable and rigorous privacy mechanism
(app) which allows mobile users to share a cloaked (approximate) location
without deteriorating its utility for location based applications. The proposed
technology provides mobile users an easy way to customize their privacy
settings, such as when and where to share locations with what precision. In this
way, mobile users will benefit from privacy-preserving location sharing with
added functionalities of location-based recommendations and social networking.
Location service providers and smartphone manufacturers can also integrate this
privacy-preserving technique to enhance the privacy protection for users.

The proposed mechanism (app) provides a rigorous and customizable privacy
framework for users to share their locations with other third parties (e.g.
location based service providers, or other users in location based social
networks). The privacy guarantee is based on differential privacy, the state-of-
art framework for privacy protection, which ensures that even given the
knowledge of the user's moving patterns or all possible locations where the user
may appear, an attacker still cannot figure out the true location of the user.
The cloaked location, on the other hand, also guarantees optimal utility
(minimal error) for location based applications, e.g., finding nearest
restaurants or friends. In addition, with a user's historical locations, the
proposed mechanism can also make personalized location based recommendations
according to the user's moving pattern and interest of friends. The project
promises significant broader impacts on enabling location based applications
with privacy protection for mobile users.