* 1619767
* Advancing Mechanistic Understanding of Two-Fluid-Phase Flow in Porous Medium  Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* William Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 03/31/2019
* USD 460,762.00

Two-fluid-phase porous medium systems are systems that contain a solid phase and
two distinct immiscible fluid phases that fill the pore space between solid
particles. This general class of system arises in many applications of interest
to society, including water infiltration from the Earth's surface, carbon
sequestration, gas production from hydraulically fractured wells, petroleum
recovery, land-atmosphere interaction, engineered treatment processes, and a
wide range of biomedical applications (e.g. tumor growth, dermal transport,
etc.). Our scientific understanding of porous medium systems is embodied in
mechanistic mathematical models, which are used to evaluate such porous medium
systems, make predictions, guide engineering design, and to inform policy
decisions. Because the length of many porous medium systems is much greater than
the natural length scale of the solid phase, the mathematical models intended to
represent such systems are typically posed at a scale that neglects many aspects
of the physical processes known to influence flow in such systems. While the
physics are relatively well understood at the small scale, there has not existed
a rigorous connection between the small, well-understood scale and the larger
scale where problems must be solved. Recently, a theory has been developed that
connects these two length scales and yields models that have the promise to be
more physically realistic and accurate than the standard models used in
practice. This research will reduce these new theoretical models to completely
solvable forms, evaluate specific aspects of these models, and validate the
models for a range of systems. Both small scale experiments and high-resolution
modeling will be a used to accomplish these objectives. The results will be of
widespread benefit to society because of the broad applicability of this class
of problem, and the work will involve graduate students recruited from a pool
that is rich in under-represented fractions of the population working in
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many critical problems in hydrology
involve two-fluid-phase flow in porous medium systems. The proposed work will
connect well-understood microscale processes with macroscale models using the
thermodynamically constrained averaging theory (TCAT) that will yield closed,
solved models that are evaluated and validated. Microfluidic experiments, and
high resolution lattice Boltzmann simulations will be used to provide the fine
scale detail needed to construct specific forms of closure relationships and
support a thorough evaluation and validation of this new class of model.
Computational and experimental methods and results will also be produced that
will be of value independent of the theoretical manner in which macroscale
systems are modeled. This work will have a significant set of broader impacts.
The models developed are hydrologically motivated but have applicability far
beyond hydrology. We will nurture and grow our set of collaborators that apply
TCAT-based models for applications such as tumor growth, the effects of diabetes
on extremal tissue, and engineered systems such as ultrafiltration membranes.
The lattice-Boltzmann methods developed will be applicable to a wide range of
systems beyond the hydrologic systems of focus in this work. A second edition of
a book describing the theoretical advances will be produced to disseminate the
findings of this work. Additional impacts include: (1) contributions to
education through course content, student research, and science outreach; (2)
participation of underrepresented researchers and linkages to minority
recruitment programs; (3) broad dissemination of findings in hydrology, physics,
engineering, and applied mathematics journals; and (4) digital archiving and
dissemination of unique data sets and video images of experiments and high-
resolution simulations.