* 1619384
* CHS: Small: User Interfaces for Improving Collaboration Between Blind and Sighted People
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shaun Kane, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,997.00

Inaccessible graphical user interfaces hinder participation by blind and
visually impaired people in work, education, and other aspects of public life.
Alternative user interface technology such as screen reader software can address
this problem by converting inaccessible visual content into synthesized speech,
but can introduce other issues when used in a shared setting; blind users are
unable to follow along when their sighted partners use a graphical user
interface, while most sighted users lack the training to use a screen reader.
This gap makes it difficult for blind and sighted peers to collaborate on shared
tasks, as each user may have a significantly different view of the task and may
have difficulty following their partner's actions. The PI's goals in this
research are to understand the barriers to collaboration between users of
different visual abilities, and to create and evaluate new tools to facilitate
such collaborations. Enabling blind and sighted people to work collaboratively
will significantly improve educational and employment outcomes for millions of
people. The PI will work with partners, the AccessComputing Alliance and the
Colorado Center for the Blind, to directly involve individuals with disabilities
as part of the research team, and will release an open source toolkit for
creating software to support blind/sighted collaboration. Educational activities
will include summer workshops with blind and sighted students to explore how
students with mixed abilities can learn to co-design and co-develop more
accessible software together.

Little prior research has explored how blind and sighted people collaborate
synchronously using computers. The PI's preliminary work has identified several
significant obstacles to synchronous collaboration between blind and sighted
individuals using existing tools: maintaining joint attention without visual
feedback, lack of awareness of actions taken by others, and crosstalk between a
screen reader's speech output and out-of-band conversations between activity
partners. In this project, the PI will develop and test a set of metrics and
reference tasks for evaluating collaborative activities between a sighted
partner using a graphical user interface and a blind partner using a screen
reader. The PI will develop tools to support equal and effective blind/sighted
collaboration through sharing information about each user's activities with the
group. This approach will connect users' computing devices (and related
assistive technology) over a network, so that each user can maintain awareness
of their partner's activities when interacting with shared resources. The PI
will prototype various means of integrating this information into existing user
interfaces, and implement a toolkit which enables software developers to support
blind/sighted collaboration in their applications. The PI will validate these
tools through user testing with mixed groups of blind and sighted users, and
will demonstrate the robustness of the approach by applying it to synchronous
co-located collaboration, asynchronous online collaboration, and micro-tasking
using crowd workers.