* 1619743
* Revealing the Inside of a Nanoscale Na-ion Battery: New Understanding on Sodium Intercalation in Cathodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2015,08/31/2017
* Reza Shahbazian-Yassar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 273,842.00

The research objective of this grant is to advance the understanding of the
underlying mechanisms that are active in Na-ion reactions in electrodes and
chemically-induced failure and fracture in Na-ion batteries. For this purpose,
the cathode electrode will be subjected to electrochemical probing inside a
transmission electron microscope (TEM) where the microstructure of electrodes
can be simultaneously monitored in high resolution. Room-temperature
rechargeable Na-ion batteries can be competitive to Li-ion batteries due to
their lower cost and the widespread availability of the sodium resources. While
tremendous research is focused on Li-ion batteries worldwide, scientific
challenges associated with room-temperature rechargeable sodium-ion batteries
have been relatively unexplored. This is of prime importance considering that Li
resources are very limited and their price has increased continuously during the
past 20 years. The challenges of Na-ion batteries are much more complicated than
the Li-ion case, as Na-ions are larger than Li-ions by 70 percent, which induces
large mechanical stresses upon driving the Na-ions into the host electrode. The
entry of sodium into the electrodes triggers complicated chemical reactions and
failures that are poorly understood, and the battery life is reduced
drastically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important challenge in the broad use of Na-
ion batteries is the very low cycling stability in service conditions. Through
this grant, the PI will investigate several unresolved scientific challenges in
new cathode materials which, if successfully resolved, could enable the
commercialization of long lasting rechargeable Na-ion battery technologies.
Several venues for integrating research with undergraduate education and
outreach activities are proposed. Female and minority students for undergraduate
education will be exposed to this research project through simple introductions
to the battery subject. Other outreach activities are also planned for local
high school female and underrepresented students. Real time videos of microscopy
experiments will be produced and made available to the community via YouTube©
and selected scientific networks.