* 1619523
* INFEWS N/P/H2O:  Optimizing Spatio-temporal Sensor Placement for Nutrient Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Urmila Diwekar, Vishwamitra Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2017
* USD 146,265.00

1619523 Diwekar, Urmila M.

The food production system generates waste streams that are characterized by
high concentrations of organic matter, nitrogen- and phosphorus-containing
species in water. Therefore, monitoring nitrogen and phosphorous species is
important for water quality requirements for agricultural as well as energy
recovery from waste streams. Currently these species are monitored via
stationary monitoring stations. However nitrogen and phosphorous species move
via agricultural run-off to other water systems, so portable sensors are needed
that can change positionsin real time. This type of dynamic sensing requires
suitable algorithms that can calculate appropriate sensor locations in real time
in the face of inherent uncertainties in the fate and transport of the relevant
species. To develop such an algorithmic framework to solve the problem of sensor
placement in real time is the objective of this research.

This research is targeted to develop a fundamental understanding of the
relationships involved in sensor placement and interaction with nutrient fate
and transport of relevant species, with the goal of identifying the number and
spatio-temporal positions of sensors for maximum effectiveness. Given that
uncertainty is inherent, the problem of sensor placement will be formulated as a
dynamic stochastic programming problem, the solution of which will be the
dynamic optimal sensor deployment policy for nutrient monitoring in the face of
uncertainties. Dynamic sensing with portable low cost sensors is a new area for
nutrient monitoring which shows promise for food-water-energy nexus. This
research will provide a theoretical basis for such an endeavor. This real time
sensor placement problem will allow for the study of the spatial-temporal aspect
of pollution which a constant monitoring station does not provide.