* 1619983
* ABI Innovation: New Software Tools for Genome Comparisons of Non-Model Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jian Ma, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 554,163.00

Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have allowed study of
the genomes of many more non-model organisms. The comparisons of these genomes
will provide new insights into the evolution of complex traits of different
species. This project will develop new methods to compare more than ten new bee
genomes to help elucidate the molecular signatures of eusociality using
evolutionary genomics. Eusocial species have different levels of social
organization while related species are solitary, providing an ideal "ladder" of
species to study the evolution of social life. The genetic basis for such
phenotypes has remained largely unexplored until very recently. In this
research, new tools will be developed to better annotate the gene models by
incorporating both RNA-seq data and information from genome sequences of related
organisms. The method will fully utilize splice variants when annotating the
gene models. Methods will also be developed to build high-quality cross-species
sequence alignments for both coding and non-coding regions in the bee genomes.
Additionally, errors in the original genome assemblies will be corrected to
improve quality. Insights from this project can be applied to other species and
clades as the data becomes available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves interactions between computational and experimental biologists. The
project will develop computational biology curricula and train graduate students
in interdisciplinary research methods. The research developed in this project
will be integrated into existing outreach programs (such as the G.A.M.E.S. camp
and the SING workshop at the University of Illinois) to encourage undergraduate
students to pursue careers in science and engineering. The tools and data
produced in the project will be made available through a project website.