* 1619978
* IUTAM Symposium on Integrated Computational Structure-Material Modeling of Deformation and Failure under Extreme Conditions; Baltimore, Maryland; June 10-22, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Somnath Ghosh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,840.00

This grant provides funding to support the International Union of Theoretical
and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) Symposium on "Integrated Computational Structure-
Material Modeling of Deformation and Failure under Extreme Conditions," to be
held in Baltimore, MD on June 10-22, 2016. The symposium will focus on different
material classes and cover a range of spatial and temporal scales needed for
physics-based modeling of deformation and failure under extreme operational
parameters. The symposium will bring together top researchers from academia,
government laboratories and industry. A number of junior faculty members and
young researchers from academia and government laboratories will be invited to
participate in the IUTAM symposium. Funding through this proposal would increase
the number of junior faculty and researchers participants to prepare the next
generation of scientific leaders in this field.

High demands on future systems are challenging the operational limits of
materials like metals, ceramics and composites. The design of enhanced systems
to meet performance and reliability challenges requires advanced methods of
analysis and simulation to provide a comprehensive understanding of the
structure-material behavior. Distinguished speakers from academia, industry and
government laboratories have been invited to address the state of the art in the
thematic areas of the symposium and to make approximately 35 presentations.
There will be three panel discussion sessions focused on the prediction of
material behavior during fatigue, impact and blast loading, and radiation and
high temperature environments. Additionally, a poster session is planned to
showcase research progress by junior researchers.