* 1619903
* Entrainment, Decoupling, and Vertical Transport in the Marine Stratocumulus Cloud Deck
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Simon de Szoeke, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 552,138.00

Marine stratocumulus clouds cover significant areas of the ocean and act to cool
the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight. The processes behind these low
clouds are not well simulated by weather or climate models. This award will
allow researchers to analyze data that was collected in a prior field campaign
so that they can study the movement of air and moisture within marine
stratocumulus clouds. The result will be a better understanding of the clouds
and an improved ability to model their formation, dissipation, and impacts. One
main impact of the research will be on weather forecasting with a focus on low
clouds and fog, which are hazards for the aviation industry. The work will also
help to improve climate models. Training and diversity impacts will be provided
through the incorporation of students into the research
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct an analysis of lidar,
radar and sounding data from the 2008 VAMOS Ocean Cloud Atmosphere Land Study
(VOCALS) to better understand the processes that control the structure,
transitions, and radiative properties of stratocumulus clouds. The researchers
note that vertical mixing is poorly observed in stratocumulus cloud top
entrainment, in cumulus updrafts rising into stratocumulus, and in evaporative
downdrafts. Conceptual and numerical models of these phenomena have only been
evaluated by their effects on external phenomena, rather than how well the
models represent the actual internal processes themselves. Three scientific
objectives are identified that will lead to a better description and
understanding of entrainment, decoupling, and coherent updraft and downdraft
fluxes: 1) Relating entrainment to the strength of turbulence in the
stratocumulus cloud and documenting diurnal variations of turbulence and its
transport due to variation of buoyancy flux at cloud top, 2) Documenting the
structure and evolution of turbulence leading to decoupling between the
stratocumulus cloud and surface mixed layer, and analyzing both diurnal
decoupling driven by the cycle of solar radiation, and decoupling associated
with large-scale cold advection over warm SST, and 3) quantifying mass
transports due to cumulus updrafts and downdrafts generated by negative buoyancy
from cloud and drizzle evaporation, and attributing the observed distributions
of vertical velocity to turbulence strength, decoupling, cumulus clouds, and
drizzle.