* 1619642
* Collaborative Research: Travel Support for Students to Attend the 2016 Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference (ISERC); Anaheim, California; May 21-24, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Zhenyu Kong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this grant is to provide travel support to graduate and
undergraduate students in the field of industrial engineering to enable a
selected cohort of students to attend the 2016 Industrial and Systems
Engineering Research Conference (ISERC), to be held in Anaheim, California, May
21-24, 2016. The ISERC is a major venue for US and international researchers in
both academia and industry to showcase research results and exchange ideas. As
such, the ISERC provides an excellent opportunity for students to broaden the
impact of their work. By attending the conference, students will have the
opportunity to explore the frontiers of industrial and systems engineering
research. The ISERC will also enable students to network with peers, mentors,
potential employers, and future collaborators. In addition, a select subset of
students will participate in the doctoral colloquium hosted by the Council of
Industrial Engineering Department Head (CIEADH) and the IIE. These students will
have the opportunity to listen to leaders in the field of industrial engineering
speak on a variety of topics. The ISERC also provides students with the
opportunity to publish their work in the high quality conference proceedings,
indexed by ProQuest. Furthermore, this grant will support the broader
participation of students from underrepresented groups at the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will help stimulate broader student
attendance and participation at the 2016 ISERC. The student travel grant program
will subsidize travel expenses of approximately 30 students who plan to attend
the 2016 ISERC. These travel grants will be awarded through a competitive
process and thus receipt of these travel awards will be considered an honor by
the recipients. Applications will be evaluated by an evaluation committee
consisting of three conference program chairs, along with one additional member
nominated by the Council of Industrial Engineering Academic Department Heads.
Selected students will have the opportunity to attend the conference and to
participate in activities specifically designed for students. By attending the
conference, students can present their research, attend tutorial sessions on
advanced and emerging research methods, attend panel discussions on research
frontiers, participate in student paper competitions, and explore research and
industry-focused career paths. In addition, the Applied Solutions Conference,
which showcases industrial engineering solutions to real-world industrial
problems, is being held concurrently with the ISERC 2016. This joint conference
provides an opportunity for students to network with potential employers, to
explore collaborations and to become familiar with potential applications for
their future research.