* 1619888
* RUI: A laboratory study of ultrasonic scattering attenuation by possible microstructures in Earth's inner core
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Michael Bergman, Simon's Rock of Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 138,552.00

Earth's inner core is elastically anisotropic, with seismic waves propagating
parallel to the rotation axis about 3% faster than those parallel to the
equatorial plane. The inner core also exhibits an attenuation anisotropy, with
the faster waves having smaller amplitudes. There is now evidence that the
pattern of both anisotropies is more complex, exhibiting depth dependence,
hemispherical variations, and smaller scale regional variations. The isotropic
seismic velocity may also exhibit regional variations. These puzzling seismic
inferences are clues as to the structure and evolution of the solid iron alloy
inner core. This grant will allow the PI to investigate the causes of inner core
attenuation and its anisotropy, and thus help to better understand the most
remote part of our planet. In particular, in laboratory studies the PI will use
ultrasonic waves to probe metallic alloys with a variety of microstructures that
have been suggested for the inner core, employing ratios of wavelengths to grain
and sub-grain lengthscales that are relevant to the inner core. By comparison
with seismic data, this will allow the PI to quantify the relative importance of
scattering attenuation versus intrinsic attenuation (viscoelasticity). As an RUI
grant, the project will involve diverse undergraduates in all aspects of the
research, providing them with training and experience in doing
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most explanations for the elastic anisotropy rely
on a lattice preferred orientation (texturing) of hexagonal close-packed iron
crystals, the most likely stable phase of iron under inner core conditions.
Explanations for the texturing fall broadly into two classes, that due to
solidification and that due to deformation. Directional solidification of
metallic alloys typically results in columnar grains formed by primary and
secondary dendrites of the primary compositional phase, with the secondary phase
along grain boundaries and between dendrites, i.e., intragranular. Such
microstructure has been proposed for the inner core, and scattering off grain
boundaries of elongated crystals has been suggested as a cause for the
attenuation anisotropy. Solidification microstructure is not thermodynamically
stable, however, and annealing can result in coarsening of secondary dendrites,
while maintaining the primary dendrites and columnar crystals, or possibly, in
recrystallization and polygonal grain growth. The latter typically occurs in
deformed materials exposed to high temperature. The PI will examine the
ultrasonic scattering attenuation of three possible microstructures likely in
Earth's inner core: directional solidified columnar grains composed of primary
and secondary dendrites; directionally solidified and then annealed grains; and
polygonal grains that result from recrystallization due to deformation and
annealing. He will use Pb-Sn because of its simple eutectic phase diagram, ease
of use, and relatively small single crystal elastic anisotropy; and
microstructures with relative wavelength/scatterer dimensions thought to be
similar to those in the inner core. The PI will use the shape and decay of the
ultrasonic coda to determine the quality factor Q, and will compare the
ultrasonic waveforms with seismic data to infer regional microstructure in the
inner core, which will give insight into the evolution of the inner core.