* 1619344
* RI: Small: Harnessing the Power of Constraint Propagation by Controlling Consistency Levels and Synthesizing Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Berthe Choueiry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2020
* USD 486,000.00

Decision and optimization problems raise many challenges in daily life as well
as in business, engineering, and science. Solving them "well" and "quickly"
directly benefits our life-styles and economy, and allows us to effectively
manage our resources. Many scientific disciplines have focused on formalizing
and solving such difficult combinatorial problems. Constraint Processing (CP), a
subfield of Artificial Intelligence, has focused on the transparent modeling of
the restrictions (i.e., constraints) that govern those problems and create their
complexity. By examining how constraints interact among themselves and how
interactions propagate along the constraints, CP has developed generic
mechanisms to solve a problem by ruling out forbidden decisions and combinations
of decisions, gradually eliciting the acceptable solutions and the optimal
choices. To this end, CP has formalized in terms of consistency properties how
constraints interact among themselves and with the possible options. Thus, the
identification of such properties and the design of algorithms for enforcing
them are at the heart of CP, and constitute perhaps what best distinguishes this
area from other scientific disciplines concerned with the same computational
problems. The goal of this project is to understand the tradeoffs between the
effectiveness and the cost of a variety of consistency algorithms, and to
control how to interleave them dynamically during problem solving to solve
difficult problems and reduce computational cost.

In particular, the research will garner the most computational benefits from
consistency-based techniques by dynamically (a) selecting the right level of
consistency to enforce at any point during search, and (b) synthesizing new
constraints over opportunistically chosen variables. The proposed activities
extend on recent practical algorithms for higher-levels consistency, and
contribute to the progress of the research in fundamental aspects of CP. The
developed methods will benefit other types of graphical models such as games as
well as the next generation of commercial and public-domain constraint solvers.
The insight gained from this research will improve the scope and content of the
introductory and advanced courses on CP both at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The various research tasks will allow the mentoring and training of
young engineers and scientists to understand the roots of complexity in problem
solving and to learn how to overcome it in practice.