* 1619415
* SHF: Small: Methodology, Tools, and Circuits for Bundled-Data Resilient Asynchronous Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Melvin Breuer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The impact of this research will span both academia and industry, yielding: (1)
fundamental theory to design and analyze asynchronous circuits that gracefully
adapt to process variability and makes near-threshold (i.e., low-power)
computing practical; (2) a CAD flow that makes asynchronous circuits far more
attractive for the ultra-low-power market. The research is coupled with a
comprehensive plan to foster innovation in engineering, including plans for
commercializing this research. The plans also include student training and
future workforce development for the electronic chip
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unrelenting demand for longer
battery life and energy-efficient designs is increasing the desire for
integrated chip voltage supplies to go lower and lower, approaching near
threshold levels. This aggravates process variability which forces increasing
margins in traditional synchronous clock periods, yielding far-from-optimal
solutions. The focus of this proposal is a recently proposed new resilient
asynchronous design style, called the "Blade", that is robust to meta-stability,
robust to hold times, and architecturally agnostic, not relying on architectural
replay to correct for errors. This proposal will create a comprehensive
framework to support the efficient design of Blade circuits with emphasis on
test, synthesis, and physical design.