* 1619302
* III: Small: Social Discovery of Users and Content in Social Media Through Similarity-Based and Graph-Based Inference of Attributes and Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kevin Chang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to develop graph-based tools to discover the people and
content to pay attention to in social media that are most relevant to a given
question or goal. This is an important problem for applications including
marketing, event detection, civic participation and governance, and disaster
management, and a hard problem because there is so much content and so many
people but not enough information about their attributes and attitudes to make
good choices about who to listen to. The research team proposes to label people
and content using similarity or generalized "homophily" principle, the idea that
the closer people are to each other (like friends or neighbors or Twitter
followers), the more likely they are to have things in common. The research team
will develop SocialSense, a tool that uses this idea to guess labels for people
and content based on how they are connected to their neighbors; these inferred
labels will allow users to create more complex and accurate queries in social
media. The team will work with existing partners to develop SocialSense and
validate that it does better than current social media tools; they will also use
the tool to support undergraduate and graduate classes around web search and
databases.

For the problem of finding users, the team will represent users and content as
nodes in a large social graph, where each of these and the edges between them
has a set of demographic and attitudinal attributes. This project develops novel
algorithms for graph-based learning/mining over social graphs as well as content
graphs. Through mining patterns of connection in the network, the team will
identify a set of structural motifs of homophily and use those motifs, as well
as underlying probabilities of the occurrence of attributes, to propagate
inferences about those attributes to other nodes, and check the quality and
fairness of those inferences using a rejection sampling technique. For finding
content, the team will represent content and queries in a graph and again mine
common patterns, this time to create query templates that will support the
creation of future queries as new topics and entities arise. Finally, the team
will integrate these components, creating a system that supports querying across
people and content and suggests interesting new queries based on discovering
patterns of connected attributes that match the motifs and templates described
above. The team will evaluate the methods and system through both offline back-
end performance measurements and online deployments that evaluate usability,
expressiveness, and simplicity of the systems in the context of their
partnerships with a smart nation/citizen input project and a social mapping
cloud service run by their institution.