* 1619745
* UNS Collaborative Research: Optimizing Microfilter Productivity During Water Treatment: Modeling and Experimental Verification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Shankar Chellam, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 185,415.00

1510743 &lt;br/&gt;Cogan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1510526 &lt;br/&gt;Chellam
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project results from the excellent
filtered water quality of microfiltration membranes which are increasingly
implemented for environmental and industrial water/wastewater separations.
Tremendous effort has been spent studying fouling mechanisms during
microfiltration; however, membrane fouling control by backwashing and air
scouring remain largely unexplored topics. This work builds upon the PIs
significant past collaborations to develop models of membrane processes. The
proposed research will yield a rigorous mathematical framework along with
systematic experimental validation to maximize microfiltration water
productivity by maintaining high flux with periodic regeneration and
electrocoagulation/flocculation pretreatment. This project provides a unique
perspective to train students at all levels in multidisciplinary studies and
broadening participation in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research represents a synergistic collaboration between an
experimentalist with expertise in membrane filtration and a mathematician with
long-term expertise in modeling, fluid dynamics, and optimal control to make
potentially transformative contributions to fouling control. The PIs tackle the
problem of maximizing the cumulative volume of surface water filtered by hollow-
fiber microfiltration incorporating periodic regeneration using optimal control
theory. This study also includes sensitivity analysis and data assimilation,
complementary mathematical processes used to quantify aspects of variability
that arise in both theoretical and experimental studies due to underlying
stochastic processes, uncertainty in measurements, or errors in approximations.
Complementary laboratory measurements are aimed at generating necessary data for
model validation as well as novel interfacial chemical characterization, to
discern the sequence of mechanisms that lead to (ir)reversible fouling.
Additionally, experiments and modeling will encompass Lake Houston water
pretreated using an innovative electrochemical process, namely
electrocoagulation with sacrificial aluminum electrodes. The underlying
mathematical approach requires specific experimental measurements to determine
sensitivity rankings for parameters (and hence physical quantities), statistical
likelihood estimates for parameter distributions, and advanced optimal control
analysis. Similarly, the experimental approach requires predictions such as key
parameter regimes to explore, specific areas of uncertainty that can be reduced,
and validation experiments to consolidate the real-world behavior with the
mathematical predictions. This is facilitated by seamless collaboration,
established over the past seven years or so, that brings together substantial
experience on experimental and theoretical aspects to the project. Input will
also be obtained from external stakeholders including a membrane manufacturer
(Pall Corporation) and a water purveyor (Orange County Water District) who will
provide hollow fibers as well as operational data from their long-term pilot-
studies. They will also evaluate our methods and results to attempt to increase
the productivity during low-pressure membrane filtration.