* 1619140
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Explore, Understand, and Build a New Profiling Framework for Managed Language Virtual Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Prasad Kulkarni, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2020
* USD 240,943.00

Program profiling is a fundamental and powerful technique to discover,
understand and reason about the dynamic or run-time behavior of a program.
Existing run-time systems (or Virtual Machines, VM) for managed languages vastly
under-utilize the potential of profiling systems, which results in severe
performance losses, and increases costs or curtails the suitability of VMs in
many domains. The goal of this research is to understand and resolve the
limitations that restrict the applicability and effectiveness of program
profiling. The intellectual merits are to develop a complete understanding of
the fundamental characteristics of program profiling, its limitations and its
impact on the effectiveness of dependent optimizations, build a comprehensive
and structured profiling framework to increase the efficiency and ease the
adoption of profiling mechanisms during VM tasks, and set the stage for
increased employment and realized benefits from adaptive optimizations in a VM.
The project's broader significance and importance are to deploy managed run-time
environments in diverse domains that include the web/Internet, desktop, server,
cloud-computing, and mobile systems.

The research aims to: (a) develop a deeper fundamental understanding of the
benefits and limitations of different profiling strategies, and their impact on
the effectiveness and performance of feedback-directed optimizations (FDOs), (b)
conduct research and engineering that applies this understanding to develop new
profiling mechanisms and machinery in the VM, and (c) construct higher-level
predictive models that maximize the ease and benefit of using profile knowledge
during VM tasks. To conduct this fundamental study, assess and demonstrate its
observations, and show the benefits of more effective program profiling to
improve existing VM optimizations, and to enable the creation of new adaptive VM
optimizations, this work will employ three sets of real VM adaptive tasks: (a)
selective compilation and feedback-directed optimizations to improve program
speed, (b) heap memory management to increase performance and power efficiency,
and (c) code cache management to maintain performance at lower memory
utilization. This research promises to improve the performance and accessibility
of managed language programs, which is very important for future computing
systems as they provide an ideal programming platform in the face of growing
software complexity, the best distribution format for portable Internet-based
applications, and the most effective execution strategy for safe and secure
execution of untrusted web services.