* 1619177
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Optimizing the Human-Machine System for Citizen Science
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lucy Fortson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2019
* USD 359,560.00

This research aims to improve the efficiency, accuracy, and usability of online
systems supporting citizen science, in which communities organized around
serious scientific research projects combine the contributions of amateurs and
professionals. In order to respond most efficiently to the increasing data
deluge across multiple domains, citizen science platforms need to be more
dynamic and complex - incorporating intelligent task assignment and machine
learning strategies. Systems that make use of both human and machine
intelligence are of interest to scientists from a wide range of disciplines.
Whether viewed as social machines or as active learning systems in which
progressive input from humans improves machine learning, these hybrid systems
exhibit complex behavior which needs to be understood for effective system
design. For example, machine learning researchers have concentrated on using the
large training sets produced by citizen science projects in order to train
algorithms that are later applied to a full dataset. Yet this serial processing
may not be the most efficient use of the human or machine effort. The main
research goal of this project is to investigate how the overall efficiency of
the combined human-machine system is impacted by the separate components and
their related properties and what the implications are for either human or
machine classifiers or both. This process will test the hypothesis that improved
overall efficiency will actually reduce the load on expert human classifiers
instead of, as currently required, needing larger expert training sets for
machines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the dynamic
combination of human and machine classifiers, gaining for the first time
knowledge of how load can be optimally shared in a real, flexible citizen
science platform. This research effort will be supported by building and
deploying software modules on the existing Zooniverse infrastructure, the world-
leading platform for online citizen science. It will (1) carry out efficient and
dynamic task assignment, distinguishing in near-real time between experienced
and inexperienced, and between skilled and less skilled classifiers; and (2)
combine human and machine classifications dynamically, periodically training
automatic classification routines on the increasing volume of training data
produced by volunteers. This new software will then be utilized in a novel
"cascade filtering" mode that reduces complex classification problems into a
series of single binary tasks. The software developed in this project will
provide domain scientists and social machine researchers who wish to exploit the
new infrastructure with a fully flexible suite of functions appropriate to the
needs defined by their specific problems.