* 1619600
* Strengthening the GEO REU Network and sharing best practices with the STEM REU community
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Valerie Sloan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 289,032.00

The Directorate of Geosciences supports approximately 60 Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) sites each year, and these sites provide research
internships for over 600 students. These REU site programs are located at many
different institutions across the county, and the scientists who run them are
often the only faculty in their institution responsible for organizing this type
of student research/professional development program. Although there is a
general knowledge of how these programs should be managed, there has been
limited sharing of ideas and best practices among the REU PIs. In the past, new
PIs have had little support as they work through the details of developing and
organizing a new REU program, and experienced PIs face a variety of challenges,
including recruiting diverse students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
funding to support the REU programs through professional networking efforts: (1)
to connect PIs and managers running REU Sites, (2) to document and improve best
practices, (3) to provide a support system for dealing with challenges and
developments, and (4) to foster an understanding of how to integrate diversity
approaches in all programmatic elements. The Principal Investigators (PIs) will
formalize this support of REU managers in the geosciences by publishing
handbooks for REU PIs, mentors and interns, and by organizing opportunities for
REU PIs and REU interns to meet and exchange information. Ongoing networking
activities will include hosting telecons and webinars on REU management, student
recruitment, etc. and hosting and monitoring the GEO REU listserve. The goal is
to develop a community of REU leaders and to increase the efficacy of REUs
programs, allowing REU PIs to create a higher quality research experience for
undergraduates. In addition, REU PIs will receive support for recruiting
students from diverse backgrounds in order to increase participation by students
who are from under-represented groups and community colleges or who are first-
generation college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formalizing the networking
activities and adding webinars, manuals, etc. will help the community run more
effective programs and attract applications from a diverse set of students. The
PI will provide support and leadership necessary to strengthen the REU programs
that are funded by the Directorate of Geosciences. It will have a direct impact
on the quality of research internship programs provided to more than 600
students each year. Improving the quality of these programs and the diversity of
students who participate in them is likely to have an important impact on the
future ocean sciences research community. The REU program is a major source of
new graduate students since many of the students who participate in them go on
to attend graduate school in STEM fields.