* 1619760
* Topological Recursion and Its Influence in Analysis, Geometry, and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Motohico Mulase, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides partial participant support for the 2016 von Neumann
Symposium, "Topological Recursion and Its Influence in Analysis, Geometry, and
Topology," held July 4-8, 2016 in Charlotte, North Carolina, coordinated by the
American Mathematical Society. Topological recursion is an emerging field of
mathematics discovered independently in the study of random matrices and in
studies of dynamics and geometry. The novelty of topological recursion is its
universal applicability to many problems arising in areas of mathematics and
quantum physics. For example, Catalan numbers, simple combinatorial expressions
that occur in various counting problems, have generalizations associated with
surfaces of complicated structure that can be calculated effectively by
topological recursion. The exact same formula computes important quantities
arising in the study of quantum gravity. Topological recursion not only provides
theoretical formulas for many concrete problems in mathematics and physics, but
also furnishes a practical computational tool. The interplay between machine
computation and mathematical proof has been a driving force for recent rapid
development of the field, in which many outstanding conjectures have been
resolved, while new mysteries have arisen, both on the theoretical front and in
computer experiments. This timely symposium, in which half of the invited
speakers are early-career researchers, is aimed to further advance this
exciting, rapidly-developing field.

Topological recursion is a new emerging field of mathematics developed in
statistical mechanical study of random matrices. Independently, essentially the
same structure of the theory was discovered in research on the volume of moduli
spaces of bordered hyperbolic surfaces. Due to the simple nature of concrete
recursive formulas, topological recursion relates many current research
frontiers of mathematics in a novel and understandable way. For example,
counting Hurwitz numbers, Gromov-Witten theory, Gaiotto's conjecture on opers
arising from string theory, the WKB analysis of Schroedinger equations, and the
relation between A-polynomials and colored Jones polynomials for knots and their
generalizations are all deeply related through ideas stemming from topological
recursion. The goal of the symposium is to promote interest among young
researchers in this exciting research frontier and to significantly enhance the
subject matter by disseminating recent progress and identifying important
problems for future development. The conference website is
www.ams.org/meetings/amsconf/symposia/symposia-2016