* 1619653
* CAREER: Coordinated QoS-Driven Management of Cloud Computing and Storage Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Ming Zhao, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2020
* USD 401,351.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses Cloud
Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that cloud users are comfortable with
running their critical applications on shared infrastructures and that cloud
providers can support economical performance-based service-level agreements,
there is an increasingly urgent need for virtualized systems to deliver
performance guarantees. And, as virtualization and cloud computing become
pervasive, it is also important that these topics are taught in a systematic
manner; especially to minority students served by this PI's university. In order
to address these challenges, this NSF CAREER project is creating a coordinated
resource management framework that optimizes the allocations of cloud computing
and storage resources according to application-desired Quality of Service (QoS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project is accomplishing its objectives
through the following three research and education components: 1) A QoS-driven
virtual machine resource management framework that can coordinate the
allocations of various computing and storage resources and optimize them
according to the virtualized applications; 2) QoS-driven distributed virtual
machine storage management that allows the allocation of shared cloud storage
resources, including the emerging solid-state-drive-based virtual machine
storage and caching, according to application QoS needs; 3) Systematic education
on virtualization and cloud computing that harnesses the research outcomes to
provide training in virtualization and cloud computing, including new education
activities for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, as well as a new
virtual-machine-based online education system to facilitate these
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research outcomes will enable
virtualized systems to support performance guarantees for modern applications
with dynamic and complex behaviors. As a result, a broader range of applications
with different QoS requirements will benefit from cloud computing, and cloud
services will be able to offer their users more economical QoS-based charging
models instead of the currently used resource-capacity-based models. This
project's education outcomes will enable systematic education on virtualization
and cloud computing from K-12 to undergraduate and graduate classrooms and
prepare a pipeline of students who are equipped with the necessary knowledge and
skills in these emerging technologies and prepared to contribute in the coming
cloud computing era.