* 1619577
* Materials Data Infrastructure: A Roadmap for Enabling Storage and Sharing of Data in the Materials Community
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2018
* USD 174,700.00

While all Materials researchers generate data in the course of their research,
there remains a dearth of resources for the storage and sharing of this data in
a publicly accessible way. This award supports a study to understand the
Materials Research community's needs related to infrastructure for the storage
and sharing of Materials data. The PIs will assemble a team of experts in
Materials Science and Computational and Data Sciences to meet, discuss, and make
recommendations regarding the current state of the community's efforts and
needs, and paths forward for both the research community and other stakeholders
such as federal funding agents. The outcome of the study will be a written
report, which will be made publicly available to the community at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address an important area which has been
the topic of much discussion, including numerous meetings and workshops. The
need for an infrastructure to support the storage and sharing of Materials data
is clear, and has been reemphasized in recent requirements related to the
sharing of outcomes from federally funded research. This study will provide a
unique forum for experts in the field to convene to assess the current state of
the art as well as distilling the community's needs and presenting actionable
recommendations. The storage and sharing of Materials data has broad potential
impacts to the community, as outlined in numerous documents including the
National Academies study on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering
(2009), and the President's Materials Genome Initiative for Global
Competitiveness (2011). The PI team has been at the forefront of Materials
Innovation, in particular with respect to the the community's needs for access
to materials data. The work has broad support, from the Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, Division of Materials Research, and the
Division of Physics. The study will be broadly disseminated, and has the
potential for significant impact in the field.