* 1619201
* SBE: Small: Continuous Human-User Authentication by Induced Procedural Visual-Motor Biometrics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Yong Guan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,923.00

Validating a user's identity is one of the fundamental security requirements in
cyberspace. Current authentication approaches require people to create and
remember secret credentials such as complex passwords, or to possess special
hardware authentication tokens. Both are vulnerable to being compromised, or
illegally shared. Even worse, authentication is typically supported solely at
the start of a session. Recent developments in biometric authentication aim to
overcome these challenges, but are either easy to bypass (e.g., imposter
attacks), incapable of satisfactory false-positive-false-negative tradeoffs, or
require expensive dedicated equipment. To address these weaknesses, the
objective of this project is to develop a non-traditional approach to biometric
authentication, which exploits motor learning and visual-motor adaptation to
provide secure, effective and continuous human-user
authentication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a new
paradigm in cyber security - expertise-based continuous biometric
authentication. The uniqueness of the new paradigm is to actively train the
subject to achieve continuous authentication, by inducing a specific expertise
into a human subject's interaction with a machine. An expertise is defined as an
artificially-induced interaction pattern that is unique to the human subject.
Once the subjects have been exposed to specific stimuli and learned their
expertise, their behaviors are easily differentiable as long as the stimuli are
maintained. To enhance the security of the system, as well as to preserve user
privacy (by facilitating expertise fade-out after the cessation of the stimuli),
the induced expertise are not static, but rather continuously evolving between
randomly-chosen targets. The project develops expertise-based active biometric
authentication modalities based on keyboard, mouse, and touchscreen devices. The
outcome of this research shall have broader impacts on the nation's higher
education, high-tech industries, and government. The research enhances the PIs'
curriculum developments and helps attract, recruit and retain engineering
students and broaden the participation of under-represented minorities and women
in engineering programs. It also supports the PIs to outreach to talented
college and high-school students and motivate them to study and eventually
pursue Doctoral degrees in computer engineering areas.