* 1619690
* EAGER: Collaborative: Toward a Test Bed for Heavy Vehicle Cyber Security Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Rosanne Gamble, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 12/31/2018
* USD 186,000.00

Heavy vehicles, such as trucks and buses, are part of the US critical
infrastructure and carry out a significant portion of commercial and private
business operations. Little effort has been invested in cyber security for these
assets. If an adversary gains access to the vehicle's Controller Area Network
(CAN), attacks can be launched that can affect critical vehicle electronic
components. Traditionally, physical access to a heavy vehicle was required to
access the CAN. However, wireless devices are also installed on heavy vehicles,
which open trucks and busses to remote wireless cyber attacks. This project
explores cyber security vulnerabilities related to wireless devices that
communicate on the CAN. For identified threats, researchers determine the proper
mitigation strategies, including where and how they are best deployed. To
demonstrate potential exploits and subsequent trust in proposed mitigation
strategies, this project designs and implements a scalable, high-fidelity test
bed using actual heavy vehicle electronic control units, such as engine and
brake controllers. The test bed includes built-in mechanisms for remote access
and secure information delivery to allow for collaboration among researchers at
different sites. The results of the research, including the potential to extend
the test bed with other components, can impact cyber security analysis for other
industries that use CAN, such as building automation, medical devices, and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SAE J1939 communication network in
heavy vehicles is based on CAN and has open documentation for packet definition
and transmission. This openness may be exploited for creating spoofed J1939
messages. Heavy vehicle owners utilize third-party systems, such as remote
telematics, that introduce new J1939 enabled modules, which can potentially be
subverted by an adversary. This project uses these systems to gain remote access
and attack another CAN connected electronic control unit. Packet sniffing is
performed as the telematics system connects wirelessly to the CAN to determine
if fake packets can be inserted. Research includes examining different designs,
configurations, and deployments of intrusion detection systems to best thwart
such remote attacks using the developed test bed. One challenge is to develop
algorithms that can act in real-time with deployed test bed hardware. Research
includes developing scientific strategies to measure the temporal response of
the cyber actions in the test bed and the reaction time of any intrusion
detection system, so that bounds can be determined based on the ability to
conduct a remote cyber operation on a J1939 network.