* 1619487
* SusChEM:   Focus on Sustainability-Integrated Approaches to Materials for Sustainable Development
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Ashley White, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2018
* USD 73,334.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Materials science will play a pivotal role in
solving many of the key challenges facing our society by providing a sustainable
supply of energy, water, products, services, transportation, buildings, and
public infrastructure. The development of materials for these applications will
require new approaches and researchers who have technical expertise and who
understand the complex interrelationships between materials science and other
disciplines. As the premier professional society for materials researchers, the
Materials Research Society (MRS) is well positioned to help its members address
these challenges, and with support from the Division of Materials research,
special MRS programming and activities focused on sustainable development will
be held at the 2016 MRS Spring Meeting &amp; Exhibit in Phoenix, Arizona (March
28-April 1, 2016). In the near term, this effort will seed future activities and
events at MRS Meetings as well as publications that put the materials and
sustainability nexus in the spotlight, so as to promote expansion of meaningful
research and development efforts. In the long term, the project will encourage
students and young researchers, and their faculty, to view sustainability as an
important challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Division of Materials Research, the 2016 MRS Spring Meeting
&amp; Exhibit in Phoenix, Arizona (March 28-April 1, 2016) will feature "Focus
on Sustainability" programming and activities including: (1) a two-day symposium
and poster session entitled "Materials for Sustainable Development-Integrated
Approaches" that will provide a medium for technically based, interdisciplinary
discussions of core materials technologies and their connection with societal,
ecological, and economic drivers for sustainable development, and which includes
a special half-day session focused on sustainability in industry; (2) a half-day
tutorial on how to teach the role of materials in sustainable development; (3) a
90-minute professional development seminar on how to integrate interdisciplinary
sustainability principles into materials research; (4) a special University
Chapter student poster competition on "Sustainability in My Community;" and (5)
public outreach and meeting attendee engagement. The "Focus on Sustainability"
program represents an investment towards building a robust community of practice
around materials and sustainability.