* 1619619
* The State University of New York (SUNY) LSAMP: Meeting the grand challenge of preparing students for successful transition into STEM majors and beyond
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2022
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 11/30/2022
* USD 3,999,961.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;The State University of New York Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (SUNY LSAMP) has been funded for 20 years and has built a
synergistic collaboration of 14 public higher education institutions in the
state of New York that provide a diverse mix of academic strengths and
capabilities. Stony Brook (lead institution), Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo,
College at Buffalo, Farmingdale, New Paltz and Old Westbury (4-year
institutions) and community colleges: Dutchess, Nassau, Orange, Schenectady,
Suffolk and Westchester colleges comprise the partnership. Over the next five
years, the goals of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--meet the grand
challenge of preparing underrepresented minority students for successful
transition into science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
majors;&lt;br/&gt;--focus on providing experiential activities that lead to
socialization into science;&lt;br/&gt;--promote significant systemic change by
increasing research on broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary focus of SUNY LSAMP is to ensure student success in completing
undergraduate and graduate degrees in STEM disciplines. Interventions are primed
for a more intentional focus on LSAMP students' success at the community college
transfer level and successful entry into graduate school in the completion of
STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;The SUNY LSAMP program is comprehensive and designed to
enhance academic and research outcomes including well-prepared underrepresented
minority students in STEM disciplines equipped for success in graduate school,
engaging mentoring and research student retention models, and a sound and
rigorous evaluation plan. The program will leverage its institutional research
infrastructure and its partnerships with other state organizations and STEM
projects to facilitate successful transitions of minority students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the study, which focuses on community
college participants, is to identify an evidenced-based formula for
understanding what components of STEM enrichment programs contribute to STEM
success and why among underrepresented minority students. This is a multi-
institutional research project that utilizes a theoretically grounded model -
Fostering (STEM) Identity through Transitions (FIT) Model -to explore issues of
STEM success. The study has the potential to fine-tune the FIT theoretical model
resulting in the continuing development of enrichment programming in STEM
throughout the SUNY system and for use at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alliance program evaluation findings
assessing the effectiveness of the SUNY LSAMP strategies will be shared with the
education community to build the knowledge base and foster implementation of
best practices. In addition, the project includes a study to identify an
evidenced-based formula for understanding what components of STEM enrichment
programs contribute to STEM success among underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 20 years, the SUNY LSAMP program has yielded
amazing outcomes including a quadrupling of STEM B. S. degrees to students in
historically underrepresented populations. The alliance has achieved an eleven-
fold increase in STEM enrollment for this same population of students during
this same period. Since 2011, community college students transferring to 4-year
STEM undergraduate programs has nearly doubled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best
practices implemented in this project will have transferable values for STEM
activities in other institutions in the nation. It will also create an
environment in which the outcomes achieved will be sustainable after the project
comes to an end. SUNY LSAMP will not only increase the number of successful
students completing degrees in STEM disciplines, but is also committed to
creating a more diverse and competitive STEM workforce in the nation.