* 1619108
* SBE: Small: Protecting Privacy in Cyberspace: From Neuroscience Investigations to Behavioral Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Paul Pavlou, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

A key characteristic of cyberspace is the collection of large amounts of data,
and people's privacy becomes vulnerable given the hyper-connectivity of
cyberspace and the ease of accessing data. This project aims to enhance the
safety and trustworthiness of cyberspace by designing choice architecture
interventions informed by the neural processes underlying privacy to help people
make better decisions about their privacy in cyberspace. Choice architecture is
gaining popularity among academics and policy makers as a means to design the
presentation of options to promote decisions that benefit both individuals and
society. This project aims to uncover the neural correlates of privacy concerns
to identify the cognitive and emotional processes that guide privacy behaviors
in cyberspace. By using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to
characterize the neural processes underlying privacy, this project aims to
expand the toolbox of privacy researchers by introducing new theories and
methods from neuroscience. By investigating the neural correlates of privacy
concerns, this project seeks to inform future choice architecture interventions
to encourage people to protect their privacy. Results will be disseminated
broadly through conferences across several disciplines. Special focus will be
given on disseminating findings beyond academics to non-research audiences,
especially with respect to informing policy. Finally, this project aims to
advance research and teaching at Temple University by providing a mentoring
environment for students at all levels, including under-represented groups, to
study privacy in cyberspace.

Privacy concerns are unintended consequences of the Internet that prevent a safe
and trustworthy cyberspace. There is a tradeoff between privacy risks associated
with disclosing private information and the benefits from such disclosure
(termed "privacy calculus"). Moreover, the "privacy paradox" states that
although people self-report that privacy is critical to them, they often
disclose more private information online, inconsistent with their privacy
concerns. However, the neural processes that underlie people's decisions to
protect their privacy are unclear. This project breaks new ground in privacy
research by uncovering the neural correlates of privacy concerns with fMRI and
using these insights to design choice architecture interventions to protect
people's privacy in cyberspace. Specifically, it examines the neural processes
underlying privacy concerns to help people better balance their privacy risks
versus disclosure benefits in their privacy calculus to overcome the privacy
paradox. This project will characterize the psychological processes that guide
people's decisions to disclose their private information by identifying the
neural correlates of privacy concerns with fMRI. This work will inform choice
architecture interventions to encourage people to make decisions about their
privacy in cyberspace to better match their privacy concerns.