* 1619473
* SHF: Small: Computer Aided Design Methodologies and Tools for Superconducting Single Flux Quantum Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 449,995.00

Advances in "beyond-CMOS" device technologies and corresponding logic families
are now seen as a key step towards achieving the next major leap in high-
performance computing. The research challenges and opportunities described in
this research provide directions for developing many aspects of a very promising
"beyond-CMOS" technology, which can result in extremely high performance, yet
energy-efficient, computing system, and thereby, ensure sustainability of the
information technology ecosystem. Education, Outreach, and Training Programs
include development of new educational modules; recruitment of minority and
under-represented students; as well as undergraduate learning and research
internship opportunities for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
goal of this project is to investigate the state-of-the-art in design and
optimization of superconducting DC-powered single flux quantum (SFQ) logic
circuits and draw up a comprehensive research plan for developing a standard
cell-based design methodology and supporting computer-aided design tools for the
SFQ logic at the register-transfer-level. In the process, this project will
analyze similarities and differences between the SFQ logic and standard digital
CMOS logic fabrics, investigate various problems related to the synthesis,
optimization and physical design of SFQ logic gates and circuits, and finally
produce a number of computer-aided design techniques and prototype software
tools for proof-of-concept demonstrations, including a standard cell
characterization tool, a static timing and power analysis tool, a frontend logic
synthesis, and a backend placement and clock network design tool. In short, this
research aims to achieve major strides in the development of advanced design
automation technologies in support of large-scale superconductive SFQ digital
electronics to meet the needs of future energy-efficient, high-performance exa-
scale computing systems.