* 1619085
* CIF: Small: Massive Uncoordinated and Sporadic Multiple Access -- Strengthening Connections between Coding and Random Access
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 495,010.00

The wireless landscape is poised to change, once again, within the next few
years due to the emergence of machine-driven communications. This creates new
challenges for wireless traffic, with packets originating from sporadic
transmissions rather than sustained connections. Currently deployed scheduling
policies are ill-equipped to deal with such traffic because they rely on
gathering information about channel quality and queue length for every active
device. The goal of this research initiative is to address this deficiency and
devise novel access schemes tailored to massive uncoordinated and sporadic
multiple access, thereby readying wireless infrastructures for the traffic of
tomorrow. The broader impacts of this research program include providing
pragmatic solutions to some of the challenges posed by an evolving wireless
landscape, strengthening wireless infrastructures, and contributing to the
training of a globally competitive Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
workforce. The research tasks are attuned to societal needs in information
technologies, an important economic driver for our nation. The wide
dissemination of the findings will enhance the scientific understanding of
wireless systems, access strategies, and iterative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research initiative
lies in exploiting the close connections between message-passing decoding and
serial interference cancellation to create new access strategies. Linking
advances in iterative methods to uncoordinated random access embodies the type
of crosscutting research that can lead to disruptive technologies and paradigm
shifts. This project embraces the evolving perspective of harnessing
interference in wireless networks rather than fighting it or avoiding it. This
viewpoint underlies many recent successes in network coding and distributed
storage. This project brings forth such a perspective in the design of large-
scale wireless networks.