* 1619639
* MoLSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Dwayne Smith, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Missouri Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (MoLSAMP) includes
two HBCUs, three major research institutions, a regional comprehensive
university, a highly selective liberal arts university and an urban community
college. The MoLSAMP Alliance will deploy a variety of activities and establish
a logical cohesiveness among the individual campuses to promote recruitment,
retention and graduation of underrepresented minority students with a goal to
increase the number of underrepresented minorities (URM) majoring in and
graduation with degrees in STEM disciplines by 125% in five years. The
activities undertaken by MoLSAMP to achieve this ambitious objective will be
designed to address both the cognitive and non-cognitive factors that influence
success in undergraduate education. Featured activities include expansion of
access to research and internships that provide experience in real world applied
science, comprehensive academic advising and mentoring by dedicated faculty and
administration, summer bridge programs for first and second year students and
career development conferences and research symposiums designed to bring
students and faculty together for informative and inspirational social
gatherings. To facilitate a boundary-lite synergistic effort, articulation and
reverse articulation agreements will be established to increase fluidity of
academic credits between alliance institutions. A comprehensive and frequently
updated MoLSAMP website will provide detailed information regarding MoLSAMP
activities and related resources and serve as a conduit for student and faculty
communication within and between alliance campuses. MoLSAMP supported activities
will be continually evaluated to identify best practices and results will be
disseminated though a variety of channels to facilitate efforts to increase URM
participation and success in STEM nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MoLSAMP
Alliance currently yields 64% of the total STEM baccalaureate degrees conferred
to URMs in the State of Missouri. A primary goal of MoLSAMP is to increase the
recruitment, retention and successful STEM degree completion of URMs by at least
125% by the year 2021. This goal will help to address the underrepresentation of
minority groups in STEM education and the workforce, and with the success of
MoLSAMP supported activities, inform the broader efforts of colleges and
universities nationwide to diversify the STEM student population and ultimately
strengthen our nation's science based workforce. Minority students face a
variety of challenges that contribute to their underrepresentation in STEM
degree programs. These challenges include insufficient preparation for college
level STEM coursework, financial hardship and failure to socially and culturally
integrate during the first year of college. MoLSAMP scholars will receive a
variety of support mechanisms to mitigate these factors, including intrusive
academic advising, ample opportunity to explore applied science through research
and internship opportunities, social, academic and career networking
opportunities through MoLSAMP organized social gatherings, social media
platforms, mentoring programs, and summer bridge programs. MoLSAMP activities
will also include measures to increase successful transfer of students from St.
Louis Community College to four year degree Alliance institutions, and a 25%
increase in URM students entering graduate programs. Successfully and
substantially increasing the number of URM students completing degrees, entering
graduate programs, working in research laboratories and importantly, teaching
and mentoring the next generation of URM STEM students, should provide a
scaffold for a sustainable increase in diversity in STEM education and industry.