* 1619547
* Plasmas for Low Noise Reconfigurable RF Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dimitrios Peroulis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Spectrum sharing and dynamic band allocation remain significant barriers for the
next generation communication systems and sensors. In this regard, development
of reconfigurable radio-frequency (RF) systems is increasingly important.
However, most of the existing and proposed technologies tend to be primarily
beneficial to reconfigurable receivers or low-power transmitters. Indeed,
conventional semiconductor devices are easily damaged and have challenging
interference and linearity issues when the power level exceeds a few Watts,
while mechanically-tunable systems are bulky and slow. In this regard, weakly
ionized plasmas can offer an attractive solution. Plasma-based electronics are
inherently capable of handling high power. Focusing on novel methods of
generation and control of weakly ionized plasmas, the proposed effort could
create a foundation for rapidly tunable, low-loss, high-power transmitters and
radar systems from the MHz to the GHz range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate
this potential, the proposed effort will investigate regimes of weakly ionized
plasmas conducive to their use as switchable and tunable elements in RF
antennas. The novel concepts distinguishing this program are: (1) the use of
plasmas as both tunable dielectrics and conductors; (2) plasma generation by
nanosecond repetitive pulses that would enable low thermal electromagnetic noise
and low ohmic losses. As electrical conductors, low temperature plasmas, such as
those in glow and similar discharges, can potentially be used in RF antennas,
amplifiers, and filters. The inherent advantages of plasma antennas or antenna
elements include the possibility of turning the antennas on/off and also rapidly
changing the antenna properties such as the resonant frequency. Large, meter-
scale, plasma antennas have been previously demonstrated, and with the
development of microplasma technology, plasma antennas can be miniaturized.
However, three fundamental issues present stumbling blocks for the development
of plasma-reconfigurable RF systems: a) the inherently lower conductivity and
thus higher losses of plasmas compared with metals, b) the high power
consumption and heat generation, and c) the high electron temperature
translating into much higher thermal electromagnetic noise in plasma devices
compared with solid state ones. The objective of the proposed effort is to find
plasma regimes where the thermal electromagnetic noise does not exceed that in
solid-state devices and where ohmic losses are low. The key concept is to
utilize plasmas generated by repetitive short pulses to sustain high electron
density at low time-averaged electron temperature. If successfully demonstrated,
the new concept could enhance fundamental understanding of electromagnetic
properties of plasmas and enable novel practical devices.