* 1619660
* Theoretical Studies of Spectral Signatures of Large Amplitude Vibrational Motions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Anne McCoy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2019
* USD 615,000.00

Anne McCoy of Ohio State University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to
develop theoretical and computational tools needed to understand the spectra of
molecules in which the atoms in the molecules undergo large amplitude motions.
The work has a particular focus on protonated and hydrogen bonded systems. This
class of molecules can be found close to home in our atmosphere and also far
away in the interstellar medium. Such molecular systems also provide prototypes
to understand the solvation of ions in water. Experimentalists use vibrational
spectroscopy to study these molecules. In the case of astrochemistry,
vibrational spectroscopy provides the best method for studying chemical
composition. Unlike many common molecules, however, the bonding in these systems
is weak. Most of the models that have been developed to predict and interpreted
rotation/vibration spectroscopy do not apply to them. By developing these new
approaches, McCoy and her research group are addressing this deficiency. The
results of these studies will be used to develop connections between spectra and
structure and bonding. McCoy and her research group collaborate with
experimental research groups on all of these projects. This research program
provides educational and research opportunities for both undergraduates and
graduate students. McCoy is very active in encouraging women and other members
of under-represented groups to pursue careers in science.

Of particular interest is the interaction between rotation and vibration
motions. To this end, the McCoy group is developing several Monte Carlo-based
techniques to probe these interactions. Much of the proposed work involves the
Diffusion Monte Carlo approach, with an emphasis on extending the range of
properties that can be calculated using this general approach. In addition, they
employ an approach based on Monte Carlo sampling of potential surfaces to deepen
the understanding of the origins of the broadening of spectral features in
hydrogen bonded systems. Specific applications include molecules, specifically
H5+ and CH5+ that are of astrochemical interest, as well as several studies that
probe the origins of spectral signatures of hydrogen bonding.