* 1619689
* Peach State LSAMP - Extending the STEM Pipeline in
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* William Kisaalita, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,999,999.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;The Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(Peach State LSAMP) composed of the University of Georgia (lead institution),
Fort Valley State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Kennesaw State
University System, and Savannah State University aims to:&lt;br/&gt; - Increase
enrollment of historically underrepresented minority students in STEM
disciplines; &lt;br/&gt; - Increase baccalaureate degrees obtained by this
population of students in STEM disciplines;&lt;br/&gt; - Increase the transfer
of Georgia Perimeter College alliance students to 4-year
institutions;&lt;br/&gt; - Increase the number of LSAMP students who participate
in research/internships; &lt;br/&gt; - Increase the number of LSAMP students who
pursue graduate degrees in STEM; and,&lt;br/&gt; - Partner with Education
Research team to conduct research on the Peach State
LSAMP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of Peach State LSAMP is to ensure
student success in completing undergraduate and graduate degrees in STEM
disciplines. Interventions are primed for a more intentional focus on LSAMP
students pursuing and completing graduate school. Hence, the proposed activities
will focus more on preparing more Peach State LSAMP funded students for graduate
school in STEM disciplines. The Peach State LSAMP program is comprehensive and
designed to enhance academic and research outcomes including well-prepared
underrepresented minority students in STEM disciplines equipped for success in
graduate school, engaging mentoring and research&lt;br/&gt;student retention
models, and a sound and rigorous evaluation plan. The program will leverage its
institutional research infrastructure and its partnerships with other academic
institutions and local industries to facilitate successful transitions of
minority students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alliance program
evaluation findings assessing the effectiveness of the Peach State LSAMP
strategies will be shared with the education community to build the knowledge
base and foster implementation of best practices. In addition, the project
includes an exploratory study to investigate the fidelity of its community
college transfer bridge program. The study has the potential to determine if and
why this intervention is effective and contribute to other in-depth research
studies on the impact of this STEM pathway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best
practices implemented in this project will have transferable values for STEM
activities in other institutions in the nation. It will also create an
environment in which the outcomes achieved will be sustainable after the project
comes to an end. Peach State LSAMP will not only increase the number of
successful students completing degrees in STEM disciplines, but is also
committed to creating a more diverse and competitive STEM workforce in Georgia
and beyond.