* 1619173
* NeTS: Small: Elastic RF-Optical Networking (ERON) System and Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This project seeks an innovative approach to the design of very high-bandwidth
and ubiquitous wireless networks exploiting the unique properties of RF-photonic
signal processing and integrated photonics for emerging next-generation and
high-bandwidth 5G technologies. The flexibility offered by the photonic and
electronic system co-design has the potential to provide a 100-fold increase in
bandwidth available for the mobile users, compared to what currently available
with current technology. This project will exploit key enabling physical layer
technologies, such as dynamic optical waveform generation and measurement (OAWG
and OAWM) on silicon photonics (SiP), together with SiP lattice filters
(SiPhaser) and photonic mixers. The combination of these technologies will
provide a unique and efficient front-haul architecture to perform analog
massive-MIMO beamforming at mm-wave frequencies without requiring any complex
high-speed RF circuitry. The following topics will be investigated: (1) RF-
Optical Networking architecture design and performance studies; (2) DSP, coding,
and mmWave-MIMO algorithms development; (3) simulation studies of analog RF-
optical beamforming by SiPhaser filters; (4) Proof-of-principle demonstration of
SDM MIMO mmWave with RF-photonic processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future
Internet applications will exponentially increase the demand for ubiquity,
mobility, and bandwidth through diverse platforms, in particular, rapidly
expanding cloud data center infrastructures. Today's wireless networks are
typically limited to 1~100 Mb/s connectivity with limited end-to-end throughput,
latency, and reliability. While fiber optic networks provide 1~100 Tb/s capacity
on each single-mode-fiber over thousands of kilometer distances, they are
limited to wide area and metro networks, not readily accessible by mobile users.
This project seeks to improve our nation's cyberinfrastructure by making
additional bandwidth available to citizens with mobile devices. The project will
also provide an exciting opportunity to train students in design, developing,
and testing algorithms and physical layer technologies on a futuristic
networking platform.