* 1619676
* University System of Maryland LSAMP: 2016-2021
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Freeman Hrabowski, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2022
* USD 4,999,994.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for cultivating STEM talent has been well
established. For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is
vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional
educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based
economy. American students from diverse ethnic groups are underrepresented in
STEM fields, and represent an untapped resource for the STEM workforce in the
U.S. The University System of Maryland (USM) LSAMP, which began in 1995, will
use STEM training as a conduit for mutual benefit of U.S. citizens: a program
that at a basic level makes tomorrow better than today for as many students as
possible, and a program that facilitates the conscious development of large
numbers of underrepresented students with STEM skills who will contribute to
America's innovation and competitiveness. The University of Maryland, Baltimore
County (UMBC), lead institution of the USM LSAMP, in partnership with long-time
alliance members the University of Maryland College Park (UMCP) and the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES), seeks to expand the alliance by
adding new Associate Members from Towson University and Frostburg University,
and Community College Collaborators from the STEM tracks of Prince George's
Community College, Anne Arundel Community College, and the Community College of
Baltimore County. The USM LSAMP will continue to build foundations for
cultivating and mentoring the next generation of leaders through four pillars of
STEM: (1) STEM Identity, (2) Sense of Community, (3) Strength-based Approaches,
and (4) Institutional Culture Shift. The four pillars will be operationalized
via four programmatic focus areas that are (1) Participation, (2) Performance,
(3) Preparation, and (4) Presentation. Participation consists of a book-ended
support structure. On the front end, bridge programming will be utilized for
both incoming freshmen and community college transfer students. On the back end,
preparation for graduate school will be integrated into the undergraduate
experience to pave the way for STEM graduate degrees. Performance will focus on
bolstering students' math performance. In addition to tutorial support
throughout the year, USM LSAMP students will also have the opportunity to
participate in the USM Winter Mathematics Institute. Preparation will emphasize
undergraduate research as a pathway to the Ph.D. USM LSAMP students will have
opportunities to conduct research during the academic year on each of the USM
LSAMP campuses. The alliance will use presentation as a means to foster both
professional and leadership development. Participants will have opportunities to
present their research domestically and internationally. The leadership of USM
LSAMP who are STEM professionals endeavor to change lives, families, and society
by helping the next generation of STEM leaders pursue the path of STEM
excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge-generating research study,
entitled ?Invoking STEM Identity through Purpose-Driven Research Preparation and
Sense of Community?, will test a theory-driven model that positions
racial/ethnic climate, science self-efficacy, sense of belonging,
academic/social integration, and science identity as mediators to explain
pathways to persistence and success in STEM. The model will be examined using
both quantitative and qualitative data for the USM LSAMP program as a whole as
well as for each program component. Whether the pathways differ by ethnicity,
gender, and transfer status will also be explored.