* 1619261
* STARSS: Small: GC@Scale: Synthesis, optimization, and implementation of Garbled Circuits for Scalable Privacy-Preserving Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Farinaz Koushanfar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2020
* USD 298,231.00

Computing on sensitive data is a standing challenge central to several modern-
world applications. Secure Function Evaluation (SFE) allows mistrusting parties
to jointly compute an arbitrary function on their private inputs without
revealing anything but the result. The GC@Scale project focuses on novel
scalable methods for addressing SFE, which directly translate to stronger
cryptography and security for myriads of tasks with sensitive data. The
applications are wide reaching and include privacy-preserving processing of
medical, genome, and biometric data, as well as personal, government, and
industrial cloud computing. The project includes an ambitious educational
program that targets both undergraduate/ graduate students, and also addresses
issues related to outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of SFE using
Garbled Circuits (GC) was introduced by Yao. Despite a decade of research in GC
implementation and several key progresses, scalability of the available methods
has been hampered by the circuit representation as a directed acyclic graph, and
software-level local logic optimizations. GC@Scale leverages PI's recent work,
which has changed the SFE landscape by viewing GC generation as an atypical
sequential logic synthesis. The project plans to advance the understanding and
enable expanded exploration of SFE methodologies, while simultaneously enriching
the theory, practice, and tools for logic design, synthesis, mapping and
optimization. The proposed plan includes: (i) design and FPGA implementation of
an efficient general purpose Garbled Processor for secure computation; (ii)
Creating the challenging application-specific GC matching and search engines
with a higher than linear complexity. (iii) Devising new custom SFE engines for
Machine Learning tasks.