* 1619582
* Intense Sub-Femtosecond Optical Radiation from Relativistic Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Howard Milchberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 584,749.00

This work will explore the shortest duration optical flashes ever generated,
produced by accelerating electrons from rest to almost the speed of light over a
distance less than one-hundredth the thickness of a human hair. The accelerating
charged particles are produced by the interaction of low energy (but very high
intensity) laser pulses with dense jets of hydrogen gas. The hydrogen gas has
all of its electrons stripped off by the laser pulse, forming a plasma, and
radiation pressure from the laser pulse then pushes the free electrons out of
the way. This produces an electrostatic disturbance that moves as a wave in the
plasma (a 'plasma wave') and is so strong that it can accelerate its own
electrons from rest to nearly the speed of light in the form of directed beams.
These beams of accelerated electrons are useful for medical and scientific
imaging. One of their intriguing, exciting, and potentially useful byproducts is
radiation flash emission, which takes place over just one half cycle of the
radiation emission itself, making it of sub-femtosecond duration (less than
1/1000000000000000 second long). Such a light source, in addition to its
fascinating internal relativistic dynamics, can act as the fastest-ever optical
strobe source for capturing images, for example, of electrons in mid-flight in
their orbits in an atom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
characterize a new source of intense, coherent, sub-femtosecond pulses (or
flashes) in the optical range. These pulses arise directly from wave breaking of
relativistic plasma waves and are only indirectly driven by a pump laser field.
The radiation flash appears to arise purely from classical acceleration of
charged particles exposed to the enormous electric and magnetic fields inside
relativistic plasma waves. Their spectral and coherence characteristics are
strongly affected by the plasma density, which sets the group velocity of the
plasma waves, the spatial scale of the radiating bunches, and the laser energy
required for relativistic self-focusing of the initiating laser pulse. Such
flashes are consistent with unidirectional acceleration of electrons from rest
to nearly the speed of light. The project will consist of detailed measurements
of flash coherence properties, temporal pulse structure, and exploration of
timing control of this radiation. Accompanying the experiments will be extensive
2D and 3D particle-in-cell simulations. A new 1 kHz, 10 mJ laser system will
enable experiments at a much higher repetition rate, improving shot-to-shot
reproducibility and allowing high data collection rates, both of which lead to
better signal-to-noise and more precise measurements.