* 1619990
* I-Corps: Customer Discovery for Embedded Scale (E-Scale) system
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Pearlman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The E-scale is a passive weight monitoring system which can detect the weight of
people every time they enter or exit the bed. Originally designed for wheelchair
users and others who cannot stand on a typical bathroom scale, the E-scale is an
inexpensive solution for frequent weight tracking of anyone. The data from
E-scale is wireless and is accessible on any of their electronic devices.
Potential E-scale markets include in-home use by people who are unable to stand
unassisted and use in nursing and assistive living facilities to track the
weight of residents. The E-scale may also serve the broader markets of people
who have had recent surgeries or others who may need to monitor weight
frequently to detect changes for medication dosage or for potential
complications of their condition. These segments include people with congestive
heart failure (5 million in US) that are advised by the American College of
Cardiology to weigh themselves on a daily basis to determine even subtle weight
changes (3 pounds gained in less than 3 days). Weight is an important biological
metric for everyone, but is often even more important for those people with
existing medical conditions. However, due to lack of accessible technology,
these are the people who have the most trouble tracking their weight.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the E-scale project is to develop a system for
in-home weight-tracking of people who cannot stand on a bathroom scale. The
E-scale consists of sensors contained in puck-like devices that are placed under
each leg of a bed and weighs someone every time they enter or exit the bed.
Algorithms analyze the sensor data and are able to detect and separate the
weights of multiple people in the bed with an accuracy of +/- one pound. This
data is then sent to the cloud for viewing on an individual's own or a
caregiver's electronic devices. The prototype of this device is currently being
evaluated with in-home usability testing and will also be evaluated as an
integral part of a weight loss study for wheelchair users recently funded by the
Paralyzed Veterans Association. If the E-scale is found to be useful, it will be
commercialized and marketed towards wheelchair users, other people who have
difficulty using bathroom scales, and nursing and assistive living facilities.