* 1619659
* Alabama LSAMP: Sustainability of Best Practices for STEM Education and Research
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Kevin Whitaker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,249,411.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alabama LSAMP is a completely reconstituted alliance
that consists of 4-year institutions, doctoral-granting institutions, community
colleges, high schools, and industry. The proposed activities that will expand
the elements of the previous program consist of: performance-based stipend
support, summer bridge programs, spring research conferences, community college
bridge to 4-year institution programs, summer research experiences for high
school and undergraduate students, and outreach to middle school students. The
objectives of the proposed program are: To increase the number of students from
underrepresented minority groups who earn STEM undergraduate degrees; to enhance
the STEM educational experience for underrepresented minority students; to
increase retention and progression of underrepresented minority students to
baccalaureate degrees; to enable successful transfer and matriculation of
underrepresented minority students from 2-year to 4-year institutions in STEM
programs; to increase access to high quality undergraduate research experiences;
and to facilitate seamless transition of underrepresented minority students into
STEM graduate programs. The expected benefits of the proposed program are: to
contribute to a reversal of the loss of US STEM talent, the promotion of
systemic change in institutional culture to enhance the retention of
underrepresented minority students in STEM disciplines, increased matriculation
of underrepresented minority students that transfer from community colleges into
STEM disciplines, and sustained transformation of the undergraduate STEM
educational experience. The proposed activities are important to advancing
knowledge and understanding of sustainable best practices in STEM education and
research experiences for undergraduates and will include a social science study
and planned dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is: To implement and study innovative, evidence-based, sustainable
best practices in STEM education and research experiences for undergraduates
designed to increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minority
students by enhancing the STEM educational experience. At the heart of this
research study is the question of whether variability in the content and length
of a summer bridge program differentially impacts self-efficacy and belonging;
and consequently, students' intentions to pursue a STEM degree and academic
progress. This research may inform LSAMP programs nationally about how to
structure summer bridge programs and contribute to models of stage-environment
fit and our understanding of self-efficacy and belonging during school
transitions. This study will examine how self-efficacy and belonging are
affected by participation in the Alabama LSAMP program, and how they in turn are
related to intentions to pursue a STEM degree. The study pays special attention
to how different program elements, especially how those during the summer bridge
program affect these factors over the transition to college. The effect of the
timing and the amount of time spent in the following best practices for STEM
retention will be examined: research, professional development, academic
support, social integration and mentoring. The method for the research study
will involve all LSAMP participants across the nine institutions each year (79
per year) which should result in data from approximately 395 students over the
course of the 5-year study. Students will complete surveys (typically online) at
intervals during the first year of the program and then once a year thereafter
to track their progress. All students will complete a survey assessing self-
efficacy, belonging, and intentions at the start of the summer bridge program
(baseline). Before addressing the primary research questions, the psychometric
qualities of each scale will be assessed. Factor analysis will be used to
confirm or modify the scales so that they align with the intended psychological
constructs. Factor analysis will also be used to determine if some measures can
be combined to create scores that reflect larger meaningful constructs. Because
students are nested in nine different institutions, hierarchical linear modeling
is the most appropriate statistical tool. Additional models can be developed to
examine how the timing and intensity of activities throughout the first year
impact self-efficacy, belonging and intentions. These analyses will create a
fuller picture of the transition process.