* 1619630
* Feature-Based Data Assimilation and Uncertainty Quantification for Complex Systems in Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Matthias Morzfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,999.00

The basic idea of data assimilation is to update a computational model with
information from sparse and noisy data so that the updated model can be used for
predictions. Data assimilation is at the core of computational geophysics, most
notably in numerical weather prediction, oceanography, and geomagnetism, and is
used widely in engineering applications, ranging from robotics to reservoir
modeling. In the usual approach one attempts to refine a computational model
such that its outputs match data. However, matching model outputs directly to
data is often unnecessary or even undesirable. In this project, data
assimilation is extended so that computational models can be updated based on
features in the data, rather than the raw data themselves. The feature approach
reduces an intrinsic dimension and is applicable to large scale problems in
geosciences and engineering, with specific applications in geomagnetic dipole
reversals, cloud modeling, and uncertainty quantification for solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical aim of this project is to
extend data assimilation such that computational models can be calibrated
against features observed in the data, rather than the raw data. This can be
achieved within a Bayesian framework by replacing the data with a suitable low-
dimensional feature, computed from the data. The resulting feature-based
likelihood can be used to assimilate selected aspects of fine-scale data into
coarse, low-dimensional models. More generally, the use of features reduces the
dimension of the likelihood, which in turn reduces the computational
requirements of feature-based data assimilation by Monte Carlo methods. The
mathematical foundations of the feature-based approach will be explored by
rigorous analysis. New computational methods for feature-based data assimilation
will be created, which combine machine learning techniques with Monte Carlo
sampling. The efficiency of these methods will be assessed by interdisciplinary
collaboration with scientists in geosciences and engineering in three specific
applications. Specifically, feature-based data assimilation algorithms will be
developed for the study of superchrons of Earth's magnetic dipole field, to
determine the geophysical relevance of low-dimensional cloud models, and for
uncertainty quantification of thin-film polymeric reflectors for solar power
generation. These applications will collaboratively connect scientists (faculty,
postdocs and students) across several disciplines (geosciences, engineering,
mathematics). Undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Arizona
will be trained as part of the project and will aid in producing and
disseminating key results. The research activities will be accompanied by an
outreach plan, implemented as part of the G-Teams program within the Department
of Mathematics at the University of Arizona. A central outreach theme is to
demonstrate, for K-12 teachers and their students, mathematics "in action" by
applying mathematical concepts to problems relevant to our society.