* 1619907
* Inverse Problems in Optical Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* John Schotland, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Advances in imaging technologies such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) have transformed the practice of clinical medicine and
basic biomedical research. Although the development of such technologies is well
known to depend upon progress in physics and engineering, it is less well known
that applied and computational mathematics has also played an essential role.
This research project studies mathematical questions that arise in new medical
imaging modalities that make use of near-infrared light either alone, or in
combination with ultrasound. The research will study novel mathematical
algorithms that will lead to improvements in optical imaging both with respect
to resolution (visualizing structures at smaller scales) and computational
speed. In particular, the project aims to devise robust and accurate image
reconstruction algorithms that may lead to the detection and characterization of
disease at much earlier stages than is currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to investigate
inverse problems that arise in biomedical optical imaging. The project involves
two components. (i) Development of mathematically-justified image reconstruction
algorithms for optical tomography with diffuse light. The analysis will be
carried out within the framework of radiative transport theory. The project aims
to develop reconstruction methods based on topological reduction of the inverse
Born series, for recovering the absorption and scattering coefficients of the
radiative transport equation from boundary measurements, and to characterize the
convergence and approximation error of these methods. It is planned to employ
these results to develop and test fast reconstruction algorithms suitable for
use with a noncontact optical tomography system. (ii) Study of inverse problems
that arise in acousto-optic imaging. This recently developed imaging modality
combines the high-resolution of ultrasound imaging with the physiologically
important contrast of optical imaging. The work includes theoretical analysis of
related inverse scattering problems, together with numerical tests of associated
image reconstruction algorithms. In particular, the project aims to develop
reconstruction methods for recovering the absorption and scattering coefficients
of the radiative transport equation from acousto-optic measurements.