* 1619654
* Iowa-Illinois-Nebraska LSAMP: IINSPIRE: A STEM Partnership for Innovation in Research and Education
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Jonathan Wickert, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 11/30/2022
* USD 4,999,714.00

The Iowa-Illinois-Nebraska LSAMP (IINSPIRE LSAMP) alliance was formed in 2011 to
broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM education in
the Midwest. IINSPIRE LSAMP consists of sixteen two-year and four-year colleges
and universities: Augustana College (Illinois), Des Moines Area Community
College, Doane University, Eastern Iowa Community College District, Grinnell
College, Hawkeye Community College, Iowa State University, Iowa Valley Community
College District, Kirkwood Community College, Little Priest Tribal College,
Luther College, Nebraska Wesleyan University, University of Iowa, University of
Northern Iowa, Upper Iowa University, and Wartburg College. These institutions
vary widely, face both similar and distinct challenges, and have joined together
to produce a diverse STEM workforce prepared to address societal needs. The
alliance is focusing on extending and sustaining innovative student experiences
on every campus to recruit and retain students in STEM. In these student
experiences, IINSPIRE students become leaders through undergraduate research
projects and internships, professional meetings, and student organizations. They
gain confidence as scientists, engineers, and mathematicians through training,
mentoring, support and transition programs. The alliance is also focusing on
expanding inclusive mentoring and teaching practices; collaborating within and
across campuses to provide opportunities for students and faculty; and studying,
evaluating and improving student experiences and outcomes. Another emphasis of
the alliance is student success through transition points, including math during
the first two years of study, transfer from two-year to four-year institutions,
and entry into STEM graduate programs. A collective and committed effort by
alliance members is improving educational pathways and partnerships for STEM
student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IINSPIRE LSAMP goal is to go beyond
doubling the number of underrepresented minority (URM) STEM baccalaureate
graduates in the alliance by 50%, from 350 to 525 graduates, and to pursue an
array of project outcomes to broaden the participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM education across all sixteen alliance institutions in Iowa,
Illinois and Nebraska. This is being accomplished by implementing, extending and
sustaining comprehensive, evidence-based, and innovative strategies resulting in
the graduation of well-prepared, highly-qualified students from underrepresented
groups who pursue graduate studies or careers in STEM. The strategies include:
practices that support student academic, social and professional development and
progress in STEM majors; IINSPIRE-specific student experiences and mentoring at
each institution, leveraging programs and resources that serve URM STEM
students; undergraduate research experiences and training leading to a research
certificate; and STEM transfer partnerships between 2-year and 4-year
institutions. A key strategy is the campus-specific student experience model,
which interweaves IINSPIRE-driven institutional activities, alliance-wide
activities, and other institutional/partner activities and resources leveraged
to support the student experience from pre-matriculation through graduation. The
campus-specific student experience models as well as relationship-building among
institutions have been designed through alliance-wide planning to entail
institutional commitments and foster program sustainability. Research studies
guided by Social Cognitive Career Theory are studying both micro- and macro-
level influences to understand how IINSPIRE students thrive and persist in STEM
disciplines. There are various broader impacts of the IINSPIRE LSAMP alliance,
including expanding opportunities for URM students in undergraduate and graduate
training and preparation for STEM professions; and promoting partnerships with
community colleges, industry, diversity programs, and researchers; thus
contributing to the development of a diverse workforce in STEM fields. In the
longer term, alliance activities are building capacity in STEM research and
bringing research into practice to improve STEM teaching and learning.