* 1619283
* SHF: Small: High-Performance, Energy-Efficient Mobile Web Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Vijay Janapa Reddi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The Web is continuously transforming society - shaping communications,
catalyzing innovations, even shaping thought processes. Over the past decade,
the role of the Web has shifted from information retrieval (Web 1.0) to
providing a platform for interactive and engaging user experiences (Web 2.0).
The Web is once again entering a new age, transcending user engagement to
provide intelligent services that integrate multiple devices together. The
driving force behind the Web's evolution is the ubiquity of mobile devices-
undoubtedly today's most pervasive personal computing platform. The PI will
study the crucial conjunction between mobile devices and Web technologies
because mobile devices struggle to deliver high computational capability on a
battery-power budget. The PI's integrated education plan, involving workshops,
new curriculum and cutting-edge Web technologies, will stimulate students from a
young age, who come from a diverse range of backgrounds, ethnicities, age groups
and skill sets, to pursue academic interests in relevant scientific and
technological fields. The exposure will nurture students to embrace careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will lay the groundwork and establish the foundations needed to develop
future high-performance and energy-efficient mobile computing systems that can
usher in the next generation of Web applications.Â  The PI will research and
investigate optimizations across the layers of the execution stack: at the (1)
hardware layer the research will yield insights into new mobile processor
architectures that achieve high efficiency by exploiting domain-specific and
runtime knowledge; at the (2) runtime software layer, the project will lay the
foundations for feedback-driven mechanisms that can dynamically learn to operate
the architecture at energy-efficient points without compromising end-user
application performance and user experience; at the (3) application layer, the
research will discover language hints to empower application writers with
awareness of their applications' energy consumption.