* 1619127
* SHF: Small: MultiSpot - Closing the power-delivery/heat-removal cycle for heterogeneous multiscale systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Mircea Stan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The semiconductor industry is poised to continue the historic Moore's law trend
of doubling the level of integration every 18 months, even as the virtuous cycle
benefits of Dennard scaling are quickly vanishing. Once devices no longer scale
laterally, one way to continue to increase areal density is to use 3D
integration. The main objective of the current project, called the MultiSpot
project, is to provide fundamental solutions to the problem of 3D-IC power wall.
These solutions could have a deep impact on the semiconductor industry, and thus
the society as a whole by providing a path forward for Moore's law to take
advantage of the third dimension. The project will also lead to new research
infrastructure exemplified by the several high-impact architecture modeling
tools for power and thermals previously developed by the PIs, such as HotSpot,
HotLeakage VoltSpot, and ArchFP that have enabled extensive research at academic
institutions and industry in the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One approach is to
provide very low impedance paths from the interior of the volume to the outside
for power in addition to heat removal. A different dual use for microchannels is
to modify their walls to create supercapacitors that can be useful to store
extra charge to combat power brownouts or boost operations. An alternative
method to address the power delivery volumetric/areal mismatch is voltage
stacking, in which the different layers in a 3D-IC stack are electrically
connected in series, instead of in parallel as in a conventional approach.
MultiSpot proposes practical methods to complement and assist the implicit
regulation of voltage stacking with the explicit regulation of multi-output
switched-capacitor ladder networks. The project also considers cross-layer
aspects, such as details of embedded capacitor technologies, the architectural
implications of homogeneous vs. heterogeneous 3D-IC solutions, the modeling of
power delivery and heat removal at the architecture level, and validation
through modeling and simulations.