* 1619352
* Design, Stability and Optimality of Cyber-networks for Frequency Regulation in the Smart Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2020
* USD 425,000.00

This research project aims at developing methods to help integrate clean energy
into the electric power grid. We are at the cusp of a historic transformation of
our energy system into a more sustainable form in the coming decades. One of the
key technical challenges is balancing supply and demand at all times at all
points of grid. Traditionally, supply-demand balance is maintained by adapting
generation to fluctuating demand. This will become ineffective in the future
because sources of renewable generation of electricity such as wind and solar
power are random and uncontrollable. On the other hand, there will be more and
more distributed energy resources such as electric vehicles, smart buildings,
smart appliances, storage devices, and other power electronic controllers that
not only consume, but may also sense, compute, communicate and actuate. We will
design methods for ubiquitous, continuous load-side frequency regulation to
supplement the current generation-side control, prove the stability and
optimality of these methods in a large network of distributed energy resources,
and study their interaction with generator-side control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
cyberphysical network such as a smart grid consists of a physical network
governed by its own laws of physics and a cyber-network that senses,
communicates, computes, and actuates on the physical network. Our starting point
is the observation that the topology of the cyber-network may be different from
that of the physical network. For instance, not every node in the physical
network may have sensors or controllers, and this constrains the topology of the
cyber-network. On the other hand, two nodes that are not directly connected in
the physical network may be able to communicate, e.g., through a wireless
channel, and this provides an extra degree of freedom for the design of the
cyber-network. We will develop a theory to clarify the impact of the cyber-
network on the stability and optimality of the physical network, design
effective cyber-networks and frequency regulation algorithms based on the
theoretical insights, and validate these designs through simulations.