* 1619827
* P2C2: Collaborative Research:Spatiotemporal Variability of Northwestern North American Temperatures in Response to Climatic Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 08/24/2015,04/30/2019
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 105,155.00

Generally, this award aims to apply a novel analytical technique to a
millennial-scale tree-ring data from existing and newly-obtained sample archives
to yield reconstructions of past temperature variability closely linked to
dominant modes of climatic forcing, such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation
(PDO). The researchers are targeting three climatically-sensitive regions where
tree-ring width (RW) records of this length are available in existing sample
archives from the Gulf of Alaska in southern Alaska, Sukakpak in northern
Alaska, and northwestern Canada (Yukon, British Columbia, Alberta). The
resulting climate reconstructions will be compared with climate model outputs to
examine spatiotemporal patterns in response to climate forcing (particularly
volcanoes), identify uncertainties, and test hypotheses regarding internal and
forced modes of variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will generate a
suite of novel, maximum latewood density (MXD) chronologies for these sites
using the Blue Intensity (BI) parameter, which is substantially less costly and
labor intensive yet retains the accuracy and resolution of traditional MXD
techniques. There are few sub-millennial to millennial scale MXD-based
chronologies currently existing for this vast region. The researchers argue that
the resulting BI chronologies, based on living and subfossil wood material, will
yield robust records of past climatic extremes, trends and shifts in past
temperature, spatiotemporal expressions of internal Pacific variability, as well
as details regarding the external climate forcing over northwestern North
America for the past millennium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has
broad impact in four key aspects, namely:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, this
project will synthesize a network of climatically-sensitive tree-ring records
from across northwestern North America to yield high-resolution, strongly
calibrated reconstructions on past climate variability from intra-seasonal to
Decadal to Centennial time scales. These dendroclimatic reconstructions will
mainly be developed using existing data that will be processed to extract new
information using the new BI technique, along with the development of field
temperature reconstructions. Tree-ring data will be compared to model output and
other proxy records and made available to the modeling community. This research
will help advance a broader understanding of the long-term variability of
climate over the past millennium for one of the most rapidly changing regions of
the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, scientific results from the project will
be archived and provided to the scientific community through the National
Geophysical Data Center (NGDC) and International Tree-Ring Data Bank (ITRDB).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, as appropriate, the researchers will engage with
native groups in Alaska. In the past, the PIs have interacted extensively with
northern communities by involving native peoples in research and plan to
continue to do so for this project. The potential research outcomes could have
relevance to native populations and the data and interpretations will be
available to relevant communities (community groups, e.g. Arctic Borderlands
Ecological Knowledge Cooperative,
http://www.taiga.net/coop/index.html).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourth, the project
will support undergraduate and graduate students as part of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program
and the student program at The College of Wooster. The support of undergraduate
students would allow for an early experience in research.