* 1619712
* Meeting: Ctenopalooza - A Workshop on Ctenophore Biology, March 14-15, 2015, Saint Augustine, Florida
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Joseph Ryan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2017
* USD 21,710.00

The first international workshop on ctenophore biology will be held at the
Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience in St. Augustine, FL on March 14-15,
2016. This meeting will bring together researchers studying the biology of
ctenophores. Ctenophores, also known as comb jellies, are a group of animals
found in nearly all marine environments (coastal and oceanic, deep sea as well
as surface waters). Most species are planktonic and move by the beating of eight
ciliary bands, which is the distinct morphological character uniting the group.
Recent biogeographic and evolutionary findings, as well as published genomic
resources and access to deep water have brought a great deal of attention to
these animals, resulting in a revived research activity. The purpose of this
international ctenophore workshop is to bring together the burgeoning community
of ctenophore biologists, foster cross-disciplinary collaborations, discuss
improvements and expansion of community resources, and share expertise relating
to field, experimental, and culture techniques. Furthermore, the workshop has
been designed to foster interactions between junior scientists (undergraduate
and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) and senior researchers to
inspire the next generation of ctenophore biologists to identify and take on the
big open questions that can only be answered by studying ctenophores. The recent
influx of interest in these fascinating and important animals presents an
opportunity to explore future directions and address some of the challenges for
expansion of ctenophore research. This will be the first meeting completely
dedicated to studying ctenophores, and the results will be published in an open-
access journal to facilitate the broadest possible distribution of ideas
generated during this workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies suggest that
ctenophores are the sister group to all other animals and as such, are a
critical group for understanding the biology of the last common ancestor of all
animals. These findings have been corroborated by analyses of the complete
nuclear genomes of two ctenophores. The availability of these data and the
implications of the phylogenetic position (e.g., independent origin or loss of
neural cell types within animals) have captured the attention of a wide
audience, and research on these animals has grown. Although interest in
ctenophores continues to grow, these animals remain relatively poorly studied
and often misrepresented. Thus, it is important to identify ways to improve and
expand community resources, as well as share expertise relating to culturing and
experimental techniques. The workshop will bring together researchers from a
variety of fields (e.g., taxonomy, ecology, neurobiology, evodevo, and behavior)
to identify ways to improve resources, to foster collaborations, and to promote
cross-disciplinary approaches to studying these unique creatures.