* 1619843
* RACE-GENDER TRAJECTORIES IN ENGINEERING: THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CONTROL ACROSS NEIGHBORHOOD AND SCHOOL CONTEXTS
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Odis Johnson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2020
* USD 717,187.00

Meeting the nation's need for a larger, more diverse scientific and
technological workforce requires new knowledge about how school and neighborhood
contexts shape individuals' career trajectories. Research has yet to explore
whether a heightened emphasis on social control in these environments provides a
climate antithetical to the cultivation of adolescents' innovative thinking and
creativity, attributes that are considered essential to their success in the
engineering sciences. Research of this kind will be useful in identifying: 1)
the school and neighborhood dimensions most strongly related to the dispositions
and trajectories of underrepresented populations at key junctures of engineering
pathways, and 2) the kind of educational reforms and neighborhood programs that
will aid students' secondary school preparation, post-secondary persistence in
the fields, and eventual entry into the engineering professions. In support of
these important aims, this research applies advanced statistical methods to the
ELS dataset to answer the following questions:

1. What contextual structures, processes and effects in existing research are
most related to race-gender groups' occupational attainment in engineering?

2. Are school and neighborhood social control strategies related to race-gender
trajectories in secondary school preparation, post-secondary persistence, and
entry into the engineering workforce?

3. Is more variation in race-gender groups' engineering career trajectories
accounted for by their neighborhood or school context?

4. What causal inferences can be made about the engineering career trajectories
of nearly identical race-gender groups that differ in their exposure to more or
less restrictive methods of social control within neighborhoods and schools?

The transformative potential of this study extends from its capacity to fill
multiple voids in our engineering workforce development and broadening
participation knowledge base. Identifying neighborhood and school qualities
associated with race-gender groups' likelihood of entering engineering science
professions contributes specific knowledge about school and non-school contexts
as sites of engineering career development. This project considers whether
society's pursuit of social control and order establishes a climate within both
contexts that is antithetical to the cultivation of adolescents' interest in
engineering. Youth of color, African American and Latino males in particular,
are most likely to be exposed to punitive social control strategies, and may
become less likely to enter the engineering field as a consequence. To explore
these possibilities, this project uses systematic literature review procedures
and innovative quantitative methods to investigate the longitudinal career
trajectories of participants in the Educational Longitudinal Study (ELS) of
2002. The research uses social control, intersectionality, and status attainment
theories to frame the estimation of race-gender trajectories at critical stages
of career development. This study aligns with NSF priorities and national calls
to broaden the participation of historically underrepresented groups at all
stages of their career development. Study results about the engineering
experiences of race-gender groups within neighborhood and school contexts will
reveal areas where investment and reforms can expand access and interest in
engineering careers. The policy relevance of this research is significant and
will inform decision-makers and practitioners about the human capital cost to
engineering fields previously hidden in the uninvestigated effects of social
control strategies. This study will offer potentially transformative
recommendations for schools that, if adopted, would enable the replication of
inclusive learning environments that align with expansive engineering
opportunities.