* 1619620
* TWC: Frontier: Collaborative: Beyond Technical Security: Developing an Empirical Basis for Socio-Economic Perspectives
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 316,432.00

This project tackles the social and economic elements of Internet security: how
the motivations and interactions of attackers, defenders, and users shape the
threats we face, how they evolve over time, and how they can best be addressed.
While security is a phenomenon mediated by the technical workings of computers
and networks, it is ultimately a conflict driven by economic and social issues
that merit a commensurate level of scrutiny. Today's online attackers are
commonly profit-seeking, and the implicit social networks that link them
together play a critical role in fostering the innovation and the efficiency
underlying cybercrime markets. Further, the socio-economic lens can provide
vital insights not only for understanding attackers, but victims too. Today's
consumers, corporations, and governments make large investments in security
technology with little understanding of their ultimate return-on-investment. And
the ease with which we adopt online personas and relationships has created a
collective blind spot that attackers exploit all-too-
easily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grappling with these socio-economic dimensions is
of fundamental importance for achieving a secure future information
infrastructure, and developing a sound understanding of them requires research
grounded in empiricism. Accordingly, the project has four key components: (1)
pursue in-depth empirical analyses of a range of online criminal activities; (2)
map out the evolving attacker ecosystem that preys on online social networks,
and the extent to which unsafe online behavior is itself adopted and
transmitted; (3) study how relationships among these criminals are established,
maintained, and evolve over time; and (4) measure the efficacy of today's
security interventions, both in the large and at the level of individual users.
Across all of these efforts, the aim is to identify bottleneck elements where
interventions might most effectively undermine entire ecosystems of abusive and
criminal activities. Consequently, this research has the potential to
dramatically benefit society by undermining entire cybercrime ecosystems:
disrupting underground activities, infrastructure, and social networks through
strategic intervention. The work will also create numerous educational
opportunities, including undergraduate and graduate education as well as
workforce education for security professionals, law enforcement, civil
regulatory agencies, and legal scholars and professionals tasked with countering
modern Internet threats.