* 1619278
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Micro-Assembly Exploiting SofT RObotics (MAESTRO)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Aaron Becker, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 209,308.00

The MAESTRO project will develop a new type of manufacturing by combining soft
robotics and swarm control to construct assemblies in 2D and 3D from individual
artificial cells made of hydrogels. MAESTRO will design rules for building tiny
factories so that, like a conductor?s baton, global control signals will
organize artificial cells into complex configurations. These artificial cells
can contain living cells and be assembled into tissue for artificial organs, or
contain inorganic particles to assemble into micro-scale tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAESTRO will ferry desired components in artificial cells
constructed from polysaccharide-based hydrogels. Current approaches use
engineered structures or live bacteria as micro-scale actuators to push or pull
desired objects into place. The proposed approach uses the soft robots
themselves as building blocks for desired patterns. The artificial cells excel
at encapsulating a wide range of micro and nano-sized particles, for example
living cells and magnetic nanoparticles. Furthermore, artificial cells can be
triggered to efficiently release their payloads. Novel swarm control algorithms
using obstacle-based particle computation will steer the cells. In traditional
robotics, simultaneous control of multiple robots is based on individual motion
control that requires heterogeneity among robots or the ability to deliver
multiple input signals; both approaches are currently impractical in small-scale
systems. However, these challenges can be overcome by parallel motion planning
in obstacle-filled workspaces. This obstacle-based positional control makes the
position of microrobots fully controllable using just a single control input.
Actuation of these stimuli-responsive artificial cells in micro-fluidic,
obstacle-laden environments presents a paradigm shift in fabrication
technology.&lt;br/&gt;