* 1619463
* III: Small: Increase the Throughput of Non-Relational Databases through Theoretical Modeling and Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Neal Young, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 06/30/2021
* USD 548,000.00

The explosive growth of data is driving the rapid evolution of massive data-
storage systems. These systems are widely used, not only in large-scale Internet
services, but also in scientific projects in diverse areas such as astronomy,
geography, and genetics. This project will increase the efficiency of these
data-storage systems, which will allow processing more data at lower cost. There
is the potential for a large societal impact as science and engineering research
is made more cost-effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this
project will work on improving non-relational databases with log-structured
merge-tree storage architectures. One main focus will be on improving a key
component of such systems, namely, compaction policies. Compaction policies are
not yet well understood, but are crucial for system performance. To date,
compaction policies have been designed by trial and error, guided mainly by
empirical experience. The project will develop analytical models for compaction,
validate and refine the models with empirical testing, design improved policies
that are optimal according to the models, and deploy these policies in live
systems. Further, the developed theoretical models will be leveraged to optimize
non-relational database systems in handling high volumes of dynamic continuous
queries, which arrive and expire rapidly.