* 1619243
* SHF: Small: Leveraging User Preferences for Mobile User Experience Improvement
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Xin Fu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 409,980.00

Mobile users always have demanding requirements on gaining an excellent user
experience which is the top challenge faced by todays mobile device designers
and producers. From computer system perspective, the battery life (i.e., energy)
and quality-of-service (QoS) (i.e., performance) are the two major factors to
the user experience. Effectively balancing these two factors is essential to
enable a high mobile user experience. There have been studies on achieving the
optimal trade-offs between energy and performance for various computing
platforms, but they are not adaptable to the emerging mobile platforms which are
much more user-centric. Various users have diverse perceptions on the device
with the same energy and performance, and even the same user perceives the same
energy and performance differently at different circumstances. The individual
user?s preferences are generally considered as the paramount factor that
determines the user satisfaction with the device QoS and battery life. Different
users possess different preferences due to the impact of psychology. Moreover,
the surrounding circumstances also significantly change the user's preferences.
It is crucial to accurately characterize the preferences of different users at
different circumstances, and leverage them to guide the battery life and QoS
trade-offs for the user experience enhancement. The project will facilitate the
mobile devices to meet the increasing demands on the excellent user experience,
and enforce the desire of launching more useful applications into the mobile
devices, making the normal living and working more convenient and efficient.
This project will also contribute to society through engaging under-represented
groups, and collaborating with local industries and Texas Medical
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is exploring an innovative
research program to characterize the diversity of user preferences depending on
personality, emotion, demographics, and perform the preferences-guided energy-
performance trade-off in mobile platforms to effectively improve the mobile user
experience. This project, which rethinks the mobile platform design from the
user perspective, will open the door for next generation mobile platforms that
can intelligently, automatically, and human-imperceptibly customize their
configurations to satisfy each single user at different circumstances.