* 1619189
* CIF: Small: Effective bounds for distributed storage and data access
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Iwan Duursma, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 306,107.00

Today's data centers rely on advanced methods to efficiently store increasing
volumes of data. To protect against loss of data, data is stored redundantly on
multiple disks. At the large scale of clusters of thousands of disks, simple
replication of data is inefficient and not an option. To address the challenge
of efficient, reliable and secure storage of data at a large scale, the project
uses various combinations of algebraic and combinatorial methods. New
constructions are given for the efficient recovery of data in case of disk
failure. New methods are introduced to optimize bounds for storage capacity. New
secure schemes are developed to ensure that information can only be obtained
from the combined data of multiple disks. The research uses a novel algebraic
approach to fundamental aspects of data storage and data access. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be involved, working on projects with both a
theoretical and a computational component.

Algorithms for data storage encode and divide data over several disks. The
encoding challenge is to optimize the allocation of storage space between
primary data and repair data. The optimization is analyzed for the general case
in the setting of entropy inequalities and for the linear case in the setting of
rank inequalities for matroids. The main focus is on three aspects. 1) Outer
bounds: Optimize the use of available storage space under various combinations
of constraints. 2) Multiple-access: Use coordinated encoding of data from
different sources to add error-correction without sacrificing storage capacity.
3) Small alphabets: Using a novel approach, analyze nontraditional coset schemes
that are defined over smaller fields.