* 1619702
* Bridge to the Baccalaureate: Strategic Transfer Alliance for Minority Participation (STAMP)
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Louise Pagotto, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,485,100.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. The Bridge to the Baccalaureate (B2B)
track in the LSAMP program provides support for alliances of community colleges
(2-year institutions) to accelerate the transfer of students from racial and
ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines to four-year
institutions. It is expected that B2B alliances provide a bridge to the
baccalaureate degree for STEM students from underrepresented populations who
begin their instruction at a community college. The University of Hawaii
Community Colleges (UHCC's) have formed a strategic transfer alliance for Native
Hawaiian and other underrepresented students in Hawaii. This LSAMP B2B Alliance,
called the Strategic Transfer Alliance for Minority Participation (STAMP), led
by the University of Hawaii Kapiolani Community College, will support and
advance STEM education and increase transfer rates for these six community
colleges and the University of Hawaii Maui College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The B2B
STAMP will implement proven strategies and activities to increase the number of
Native Hawaiian and other underrepresented students transferring annually into
baccalaureate STEM degree programs by ~11% per year over the next 3 years (from
205 to 300). B2B STAMP will employ three strategies for success: 1) math
acceleration for first and second year students, 2) peer mentoring, and 3)
undergraduate research experiences (URE) for students as they mature
academically in their sophomore year and transition to baccalaureate STEM
degrees. The B2B STAMP retention and progression strategy of providing math
acceleration, peer mentoring and undergraduate research experiences will
strengthen the next generation of STEM Scholars who can compete in the STEM
workforce while advancing science, technology, and sustainability goals and
achievements for the people of Hawaii and the Pacific Islands.