* 1619254
* CSR: Small: Location, location, location (L3): Support for Geo-Centric Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 515,996.00

Recent years have seen the proliferation of a variety of sensors embedded in
different environments, and the increasing availability of smart wearable
devices. Together these trends have resulted in the growth of sensor data of
interest to many communities across social, economic, health-care, and
scientific domains. This has led to the emergence of geo-centric applications: a
class of applications that can process and extract rich information from the
sensor data to provide novel services to users. However, these applications
currently suffer from poor performance and failures due to the limited computing
and storage resources available on the devices and their location dependency.
This project will develop new computing abstractions, algorithms, and systems,
that enable a new frontier of geo-centric applications to be supported. The goal
of this project is to catalyze the role of computer systems in meeting the needs
of emerging geo-centric applications in mobile, sensor, and Internet-of-things
(IoT) areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a system called
Location, location, location: Support for Geo-Centric Applications - or L3 for
short. A number of novel system and application abstractions to manage the
dynamism that arises from location in support of geo-centric applications will
be developed. First is the concept of a Resource cloud, a system-facing
abstraction that is geo-aware and manages a set of changing resources based on
publish-subscribe and matchmaking. Second is the concept of a Resource
container, an application-facing abstraction that provides policy-based resource
selection and allocation across a diverse set of resources including storage,
computation, and even data sources, to meet the specific requirements of an
application. The project will address specific research problems that arise in
the design and implementation of the Resource cloud and Resource container,
including: on-demand resource provision to the Resource cloud, collective
matching of resource requests that scale to diverse resource types and to highly
shared resources, and automated resource policy generation and optimization
based on application requirements.