* 1619670
* Workshop: Phosphorus Cycling in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Advancing our fundamental understanding through an improved model-data connection; Spring, 2016; Moab, Utah
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Richard Norby, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

Phosphorus (P) has been shown to limit a number of fundamental ecosystem
processes in a wide range of ecosystems. Despite its importance, however, most
Earth system models do not currently include any aspect of the P cycle. This
hinders the utility of these models for generating and testing hypotheses and
for forecasting the effects of global change. Importantly, a critical challenge
for P modeling efforts is also a critical challenge for the scientific community
as a whole; namely, determining a way forward for improving our understanding of
the key drivers, processes, and global change responses of the P cycle. Bringing
together P experts will address this need through a more synthetic understanding
and conceptualization of P cycle dynamics, integration of varied P-related data,
improved process-based modeling of the P cycle, and P data-model integration.
Another potential advance stems from the power of explicit collaborations
between empiricists who study P cycling and modelers considering the inclusion
of P in a range of different models. The workshop will include scientists at all
career stages including students and postdocs, as well as participants from
underrepresented groups.

Workshop participants will represent diverse theoretical, empirical, and
numerical modeling perspectives that are critical for improving our
understanding of the terrestrial P cycle in the context of global change. The
meeting will include experts that span a variety of research perspectives and
methods and is expected to have five outcomes: 1) an improved understanding of
terrestrial P cycling from varied assessments; 2) synthesized datasets that will
be publicly available for analysis and modeling; 3) a meeting report that will
be submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal and a complementary set
of data-based papers; 4) a set of plans for collaborative research projects and
grants to identify approaches to obtain the knowledge necessary for improved
understanding in critical areas; and 5) a network of individuals dedicated to
fostering cross-disciplinary approaches to P research.