* 1619339
* TWC SBE: Small: From Threat to Boon: Understanding and Controlling Strategic Information Transmission in Cyber-Socio-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Cedric Langbort, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,800.00

As cyber-socio-physical and infrastructure systems are increasingly relying on
data and integrating an ever-growing range of disparate, sometimes
unconventional, and possibly untrusted data sources, there is a growing need to
consider the problem of estimation in the presence of strategic and/or self-
interested sensors. This class of problems, called "strategic information
transmission" (SIT), differs from classical fault-tolerant estimation since the
sensors are not merely failing or malfunctioning, but are actively trying to
mislead the estimator for their own benefit. Such strategic behavior could
happen through at least two mechanisms, sensor hijacking and willful
misreporting, both of which have been observed in practice. One particularly
stark and fundamental difference between strategic and faulty sensors is that a
population of strategic sensors does not necessarily result in an erroneous
estimate. In fact, depending on how each sensor expects others to act, it is
even possible for the resulting estimator to converge to a correct value of the
estimated quantity of interest faster than in the absence of any strategic
intent! In other words, strategic information transmission appears to have the
potential for being both a boon and a curse for the systems it targets. The
central question for the engineer and system designer, then, is: "where is the
demarcation line?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with a
comprehensive study of SIT in the specific contexts of false data attacks in
controlled systems, willful misreporting in participatory sensing applications,
and adversarial machine learning. It builds on and extends existing models from
the so-called "cheap talk" literature in Economics, where strategic information
transmission has been considered before, although under widely different
assumptions than in the context of security of cyber-physical systems. The
novelty, pertinence, and intellectual merit of this project, lie in (1) its
formulation of new models that more closely account for the specificity of
strategic information transmission in the three applications of interest than
existing frameworks, (2) its combined use of information theoretic and game
theoretic tools to analyze these models and, (3) the use of behavioral economics
experiments to help characterize, and straddle, the boundary between detrimental
and beneficial strategic information transmission in practice.