* 1619867
* All-Order Precision for LHC Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2018
* USD 60,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Simone Marzani at the
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York. The Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is the highest-energy particle collider in the world. It
accelerates particles to very high energies and then collides them against each
other. The idea behind this is Einstein's famous equation that allows mass and
energy to be converted into each other: with enough collision energy, heavy
particles can be created and the fundamental building blocks of Nature and their
interactions can be studied at energies and distances never explored before. As
a result, research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. The LHC collides protons, which are strongly
interacting, and further strongly-interacting particles are abundantly produced
in every such collision. The research of Professor Marzani is focused on
understanding the strong force, in order to achieve a very precise modeling of
particle interactions which will in turn allow physicists to uncover new and
rare phenomena hiding within the resulting data. This project is also envisioned
to have significant broader impacts. Professor Marzani will involve a postdoc
and graduate students in his research, and thereby provide critical training for
junior physicists beginning research in this field. He also intends to give
public lectures on his research results, and develop new course curricula based
on results coming from the LHC. More technically, Professor Marzani will employ
his expertise in all-order perturbative calculations to develop theoretical
tools to perform accurate QCD phenomenology at the LHC. He will also use these
tools in the context of Higgs physics, searches for new particles, and
characterization of their properties. This proposal involves two main areas of
investigation: accurate calculations for Higgs and electroweak boson production,
and analytical studies of the properties of jets, which are ubiquitous in
particle physics phenomenology.