* 1619788
* Efficient Sympathetic Cooling of Neutral and Ionic Molecules for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Svetlana Kotochigova, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

The objective of quantum information technology is to build a computer processor
that does not operate with zeros and ones. Instead, it will save data in the
energy levels of quantum systems such as atoms, ions, or molecules. Relatively
simple molecules are favorable candidates because such molecules have enough
levels to encode all the information, but not so many as to make them difficult
to control. To take advantage of this approach, however, molecules must be held
in one place for long enough to prepare them in an energy level, wait for a
computation to occur, and then read out the information again. Holding molecules
so still, nearly at rest, is challenging because molecules at room temperature
tend to vigorously move, vibrate, and rotate. Taming all of that movement
requires that molecules to be chilled to a low temperature, just a fraction of a
degree above absolute zero. This project will explore ways to cool molecules,
and thereby prepare their external (motional) and internal (rotational and
vibrational) states, by using collisions with slow ("laser cooled") atoms that
can act as a refrigerator to "sympathetically cool" the molecules. To inform
this approach, part of the project will be devoted to calculating the energy
landscapes for atoms and molecules as a function of their separation, their
orientation, and their internal energy states. The probabilities of "inelastic"
(internal-state-changing) collisions will also be calculated. Together, these
calculations will help this research team analyze the feasibility of different
ways to prepare ultra-cold molecules. As part of this project, students will
also receive training on how to perform these calculations and how to evaluate
the benefits of such ultra-cold molecules for quantum technologies, important
preparation for the future workforce in this emerging area.

For several decades now, physicists have been successful in cooling and trapping
simple atoms with laser-generated forces to get gasses down to temperatures near
absolute zero, for example using optical molasses and magneto-optical traps.
These approaches, however, have limited applications for molecules, because
molecules lack a cycling transition. In this project, the principal investigator
will theoretically study a novel cooling technique whereby molecules are
manipulated by collisions with laser cooled atoms. In particular, in inelastic
collisions, atoms steal energy from the molecule and then fly away leaving the
molecule colder, both internally and externally. This project will rely on
quantum dynamics calculations and hybrid semi-classical scattering models to
understand the collision processes for atoms and molecules. Of particular
interest are molecules with a chemical bond that is dominated by a single-
valence electron. They are both polar and paramagnetic, and thus can be
manipulated by electric and magnetic fields. An optically-trapped array of such
molecules is a candidate system for error-free quantum computation.