* 1619535
* Isaac Newton Institute Program on Melt in the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* David Bercovici, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The Isaac Newton Institute (INI) program on Melt in the Mantle is a research and
educational program running from February to June, 2016, at Cambridge University
(UK). The program will focus around three workshops in February, April and June,
which will cover (1) foundations in the physics, mathematical and numerical
approaches of mantle and magma dynamics; (2) upscaling the physics, modeling and
geophysical observations from the grain and pore scale to the the continuum
scale of molten mantle; and (3) applications of the continuum physics and models
to tectonic and planetary environments. This proposal seeks funds to assist
early-career scientists based in the United States, including students and
postdoctoral scholars, for travel to these workshops. Approximately 5 scientists
will attend each workshop, for a total of 15. The INI program will provide these
scientists an excellent opportunity to build international collaborations and
learn about mantle melting from some of the leading Earth scientists and applied
mathematicians in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth's mantle is
almost entirely solid, but on geological timescales it convects vigorously, the
well-known surface expression of this being plate tectonics. At depths up to 100
km beneath plate-tectonic boundaries (mid-ocean ridges and subduction zones),
and beneath ocean islands such as Hawaii, the mantle melts, and that melt rises
to the surface to feed volcanism and form new crust. Such magmatism plays a key
role in the chemical evolution and dynamics of our planet. Understanding the
formation and migration of melt in the mantle presents a formidable scientific
and mathematical challenge. One key challenge is in bridging diverse length
scales: melt lies along grain boundaries at micron scales, may focus into
channels at meter scales, and migrates over 100 km. Sophisticated mathematical
techniques, such as homogenization theory, are needed to map an understanding of
physics at the smallest scales to plate-tectonic scales. Seismology offers a way
to image melt in the mantle, but the development of new tools in inverse theory
are required to extract that information. Models of melt transport are
eventually cast as a series of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations,
which require advanced numerical techniques to solve. The INI program will bring
together a broad spectrum of mathematicians and solid Earth scientists to tackle
these and other fundamental challenges of melt in the mantle. The support from
this award will enable early-career US scientists to participate in this
international endeavor.