* 1619738
* I-Corps Teams: A Low Cost and High Performance Anode for Lithium Ion Batteries with Application to Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Hongwei Sun, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Existing lithium-ion battery (LIB) technologies have serious cost and
performance limitations that hinder the efficient use of renewable energy
sources and the rapid transition to electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric
vehicles (HEVs) and plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEVs). Despite manufacturing
demand for LIBs with greater power and increased specific energy density with
longer runtimes, a stronger emphasis is being placed on the reduction of overall
manufacturing cost in the new product development initiatives. Currently, the
fabrication steps contribute to the overall LIB pack cost of $400-600 /kWh,
which must still be reduced by 3-4x to be competitive with a conventional fuel
tank in order to take its place in the widespread commercialization of HEVs,
PHEVs and EVs. A tremendous effort is needed to reduce the processing cost,
material cost, and amount of needed material to meet this goal. A novel carbon
structure ? Carbon Micro/Nano Pillars (C-MNP) was invented by University of
Massachusetts Lowell as the promising anode material for LIBs. The C-MNP anode
based LIB demonstrates significant improvement in specific energy. Moreover, the
new anode manufacturing process is well suitable for mass production and is
compatible with existing battery manufacturing process offering to significantly
reduce the investment for new battery manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developed technology can provide automotive LIB manufacturers with a high
performance and low cost anode manufacturing process, which will accelerate the
widespread commercialization of electric vehicles. The proposed study will also
contribute to a fundamental understanding of NIL technology, polymer
carbonization, ion diffusion, and charge-surface interactions. Furthermore, the
developed C-MNP structure and manufacturing process can be used for
manufacturing of high performance cathode. Other potential applications include
but are not limited to, crossover-proof membrane of fuel cells, electrodes of
super capacitors, sensing surface of sensors for harsh environment, de- and
anti-icing surfaces for wind turbines, and membrane for waste water
purification. This I-Corps Teams project will help determine the market value
based on the responses and insights of the automotive LIB manufacturers for the
potential commercialization of proposed innovation. If successful, the developed
technology could be licensed to automotive LIB manufacturers as a high
performance and low cost anode manufacturing process or a small custom
manufacturing company could be started to provide C-MNP based anodes to
small/midsized LIB manufacturers as custom battery solutions.