* 1619878
* CAREER: Computational Methods for Analyzing Large-Scale Genomic Changes in Mammalian Genomes
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Jian Ma, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 232,181.00

This project will develop new combinatorial and probabilistic algorithms that
will unravel the interwoven large-scale genomic changes that have occurred
across species in an evolutionary context. The main research thrust is to
develop new ancestral genome reconstruction algorithms that handle
rearrangements, duplications, and large insertions and deletions at different
resolutions in a single unified framework. These methods will be applied to the
large number of whole-genome sequence data that have become available to
elucidate detailed history of large-scale genomic operations in mammalian
genomes. With the reconstructed history, scientists will be able to explain the
large-scale genomic changes and assess their phenotypic impact on any lineage,
including the human lineage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI considers the problem
of ancestral genomes using a parsimony principle based on breakpoint graphs that
are consistent with current genomes. For considering more than two genomes,
these problems are nearly all computationally intractable. The approach focuses
on building better synteny blocks between genomes and using these blocks in a
hierarchical method to develop new reconstruction algorithms that are then
refined to smaller blocks and dealing with incomplete lineage sorting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new software tools and resources will be extremely
useful to shed new light on the extraordinary diversity of mammalian forms and
capabilities. In addition, the insights from this project will be applied to
improve genome assembly methodologies based on next-generation high-throughput
DNA sequencing reads. The models and algorithms will also be used to investigate
specific genomic regions influenced by large-scale genomic changes, such as
complex gene clusters and regions that harbor genome instability in cancer
genomes. The project will develop open-source software tools for comparative
genomics research, making them accessible to other scientists around the world.
In addition, the outcome of the project will be disseminated through online
website. Visualization tools from the research will provide scientific education
on genome evolution to increase the accessibility of scientific results to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of his CAREER plan, the education
components are closely integrated with the research program. The educational
objectives include the development of new bioinformatics courses; training
graduate students with interdisciplinary expertise necessary for the post-
genomic era and providing them with meaningful international research experience
through collaboration; getting undergraduate students involved in research
projects; and participating in the G.A.M.E.S. camp at the University of Illinois
to inspire pre-college girls to develop careers in science and engineering.