* 1619472
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Design of Many-core NoCs for the Dark Silicon Era
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Timothy Pinkston, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 100,022.00

The proliferation of computing systems of various forms and scales have
significantly advanced science, technology, discovery and society at large for
the benefit of human kind. As the key building blocks of current and future
computing systems?including the Internet of Things, many-core chip
multiprocessors (CMPs) are facing unprecedented power challenges brought on by
limits in Dennard scaling. This necessitates many-core chips to be designed with
the ability to power down on-chip resources to effectively provide scalable
performance while keeping power and energy consumption proportional to computing
load. This necessity leads to considerable portions of many-core chips having to
go dark, thus ushering in the era of dark silicon. To facilitate dark silicon
computing, not only computational resources (i.e., processor cores) but also
communication resources (i.e., networks on chips, or NoCs) used to connect the
computational resources must be developed that can be powered up or down
proportionally with performance scalability in response to prevailing
load.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates new opportunities,
significant challenges, and innovative solutions for harnessing dark silicon in
NoC architectures that meet performance, power and energy requirements in the
dark silicon era. The objective is to enable non-essential NoC routers to be
powered down when needed as well as to enable a corresponding maximum number of
routers and router components to be powered down for a given reduction in the
number of powered-up processor cores in order to provide energy-proportional,
low-power, on-chip communication. Among some of the specific lines of research
that are explored are alternative topologies and coordinated routing algorithms
to enable more efficient power-gating of NoC routers, holistic approaches for
exploiting coordination between the NoC and other on-chip system components as
well as factoring in key application characteristics, and novel packet-oriented
dynamic power control schemes that explore energy-saving opportunities beyond
the conventionally targeted low-load traffic region. Beyond its technical
contributions that can impact fundamental advancement in dark silicon computing,
this research also has impact more broadly on research education and outreach.
Findings from this research are incorporated into graduate curriculum, courses,
and undergraduate research experiences. Outreach activities to broaden
participation in computing of persons from diverse backgrounds and development
levels are also featured.