* 1619606
* Evidence for Dynamic Weakening Mechanisms in the San Andreas Fault: Microgeochemistry and Microthermometry of Fault-related Rocks from SAFOD Core and Exhumed Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* James Evans, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 05/31/2019
* USD 186,607.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes pose a significant
hazard in many areas of the United States and the world, and understanding the
processes that generate earthquakes is a key problem in Earth science today. A
leading idea is that fault rocks have to weaken during the earliest stages of
the earthquake; otherwise, fault slip stops and large earthquakes would not
occur. If such "dynamic weakening" occurs, we should see evidence for it within
rocks from fault zones that have experienced earthquakes. This project is
studying rocks from the San Andreas Fault zone to uncover traces of dynamic
weakening from earthquakes, and to understand what conditions might lead to such
weakening. The results from this work will enable improved models of the hazards
posed by large earthquakes. In addition, this project is educating students in a
wide range of earthquake geology and fault rock topics via hands-on research
experience, and communicating fundamental earthquake geology and physics,
scientific drilling, and coring to broader audiences via social media, videos,
and in-person presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team is using field observations and samples from
the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) core and the Cajon Pass drill
core, combined with new and previous field and drill core samples of the San
Andreas Fault, to elucidate evidence for thermally activated dynamic weakening
mechanisms in large seismogenic faults. The team seeks evidence for these
mechanisms in samples that may preserve the texture and composition of slip
weakening at depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is evaluating the
distribution of these mechanisms across a range of spatial and temporal scales,
and testing how well exhumed faults represent faults at depth. The team is
integrating optical and scanning electron microscopy with detailed X-Ray
diffraction mineralogy, micro-scale whole-rock geochemistry, and stable isotope
analyses. The PIs are examining slip surfaces with Laser Raman microthermometric
spectroscopy on fluid inclusions to determine fluid compositions and
temperatures in veins, and with Raman and X-ray Near Edge Spectroscopy to
investigate potentially new indicators of thermally driven elemental changes of
carbon, iron, and manganese on the faults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this work include: 1) Educating students in a range of earthquake geology and
fault rock petrological topics, ultimately adding uniquely trained technical
researchers to the STEM workforce; and 2) Increasing awareness of fundamental
earthquake geology and physics, scientific drilling, and coring to broader
audiences through the use of engaging hands-on activities, class exercises,
videos, and social media platforms.