* 1619640
* Low-rank Diagonally Compensated Matrix Decompositions in the Design of Solvers and Partitioners
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Panayot Vassilevski, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,998.00

The computational simulation of many problems in science and engineering
requires the use of black-box matrix solvers. The main challenge in the
development of reliable black-box solver lies on the unknown origin of the
problems that need to be solved. This project will provide a new approach to
identify the nature and the origin of the problems and then develop efficient
black-box matrix tools. The results will enable researchers to make their
computational simulators more feasible at large scale. In particular, problems
formulated on large-scale graphs such as those arising from social and
information network sciences will be more successfully approached.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers a unifying step towards building
black-box solvers and preconditioners for sparse symmetric positive definite
matrices at large scale that have the potential to have desired optimal
complexity and be efficient in practice. More specifically, this project
proposes the use of a general matrix decomposition into a sum of an easily
invertible matrix minus a sum of low-rank symmetric positive semi-definite
matrices. The decomposition offers several directions for research. In the case
of sparse symmetric positive definite matrices the decomposition naturally
defines components for genuine black-box sparse matrix solvers including
alternatives to previously studied support graph preconditioners as well as
natural components for algebraic multigrid (or AMG) methods, such as convergent
smoothers and tools for creating accurate coarse vector spaces. Also, the
project offers new algorithms for partitioning (of graphs and finite element
meshes), which are dependent on the given matrix entries. For example, if the
matrix represents a discrete analog of some physical phenomenon (such as
subsurface flow, electromagnetic field, elastic body), the resulting mesh
partitioners will reflect the underlined physical process. The broader impact of
the project is that its results can have the potential to enable researchers,
including ones outside the area of numerical PDEs that are at the interface of
discrete mathematics and informatics, to make their simulations more feasible at
large scale. In particular, problems formulated on large-scale graphs (arising
in sciences and social and information networks) could be more successfully
approached. By providing the (algorithmic) tools with rigorous theoretical
foundation developed by the project, it will have the potential for solid impact
in practice, both in education and research.