* 1619197
* CSR: Small: Design and Optimization of Scalable Concurrent Data Structures for Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Neeraj Mittal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 301,856.00

In the last decade, major general-purpose processor manufacturers have turned to
hyper-threading and multi-core architectures to improve hardware performance
since many of the traditional approaches for boosting CPU performance have hit a
"Brick Wall". Hyper-threading is about running two or more threads in parallel
inside a single&lt;br/&gt;CPU. Multi-core is about running two or more actual
CPUs on one chip. This multi-core revolution that is currently underway has now
moved from general-purpose computing devices such as desktops, laptops and
workstations to other more specialized computing devices such as smartphones,
tablets, gaming devices, routers and even smartwatches. Unfortunately, most
current software applications will not benefit from this enormous parallel
processing power offered by a modern computing device unless they are rewritten
in a way that enables a program to distribute its tasks across several cores.
The future software applications will have to be multi-threaded to achieve any
performance gains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A data structure is a fundamental
building block of any software program. It is used to manage access to
application data and is designed to support specific operations efficiently. In
a multi-threaded program, several threads may need to share data and manipulate
it concurrently. This gives rise to the problem of designing and building
concurrent data structures in which several threads can access the data and
manipulate the data structure at the same time, and whose performance scales
well with the number of cores. Such high performance concurrent data structures
are key to writing multi-threaded programs that scale well with the ever
increasing number of cores.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researcher will develop new techniques for managing contention among concurrent
operations that reduce contention window, lower memory footprint, reduce cache
traffic and/or decrease traversal overhead. These techniques will be used to
develop concurrent version of important data structures suitable for multi-core
systems that scale well with the number of cores. The proposed research has the
potential of benefiting many areas in computer science and beyond including
operating systems, databases, programming languages, game engines and parallel
and scientific applications. The PI teaches graduate courses on operating
systems and multi-core systems on a regular basis as well as research-oriented
seminar courses from time to time. The PI will incorporate many of the results
developed during this investigation into graduate courses.