* 1619573
* Simulations of Laser Experiments to Study the Origin of Cosmic Magnetic Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Donald Lamb, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Magnetic fields are ubiquitous in the universe. However, their origin is not
fully understood. While cosmologists and astrophysicists have proposed a variety
of ways in which small seed magnetic fields could be created, the significantly
larger values of cosmic magnetic fields we observe are believed to be the result
of the amplification of these seed fields by a turbulent flow of plasma, the so-
called turbulent dynamo mechanism. This mechanism has not yet been demonstrated
in a controlled laboratory environment. Experiments to demonstrate and study
turbulent dynamo in the laboratory are now being planned using the high-
intensity lasers at the National Ignition Facility (NIF) at Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory and the Laser Megajoule (LMJ) facility in France - the two
largest laser facilities in the world. The effort supported by this award
consists of designing and modeling these highly demanding experiments through
simulation campaigns using a highly capable code to run large-scale 3D
simulations. The simulations are vital to ensuring the experiments achieve the
conditions required for the turbulent dynamo mechanism to operate and are
crucial to interpreting the results of the experiments. This work will further
the transformation of the academic community's ability to design and analyze
High Energy Density Physics experiments at large laser facilities and will train
junior scientists to design and interpret such experiments using validated
simulations - a critical national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments to
be modeled build on pathfinder experiments that have been conducted on the
Vulcan laser at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory in the UK and the Omega laser
at Laboratory for Laser Energetics at the University of Rochester. They also
build on the experience that has been gained designing and interpreting these
experiments using validated simulations done with the FLASH code, a highly
capable radiation-MHD code developed by the group. The configurations to be used
for the NIF and LMJ experiments are based on the platform deployed for the Omega
laser, adapted for the large laser facilities using FLASH simulations. The NIF
experiment will probe dynamo in the regime of large magnetic Prandtl numbers,
the ratio of magnetic-to-fluid Reynolds numbers (Pm = Rm / Re &gt; 1), while the
LMJ experiment will focus on magnetic field amplification for Pm &lt; 1. The
dynamo mechanism is expected to operate differently in each regime and FLASH
simulations will ensure the experiments reach the required plasma states. These
experiments promise to characterize the distribution of turbulent energy among
the velocity, magnetic field, and density fluctuations, providing a
comprehensive picture of the energy cascade in a magnetized, turbulent plasma.
Since the number of laser shots per shot day is only two at NIF and three at
LMJ, there is no room for error: numerical modeling to design and analyze the
experiments is imperative to accomplish the scientific goals of demonstrating
and characterizing the turbulent dynamo mechanism.