* 1619285
* NeTS: Small: 2G for UG: High Data-rate and Long Range Communication Techniques for Wireless Underground Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Suat Irmak, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project aims to increase the communication ranges and data rates of buried
radios by leveraging expertise in the nexus of computer science and engineering
and biological systems engineering. The goals of this project are to
characterize the underground channel; develop environment-adaptive solutions to
achieve high data rate, long-range communications; and illustrate applications
to agriculture and transportation. The emerging use of wireless underground
sensor networks (WUSNs) in many areas, including precision agriculture,
transportation, environment and infrastructure monitoring, and border patrol,
underscores the importance of wireless underground (UG) communications. Yet,
existing limitations in terms of communication ranges and data rates prohibit
widespread adoption. The novel approaches developed in the project broaden the
scope of existing and novel applications, leading to economically viable
solutions. The results and the insight from this project have the potential to
enable a wide array of novel solutions from saving water resources for more food
production to saving lives on the roadways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending the
communication ranges and increasing data rates in wireless UG communications
faces unique challenges because of the interactions between soil and
communication components: (1) Antenna properties depend on soil type and vary
with changes in soil parameters such as temperature and moisture. (2) Channel
characteristics, such as delay spread and coherence bandwidth, are time-variant
functions of the soil parameters. (3) The soil-air interface results in
fluctuations in both antenna performance and EM wave propagation, which should
be considered in system design. To address these challenges, the project
captures the impulse response of the wireless UG channel through extensive
experiments throughout the state of Nebraska, which is one of the most diverse
states in terms of soil textural properties, climatic gradients, and land use.
Based on this analysis, advanced modulation schemes are developed. Moreover,
based on UG antenna analysis, long-range communication techniques are developed.
Two distinct applications from agriculture and transportation are considered to
evaluate the developed solutions in a crop field and a crash test site.