* 1619458
* III: Small: Robustness in Social Network Analysis: Models, Inference, and Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Kempe, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 507,996.00

The burgeoning field of "Social Network Analysis" focuses on extracting useful
insights from such social network data. Implemented or envisioned applications
range from learning about the nature and driving forces behind human
interactions, to targeted product or activity recommendations and even homeland
security. Contrary to other networks, such as transportation or computer
networks, massive uncertainty and noise are practically always associated with
social network data: data pertaining to individuals are often not observable, or
are observed incorrectly. The primary goal of this project is to understand the
risks and implications of such noisy data, and to design network analysis
algorithms that are significantly more robust to noise and missing data. Given
the importance that mathematical models play in social networks analysis, a
closely related thread of the project is to analyze the fit between typical
social network models and real-world data, in particular regarding high-level
connectivity properties. The project website will be used to disseminate
research prototypes and data that are collected as part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, three connected research thrusts
that integrate the PIs' expertise in machine learning and theoretical computer
science will be explored: (1) How well do standard random graph models fit real-
world social network data, in particular with regard to expansion and spectral
properties? Since the answer likely is "poorly," how well do modifications based
on requiring local or global structure remedy this problem? (2) What is the
impact of missing observations of diffusion or activation processes on the
inferred social networks when learning from some contagious behavior? How can
this impact be mitigated by algorithms that take the possibility of missing data
into account? (3) If social network data are observed with significant (and
possibly non-random) noise, under what conditions can stability of an
algorithmic output be ensured? How "obvious" does the right answer have to be to
not get obscured by noise in the data? Can "obvious" answers be found more
efficiently? The proposed research has the potential to impact the way in which
social network inference and optimization are addressed. The PIs are committed
to a suite of activities, among them inclusion of undergraduate students in the
proposed research and outreach to local high school students, for broader
impacts.