* 1619250
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Multi-Layer Approaches for Securing Enhanced AMI Networks against Traffic Analysis Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Qiu, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 380,662.00

The U.S. power grid is being replaced with a smart grid, a complex network of
intelligent electronic devices, distributed generators, and dispersed loads,
which requires communication networks for management and coordination. Advanced
metering infrastructure (AMI) networks are one part of the smart grid to provide
two-way communications between smart meters at the consumers' side and the
utility companies. AMI networks allow utilities to collect power consumption
data at high frequency rates. However, it needs too much communication bandwidth
for smart meters to frequently send power consumption data even when the power
consumption does not change. Since using cellular networks is one of the best
options to AMI networks, the cost of sending this large amount of data is
prohibitive. This project considers enhanced AMI networks, where the meters send
power consumption data only when there is a significant change. This can
significantly reduce the amount of bandwidth needed for sending the power
consumption data; however, it creates a new privacy problem. Practical
experiment results have confirmed that by observing the data transmission rate
and using traffic analysis techniques, the attackers can infer sensitive
information about consumers. Therefore, this new privacy problem must be studied
and addressed, and strong countermeasures should be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research systematically combines
efforts from privacy, networking, and communication communities. The project
promotes a research program designed to: (a) develop schemes for countering
traffic analysis in AMI networks by considering different network and adversary
models; (b) quantitatively measure the privacy protection provided by the
schemes; and (c) evaluate the schemes in a prototype system for validating the
proposed research and enabling hands-on experience for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The project will significantly contribute to the research on
smart grid, as well as computer system security and privacy. The proposed
research will lead to a body of knowledge that can be leveraged by the designers
of other networks. The proposed project also lends itself to teaching, training
and learning of students. A new graduate course focusing on security and privacy
aspects of smart grid will be developed. The achievement of the proposed
research will be disseminated to academic community and industry via academic
conferences and industrial connections.