* 1619251
* TWC: Small: Secure Mobile Devices through Multiple Lines of Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The human society is in a wireless and mobile era. People are enjoying quality
life brought by mobile devices while subject to growing cyber threats. There is
thus a pressing need to develop secure and usable protection mechanisms for
mobile devices. This proposal outlines a challenging research plan on
developing, implementing, and evaluating secure and usable countermeasures
against new attacks on mobile devices. The scientific promise of the proposed
research will expand the fundamental understandings about mobile device
security. Successful development and implementations of the proposed techniques
will have profound impact on secure mobile device usage, thus significantly
improving the information security of mobile users in U.S. and around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of four thrusts. The
first thrust is to develop secure and usable defenses against video-assisted
keystroke inference attacks in which an attacker can infer a user's typed inputs
on the touchscreen by recording and analyzing the video of the device backside
during the user's input process. The second thrust is to develop secure and
usable defenses against power-assisted app inference attacks where an attacker
intrudes the victim's mobile device through an infected app and then accesses
the power profile of the device. The third thrust is to develop secure and
usable defenses against device losses/thefts, which automatically lock a mobile
device once it leaves the vicinity of its owner. The key idea of the proposed
defenses is to let a mobile device automatically, quickly, and accurately
recognize its physical separation from its owner by detecting and analyzing the
changes in wireless signals. The last thrust is to implement and evaluate the
discovered attacks and proposed defenses. The implementation and evaluation will
be conducted on smartphones, tablets, laptops, and Universal Software Radio
Peripheral platforms.