* 1619915
* EAGER: Development of a Novel in situ Electrochemical Tool to Understand Redox Pathways of Hexavalent Chromium and Its Intermediate Formation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Haizhou Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2017
* USD 78,403.00

1619915&lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The metal chromium has many
applications in society. However, when disposed of improperly, it can also find
its way into ground and surface waters. While this usually happens in trace
quantities, at higher concentrations it may cause adverse health effects. It
cycles between two oxidation states and is toxic in the hexavalent form. This
project involves a theoretically sound, but high-risk, untested approach with
significant potential impact, to develop a new method of detection of chromium
in water. This project will create a new rotating ring-disk electrodes-based
tool with the potential to transform the environmental engineering community's
understanding of chemical processes that relate to water quality, public health,
and regulatory processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will develop a
novel in situ electrochemical tool for the detection of chromium intermediate
species during the oxidation of trivalent chromium Cr(III) species in drinking
water. Formation of highly toxic hexavalent chromium Cr(VI, typically in the
form of oxyanion CrO4 2-, can inadvertently take place in drinking water due to
the oxidation of residual Cr(III) by disinfectants. However, the mechanisms of
Cr(III) oxidation remain largely unexplored. Preliminary investigations in the
principal investigator's (PI's) laboratory indicates that the yield of Cr(VI) is
controlled by elemental reactions involving the formation of Cr intermediate
species, followed by the associated decomposition of these intermediate species.
This project aims to develop a novel electrochemical system with multi-stage
rotating ring-disk electrodes to quantitatively investigate the formation of
short-lived tetravalent and pentavalent chromium species, i.e., Cr(IV) and
Cr(V). Currently, the detailed mechanisms of Cr(VI) formation via Cr(III)
oxidation are poorly understood. Although it is widely presumed that the low
solubility of Cr(III) prevents its release in drinking water and that Cr(III) is
chemically inert downstream of water treatment processes, these presumptions are
inadequate. Since Cr(VI) is under consideration by regulatory agencies for more
stringent drinking water standards, it is urgent to understand the fundamental
mechanisms of Cr(VI) formation to develop better control strategies. This
research will assess the role of these intermediate species relevant to Cr(VI)
occurrence in drinking water. Specifically, in this project, two novel and
advanced electrode systems will be developed to examine the nature of Cr
intermediate species: (1) state-of-the-art noble metal electrodes (i.e., gold
and platinum) for homogeneous Cr(III) oxidation investigation; and, (2) in-house
built electrode with deposited Cr(III) minerals for heterogeneous Cr(III)
oxidation investigation. Outcomes of this research will establish a protocol for
rotating ring-disk electrodes-based electrochemical analysis of chromium
intermediates and exploration of fundamental mechanisms associated with Cr(VI)
formation. Outcomes of this research will establish a protocol for rotating
ring-disk electrodes-based electrochemical analysis of chromium intermediates
and exploration of fundamental mechanisms associated with Cr(VI) formation in
aquatic systems. The project involves a radically different electrochemical
approach in contrast to a traditional batch reactor system to study metal redox
chemistry, and applies new expertise of surface electrochemistry and analytical
chemistry to engage novel discoveries in a new area of research.