* 1619308
* III: Small: Robust Large-Scale Data Mining for Knowledge Discovery in Depression Thought Records
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Heng Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project investigates new robust large-scale data mining and machine
learning algorithms to solve critical computational challenges in mining massive
depression thought records for cognitive behavior therapy. Depression is rapidly
emerging as one of the major problems in our society and is also related to many
other health conditions, such as stroke, diabetes, hypertension, HIV/AIDS, etc.
Cognitive behavior therapy is the most extensively researched form of
psychotherapy for depression, and the depression thought records from patients
is the key component of cognitive behavior therapy. However, the process of
reviewing and analyzing the depression thought records is extremely time
consuming, which inhibits both clinical interviews and the training of new
therapists. This project builds a novel data mining system to automatically
discover knowledge from depression thought records for assisting therapists in
selecting potential interventions and aiding new therapists in their development
of cognitive behavior therapy skills. This project will facilitate the
development of novel educational tools to enable new courses and enhance current
courses. This project engages minority students and under-served populations in
research activities to give them a better exposure to cutting-edge science
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To effectively and efficiently analyze large-
scale depression thought records, this project explores the following research
tasks. First, the project develops a robust semi-supervised learning model to
categorize logical thinking errors of depression thought records. Second, the
project investigates a joint multi-task method to simultaneously recognize the
categories of thinking errors and emotions of depression thought records. Third,
new multi-label and multi-instance learning is studied for identifying coping
activities. Fourth, to analyze the multi-language depression thought records,
robust transfer learning methods are developed for cross-language knowledge
transfer. Meanwhile, parallel computational algorithms are designed and applied
for large-scale depression thought record data mining. These novel data mining
algorithms are designed to solve large-scale applications and automate the
depression thought record data mining, which holds great promise for smart
health.