* 1619450
* TWC: Small: Cache-based Side Channel Attacks on Smartphone Graphics Buffers: New Vulnerabilities and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Nael Abu-Ghazaleh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2021
* USD 516,000.00

Touch screens on smart mobile devices such as cell phones or tablets allow both
user input (touch events) and display output. For a touch screen to function,
the mobile device stores input and display data in a graphics buffer internal to
the device. The researchers have discovered that a malicious application running
on the mobile device could silently monitor characteristics of the graphics
buffer to identify the alphanumeric characters that the user types into the
touch keyboard or information displayed on the screen. The malicious application
could then send that information to a third party, violating the confidentiality
of the user's input or output. This project is assessing the feasibility of
attacks on the graphics buffer and studying characteristics of graphics buffer
vulnerabilities. The researchers are developing software- and hardware-based
defenses to mitigate such vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
are studying attacks that use a CPU cache-based side channel, a technique for
deriving the access pattern of a process from another process, to identify which
locations on the screen are being modified, allowing the attacker to gain
information about user I/O activity such as data being typed on a
keyboard.Â Prior work on cache-based side channel attacks and defenses has
focused on cryptographic algorithms where the critical data has a small memory
footprint, and is read-only. In contrast, graphics buffers are extremely large
(on the order of MBytes), and are both read and written to, requiring new
approaches for attacks and defenses. The project is studying how such attacks
might be generalized, as well as the extent of feasible resolution and
precision. Finally, the researchers are designing countermeasures, considering
security, performance overhead, complexity, and impact on the core process
pipeline and caches.