* 1619287
* III: Small: Towards a Database Engine for Interactive and Online Sampling and Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeff Phillips, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Existing databases and data management systems are designed and optimized for
executing queries and analytical jobs in their entirety. User interactions with
such systems are limited to binary decisions: either wait for exact answers in
the end, or terminate a job while it is still running and obtain little or even
zero knowledge regarding the final output. This model no loner works well with
big data as waiting for the exact query or analytical results may take a long
time. The good news is that often users do not need exact results in big data
computation; instead, they are happy with approximations, especially for
approximations with quality guarantees. It is even better if the approximation
quality gradually improves over time in an online fashion, while the query is
being executed, and users can control the efficiency-accuracy tradeoff in
realtime. This project designs techniques for building a database engine that
supports such interactive and online exploration and analytics. The results of
this project is also useful for downstream data analytical modules such as
information visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As data continues to grow,
executing queries and analytics in their entirety is increasingly more expensive
and falls short of enabling interactive exploration and analytics. This project
investigates novel online sampling and approximation techniques to enable online
and interactive exploration and analytics over big data in a database system.
The main idea is to produce independent random samples from the set of records
that satisfy the user query in a continuous online fashion. This project designs
techniques that produce such online samples efficiently and effectively for a
wide range of queries and analytical workloads, such as join and group-by
queries, in a database engine. The project also develops online approximation
techniques based on these online samples. A system prototype is being developed
by integrating these techniques into an existing database engine. The techniques
and the system developed in this project helps increase the productivity of
users and scientists in various application domains by enabling interactive and
online exploration and analytics. The project also makes broader impacts through
various teaching, education, and outreach activities.