* 1619027
* SHF: Small: Reconfigurability and Technology Integration  of Magnetic Energy Minimization Co-Processor (MEMCoP)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Greg Carman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 449,999.00

This collaborative proposal been two universities - USF and UCLA - advocates a
new form of computing that uses circular nanomagnets to solve quadratic
optimization problems, orders of magnitude faster than that of a conventional
computer. A wide range of application domains can be potentially accelerated
through this research, e.g., computationally expensive and hard to parallelize
problems of finding patterns in social media, error-correcting codes, big data
applications etc. The project plans to engage undergraduate REU students, and
the PIs will be involved with the local community through interaction with K-12
teachers and K7-K8 women students. As a part of Sloan University Center for
Exemplary Mentoring (UCEM), the lead PI will recruit and retain undergraduate
students. The UCLA team will work with a group of undergraduate students
sponsored by Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity
(CEED).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core computational theme of this proposal is
mapping quadratic energy minimization problem spaces into a set of interacting
magnets such that the energy relationship between the problem variables is
proportional to that of the energies between the corresponding magnets. The
optimization is accomplished by the relaxation physics of the magnets themselves
and solutions can be read-out in parallel. In essence, given a specific instance
of the problem, the plan is to arrive at a specific magnetic layout, the relaxed
state of which will be the solution of the original problem. Reconfigurability
is fundamental to the success of this form of high-payoff computing (one does
not intend to fabricate a specific magnetic layout to solve one instance of a
problem). Three alternative programming solutions are proposed, and trade-offs
between the mechanisms will be evaluated. The project also plans to explore
reconfigurability together with readability and system integration aspects.