* 1620582
* Improving Absolute Paleointensity Experiments through Pressure Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Bruce Moskowitz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 239,995.00

The Earth's magnetic field shields the surface of our planet from harmful levels
of solar radiation, providing a protective envelope that retains our atmosphere
and hydrosphere, establishing the conditions necessary for life, and even
safeguarding modern communication satellites from low intensity solar storms.
However, our understanding of variability of the strength of the Earth's
magnetic field, and any concomitant disruptions these fluctuations might cause,
is still in its infancy. Direct measurements of the field from magnetic
observatories only extend ~150 years into the past, and while this is
significant in human terms, this magnetic record does not include phenomena such
as geomagnetic reversals, excursions, or intensity spikes. In order to study
these important geomagnetic behaviors scientists rely on the magnetization
recorded by rocks, such as lava flows, which record the direction and strength
of the Earth's magnetic field as they cool. However, natural materials are not
ideal magnetic recorders and efforts to uncover variations in the strength of
the ancient magnetic field, or "paleointensity", have been severely hampered by
the presence of magnetic minerals whose dimensions are too large to allow them
to accurately record the geomagnetic field. This research will aim to overcome
this problem and obtain more reliable paleointensity estimates by incorporating
pressure treatments into conventional methodologies. Preliminary work has shown
that pressure cycling preferentially removes the problematic magnetizations held
by larger magnetic grains, while leaving the more reliable magnetizations held
by smaller (single domain) grains largely intact. Pressure experiments on
volcanic glass (obsidian) have led to significant improvements in our ability to
estimate the field responsible for a rock's final magnetization. This research
aims to test this new pressure methodology on more commonly used geologic
materials, with a special focus on the volcanic rocks of the 1.1 billion year-
old Midcontinent Rift in Minnesota. Broader impacts will be achieved through the
mentoring of an early career postdoc, the inclusion of undergraduate students in
the research, and the creation of a unique, non-magnetic pressure cell that will
allow visiting researchers from throughout scientific community to better
explore the effects of pressure on the magnetism of natural materials at the
Institute for Rock Magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal remanent
magnetization processes, e.g., how rocks acquire permanent magnetization, or
"remanences" when cooling through their Curie temperature, is fundamental to
paleomagnetism. This proposal will examine how thermal remanent magnetizations
are influenced by the addition and removal of stress energy. It appears that
pressure treatments strongly minimize the types of remanence (PSD and MD) that
are detrimental to paleointensity experiments, which are based on single domain
magnetic theory. Hence, the PIs think they can overcome a longstanding problem
and provide a theoretical understanding of how pressure changes thermal
remanence in PSD and MD grains. This new method will potentially increase the
success rate of paleointensity experiments, which currently ranges from 10-30%,
leading to a significant time savings. The ability to gather paleointensities
from pressurized materials is also of special importance to planetary sciences
(e.g. meteorite and planetary magnetism). The work proposed here will further
our understanding of how pressure influences paleointensities, and can be
applied to a variety of different protocols. A continuous monitoring of induced
and remanent rock magnetic parameters with increasing pressure will help us
understand how magnetic properties change with pressure cycling and will
generally improve our understanding of the magnetic behavior of common magnetic
minerals.