* 1620998
* I-Corps:  Hybrid Protein Graphene Electrodes for Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Daniel Cox, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Our modern technical society needs devices able to store and deliver energy
effectively, for applications including i) mobile electronic devices (ii)
electric transport via cars, electric bikes, "hoverboards" and other vehicles
(iii) implanted biomedical sensor devices, and (iv) electrical energy storage
for alternative power sources such as windmills and photovoltaics, because "the
wind doesn?t always blow, and the sun doesn?t always shine." Current commercial
storage is dominated by batteries, especially lithium ion batteries ubiquitous
in cell phones, laptops, Tesla electric vehicles, etc, because they have the
highest energy density by weight. However, batteries can heat up (not desirable
for medical implants), contain toxic components (as in the lead acid batteries
common in electric bikes), and have safety issues (witness the string of fires
in "hoverboards" recently). It is worth examining other options like
supercapacitors, which store energy by nonchemical, nontoxic means, can deliver
electrical energy far more rapidly than batteries, and which do not heat or
represent fire danger. While supercapacitors have long occupied niche markets as
secondary power sources or for rapid charging applications, they do not store as
much energy per unit mass as lithium ion batteries, and conventional designs are
more expensive, based dominantly on the cost and materials in the supercapacitor
charging terminals (electrodes). This I-Corps team proposes a new approach that
combines the revolutionary material graphene with designed proteins to provide
supercapacitor electrodes that are cheaper and have high energy density and so
could be disruptive for the energy storage market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
short term, this I-Corps team hopes to produce low cost, environmentally benign
small supercapacitors which can potentially be used in medical devices (since
they do not heat up and are benign), niche transportation applications (such as
replacement for batteries in e-bikes and cars), and potentially novel devices
such as nontoxic, non-flame based biodegradable replacements for flares. In the
long term, they could help supply reliable and quickly discharged electrical
grid storage to go hand-in-hand with intermittent energy generation from
renewables so that the transfer of electricity remains stable and disruption
free. During the I-Corps program, the team intends to interview stakeholders in
general energy storage technologies, grid storage (from the storage provider
side and the energy storage side), home energy storage, energy storage in
medical devices, and energy storage in various transportation contexts,
especially e-bikes and cars. The team does not plan to go after energy storage
in the consumer electronics market, where the technology is sufficiently mature.