* 1620902
* CAREER: Full-duplex wireless networks by means of reflected power: Theory and applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Besma Smida, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 446,226.00

One key limit to spectrum utilization efficiency involves the current practice
of half-duplex communication, in which a node cannot transmit and receive on the
same frequency at the same time. Some recent studies have provided experimental
evidence and methodologies for full-duplex communication. To date, however, all
full-duplex demonstrations have been predicated on the principle that the
transmitter and the receiver must generate their own radio-carrier waves
independently, which in practice results in a high level of self-interference at
both nodes. The objective of this CAREER project is to create reliable full-
duplex wireless networks by means of reflected power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will pursue backscatter modulation, where electromagnetic waves are
modulated and reflected by the same antenna that receives them. Within this
framework, the end-user receives a signal free of self-interference. This
research offers a new paradigm for two-way wireless networks: rather than
avoiding self-interference as in half-duplex -- or combating self-interference
as in full-duplex -- nodes will re-use the received interfering radio-carrier
waves to transfer information. The results of this analysis will advance the
knowledge of antenna scattering for a wide range of applications. The proposed
implementation in hardware will incite an exchange between algorithm innovation
and hardware implementation, pushing the limit of spectrum-efficiency
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will also embed
the proposed research into pedagogy by creating a center of wireless
communications at Purdue University Calumet. The center will provide a range of
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to gain direct experience
in testing, evaluating, and improving backscatter modulation for full-duplex
communications. Given the current pervasiveness of two-way wireless
communication, the results of this research can be used to significantly
increase the spectral efficiency of future wireless networks.