* 1620169
* The Microscopic Nature of Spacetime and the Role of Gauge/Gravity Dualities
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Sera Cremonini, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 02/29/2020
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sera Cremonini at Lehigh
University.

One hundred years after the birth of general relativity, developing a full
theory of gravity is still in many ways elusive, and understanding its quantum
regime and the fundamental structure of spacetime remains a challenge. The
development of string theory, and more recently the discovery of certain
connections between gravitational theories and non-gravitational theories, has
provided us with a concrete framework and a new set of tools to address such
issues. As a result, we have uncovered deep connections between some of the most
well-known problems in fundamental physics --- from the microscopic ingredients
of black holes to the fundamental structure of matter --- that would otherwise
be intractable. The primary objective of the proposed research is to develop a
more complete understanding of the microscopic nature of spacetime, by exploring
the extent to which gravity emerges from quantum-mechanical degrees of freedom.
This research will also utilize novel recent techniques in order to shed light
on the behavior of quantum systems that are strongly interacting. Progress in
these directions will lead to insights into outstanding fundamental questions
such as the structure of spacetime, the beginning and early evolution of the
universe, and the physics of black holes. It will also have potential long-term
applications to technology and industry as well as fundamental science, thereby
advancing the national interest in all of these areas. This work will also have
significant broader impacts. Professor Cremonini will involve graduate students
and postdocs in her research, thus providing critical training for junior
physicists beginning research in this field. She also plans to give public
lectures on topics related to her research, and incorporate the results of her
work and exciting new advances in the field into the development of new courses.

At a more technical level, Cremonini will examine the extent to which the main
features of holography are generic and robust, by studying the conditions for
the emergence of a microscopic (quantum field theoretic) description for broad
classes of gravitational solutions. The focus will be on determining to what
extent the internal structure of a gravitational system is affected by its
symmetries and geometrical properties. A crucial aspect of this work will be the
development of a systematic procedure for understanding and encoding the
breaking of various symmetries in gravitational spacetimes. Moreover, part of
the research will involve setups that describe the onset of instabilities and
can therefore be used to model a number of quantum systems which undergo phase
transitions. Using the techniques of holography, Cremonini will examine the
question of the reorganization of degrees of freedom as a function of energy
scale in generic quantum theories. Her research will contribute to the
development of a general classification of transitions in the phase diagram of
non-abelian gauge theories.