* 1620112
* From Non-Asymptotic to Nonlocal Homogenization of Electromagnetic Metamaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Igor Tsukerman, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 210,000.00

The last two decades have witnessed an explosion of interest in metamaterials
(MM) -- artificial structures judiciously designed to control wave propagation
and to produce physical effects not available in natural materials. These
unusual physical phenomena include perfect lensing, negative refraction, and
cloaking. According to Google Scholar, over 90,000 research papers, book
chapters and books have been devoted to the science and applications of MM.
Analysis and design of MM relies on their large-scale ("macroscopic") parameters
and on effective medium theories ("homogenization") needed to obtain these
parameters. The behavior of typical MM is nonlocal: that is, their response at a
given point in space may depend on the excitation at a different point. Yet
mathematical and numerical homogenization methods for nonlocal regimes are
scarce and insufficient. This project will remove this critical impediment to
further progress in MM. Existing homogenization theories, some of which date
back to classical physics of the 19th century, will thereby be significantly
extended. The broad technical impact will be in the field of MM, not necessarily
electromagnetic. Nonlocal homogenization will allow us to establish
unambiguously which applications of metamaterials are practically feasible and
to optimize the performance of metamaterial devices. The broader impact will
also be in the science of nonlocal media, for example nonlocal electrostatics of
biomolecules in solvents, which has applications in protein modeling and drug
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief objective of this research is to
advance the analysis, simulation and applications of electromagnetic
metamaterials by developing a nonlocal two-scale homogenization theory. This
theory involves Trefftz approximations of the electromagnetic fields on both
coarse and fine scales, and a judiciously chosen set of degrees of freedom. This
is a substantial, and necessary, extension not only of traditional theories, but
also of the non-asymptotic but local theory the PI has developed in recent
years. For canonical examples such as layered media or photonic crystals, the PI
will demonstrate a consistent order-of-magnitude accuracy improvement in the
transmission/reflection coefficients. The intellectual merit of the this
research is in the development of a new paradigm of nonlocal homogenization, of
new computational methods related to it, and in the application of new
methodology to electromagnetic metamaterials.