* 1620512
* Meeting: Undergraduates Phenotyping Arabidopsis Knockouts (unPAK) Student Meeting, Austin, TX, June 15-17, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Michael Wolyniak, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2017
* USD 32,030.00

This award supports a gathering of faculty and student representatives from 11
institutions that participate in the Undergraduates Phenotyping Arabidopsis
Knockouts (unPAK). Representatives from research universities, liberal arts
colleges, community colleges, and historically minority-serving institutions,
will attend the meeting in Austin, Texas in June 2016. The meeting will give
students the opportunity to organize and participate in a professional gathering
and faculty the opportunity to strategize on the directions the unPAK network
will take in the future. Students will plan and work with faculty in the
development of workshops that will address current issues with unPAK as well as
potential future collaborative directions. These workshops are expected to
include development of new techniques for research, comparison of data
collection and analysis techniques between institutions, discussion of ways to
integrate unPAK research into classroom settings, and improvement of
dissemination strategies of unPAK data to the scientific community. The meeting
will aid in expanding knowledge of plant genetics in support of developing
better agricultural strategies for economically-critical crops while providing
the next generation of scientists with networking and presentation skills
necessary to launch their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Founded in 2010 (NSF
award #1052262) and expanded in 2014 (NSF award #1355106), the Undergraduates
Phenotyping Arabidopsis Knockouts (unPAK) project has sought to provide
undergraduates with the opportunity to engage in authentic and collaborative
research using Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system. This meeting is designed
to support the long-term development and sustainability of unPAK, by bringing
student and faculty representatives of all unPAK institutions together in
Austin, TX from June 15-17, 2016 in conjunction with the Evolution 2016 meeting.
Faculty will participate in both their own planning sessions as well as sessions
with students. A major focus of the meeting will be on promoting student
interactions to support their development as scientists. The meeting will
provide a venue for in-person interaction that excites and inspires students to
pursue careers in scientific research, and will improve unPAK's ability to
efficiently deliver A. thaliana deletion line genotypic and phenotypic data by
sharing best practices among all students and faculty in the unPAK network. By
bringing together students from a wide range of institutional types, this
meeting will also expose participating students and faculty to the many ways in
which unPAK is engaging undergraduates in the advancement of scientific
knowledge about plant genetics.