* 1620419
* IBSS-L: Recruiting, Hiring, and Retaining Math and Science Teachers
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* DAVID PLANK, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 999,946.00

This interdisciplinary research project will use administrative data and
cutting-edge statistical methods to advance knowledge on the dynamics of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) teacher recruitment,
hiring, and retention in the midst of competitive labor and housing markets.
Training the next generation of scientists and engineers is one of the most
pressing problems the nation faces, and the changing global labor market
presents a two-sided challenge to U.S. public schools. As the demand for workers
with advanced training in STEM increases, educational institutions at all levels
must provide high-quality and rigorous STEM education to an ever-larger number
of students. To do so, schools must hire and retain a corps of highly educated
and skilled science and mathematics teachers. The same market forces that
necessitate improvements in the American STEM education system place fundamental
constraints on schools' abilities to hire and retain STEM teachers, however,
because schools struggle to compete with the relatively high-paying private
sector labor market to hire and retain individuals with strong STEM skills as
teachers. The findings from this project will contribute to basic theoretical
understanding of labor markets, with special emphasis placed on the market for
STEM teachers, and it will inform policy aimed at recruiting and retaining
highly effective STEM teachers. Results will be actively disseminated to policy
makers and practitioners in school districts and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will employ data from the San
Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD) about current and former teachers as
well as applicants to SFUSD teaching positions. They will link these data with
administrative records available from the U.S. Census Bureau in order to
understand the human capital challenges facing U.S. schools in today's high-tech
economy. These matched data will provide unique opportunities to better
understand the labor market for highly effective STEM teachers; to examine
productivity-based labor market sorting processes; and to investigate the role
of selection into the applicant pool in the job-sorting process. In addition to
examining how productivity is related to labor market sorting, and who does and
does not apply for particular jobs, that data will help show whether those who
are and are not hired for a given job are differentially affected across a range
of later outcomes. The investigators also will provide an in-depth picture of
where teachers go when they leave teaching and the potential pressures that
schools face in retaining highly effective STEM teachers. This project is
supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition with additional support from programs in the NSF
Directorate for Education and Human Resources.