* 1620637
* Gauge Fields, Geometry, and Strings
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Christopher Beasley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Christopher Beasley at
Northeastern University.

According to modern particle physics, three of the four fundamental forces in
Nature are expressed mathematically within the framework of certain types of
theories known as gauge theories. These three forces are the electromagnetic
force, the weak nuclear force (which is responsible for radioactive nuclear
decays), and the strong nuclear force (which holds atomic nuclei together). The
fourth fundamental force, gravity, stands as the notable exception. The
discovery of gauge theories is undoubtably one of the great scientific
achievements of the 20th century, crucial not only for our modern understanding
of elementary particle physics but also for vast swaths of modern geometry and
topology. Yet many foundational questions about the dynamics of gauge theory
remain poorly understood. These questions have bearing on such topics as the
structure of the proton, the character of dark matter and dark energy, or even
the mechanism for high-temperature superconductivity. Professor Beasley will
conduct research to develop new mathematical methods and tools, inspired by
string theory, for analyzing a special class of gauge theories defined in two
spatial dimensions. These gauge theories preserve supersymmetry, which relates
particles of different spins to each other and is among the possible extensions
of the Standard Model now being tested in experiments at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC). Research in this area thus advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical laws. The project will also have
significant broader impacts. Substantial portions of the project involve joint
work between Professor Beasley and his graduate students. The project thereby
serves to train the next generation of mathematical physicists in the methods of
quantum field theory and string theory, as well as to disseminate those methods
more broadly throughout the mathematical community. Professor Beasley will also
give a series of popular scientific talks for first-year undergraduates, will
supervise junior and senior mathematics majors in a Research Capstone, and will
videotape his lectures in a graduate course on quantum field theory for
mathematicians.

More technically, Professor Beasley will study perturbative and non-perturbative
properties of supersymmetric Wilson loop operators associated to Legendrian
knots in contact three-manifolds. He will investigate a relation between these
operators and infinite-dimensional symmetry algebras known to occur in two-
dimensional quantum field theory, as well as a new localization method for
Feynman integrals. Professor Beasley will also construct a novel, time-dependent
topological supersymmetry on three-manifolds which fiber over the circle. These
ingredients will be applied to perform a variety of exact computations in gauge
theory. The project invokes deep notions from contact geometry and topology, and
so will establish further interdisciplinary connections between theoretical
physics and mathematics.