* 1620838
* Controlling Rings of Trapped Ions for Quantum Information Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Hartmut Haeffner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum computing promises to speed up computations by exploiting the unique
properties of quantum physics that dictates that quantum systems can be in
multiple states at the same time. This non-classical property, called
"superposition", can be used to design new computer algorithms that process
information faster, as, for example, in the factorization of large numbers on
which many modern encryption schemes rely. The difficulty is that superposition
states are so fragile that even small amounts of noise, for example from
electric fields, can remove the quantum advantage. The goal of this project is
to establish a novel ring configuration of trapped ions for quantum computing.
To date quantum computational schemes that employ trapped ions as the logical
bits have relied on a linear string of ions. This new ring architecture will
reduce the influence of the dominant noise source, thereby increasing the
accuracy of the quantum operations. In addition to quantum computation benefits,
the ring shape also opens up opportunities to study aspects of the fundamental
physics behind quantum mechanics, the theory that currently best describes the
atomic world. Specifically, because the ion ring can freely rotate, it allows
for the study of effects present in large rotating objects and symmetric
systems. Thus, the project will explore unique avenues towards quantum
information processing and provide novel insights into quantum mechanics as well
as offering students new possibilities in this rapidly-developing field of
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A symmetric ring of ions offers the opportunity
to study a number of phenomena requiring translationally symmetric systems and
ring topologies as well as to implement quantum gates that benefit specifically
from the ring geometry. However, in order to realize any of these studies, a
high degree of control over the quantum state of the ions and their collective
motion is necessary. For this, the ring must not only be symmetric but also well
cooled and have the rotational degree of freedom precisely controlled. Towards
these goals, ions will be trapped with oscillating electric fields above a
planar electrode configuration. The electrode configuration is carefully chosen
to trap the ions in a compact ring far away from symmetry breaking imperfections
of the substrate. To establish the degree of symmetry of the ring, cooling to
temperatures in the low microkelvin range will be required. Hence, emphasis will
be given to various cooling techniques including ground state cooling in an
asymmetric configuration followed by adiabatic transformation into a symmetric
ring. Of particular interest for quantum information applications is the rate
with which the rotational (quantum) state changes. After this characterization
phase, laser light will be used to initiate controlled rotation depending on the
quantum information stored in individual ions. This interaction will be used to
implement the key operation for any meaningful quantum computing, namely quantum
operations of an individual (qu)bit conditioned on the state of another bit.