* 1620594
* Full vector paleosecular variation (PSV) recorded on the Koolau Volcano, Oahu, Hawaii during the Matuyama Chron at Makapuu Point (ca. 2.6 to ~2.2 Ma).
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Emilio Herrero-Bervera, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 197,474.00

Paleomagnetic (i.e. fossil magnetism) data are the unique source of observations
to understand the geomagnetic transitions and hence the geodynamo processes
involved in field generation. Due to the fact that there is a need to obtain
reversal records from volcanic sequences in order to have a better understanding
of the generation of the Earth's magnetic field, it is proposed to study a long
sequence (about ~191 meters) of lavas from the island Oahu, Hawaii at a site
known as Makapuu Point, Koolau Volcano with the main objective of investigating
the full range of paleomagnetic signals recorded before during and after several
successive polarity transitions. The section covering ~410,000 years of field
changes includes the possibility of studying the detailed recording of the
successive magnetic field reversals such as the Gauss-Matuyama, Cryptochron
C2r.2r-1 and the onset of the Reunion Subchron, since the base of the section is
2.60+/-0.13 million years old, the middle part is 2.49+/-0.07 million years old
and about 10 m below the top of the section the age is ~2.19+/-0.12 million
years old. The objectives of this 2 year research study are related to the
knowledge of field variations during periods like reversals and excursions and
related to the critical time intervals that precede and follow reversals that so
far have only been documented from a few sedimentary sequences, for the interval
between 2.6 to ~2.012 Ma. Reversal studies cannot be separated from the
surrounding polarity intervals and most records published so far were not long
enough to provide complete information. The sequence offers the exceptional
opportunity to study changes over a time period that includes several polarity
intervals and thus documents the paleofield behavior over various time
constants. This is a basic condition to extract and bring up significant
constraints for the theoretical and numerical modeling of the generation of the
paleofield. This research will have impacts on field like magnetostatigraphy,
rock magnetism, geomagnetism and physical volcanism. Several undergraduate
students will be supported and involved in all aspects of the research.

The proposal is focused on full vector studies in order to determine the total
field vector and Paleosecular Variation (PSV) of the "stable" polarities. The
study will focus on the successive periods of polarity and their associated
reversals. The paleointensity experiments will be conducted using a version of
the Thellier-Coe as well as the differential pTRM "multi-specimen" methods. The
PIs have imposed severe criteria to discard samples affected by magneto-
mineralogical transformations and with magnetization components involving multi-
domain grains. It is important to deal with paleointensity values that rely on a
minimum number of 5 to 8 determinations per flow in order to perform suitable
statistical treatment. Given the time consuming aspect of paleointensity
studies, a two-year period is envisaged to achieve the goals of this proposal
including 10 more radiometric 40Ar/39Ar age determinations. The principal
investigator and four undergraduate students will carry out the entire research
project. The involvement of undergraduate students will be a priority in this
project, from fieldwork, laboratory work, analysis and publication of the
results. Data will be disseminated through publication and on the web and
community maintained paleomagnetic and geochronologic databases. This project
will provide the stimulus to maintain the paleomagnetics operation at UH and the
Rare Gas Lab. at the Univ. of Wisconsin at Madison both of which are used by a
diverse group of students and researchers from all over the world.