* 1620026
* Nonlinear Instability of Navier-Stokes equations from a probabilistic point of view: Numerics and Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xiaoliang Wan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 183,001.00

During the last two decades, there has been a widespread interest in uncertainty
quantification from academia to industry, where stochastic models and approaches
have been developed to effectively describe the propagation of uncertainty of
different sources in complex systems, and the interplay of mathematical modeling
and experimental data. For example, classical deterministic differential
equations have been relaxed to a random one by taking into account the
uncertainty in physical parameters, initial/boundary conditions, etc. This
strategy is being employed more and more in industrial design to enhance
robustness and efficiency. Bayesian inference has been applied to inverse
problems in a more natural way to deal with the noisy observations, which
actually turns an ill-posed deterministic inverse problem into a well-posed one
from the probabilistic point of view. In this project the Principal Investigator
considers a stochastic formulation of a classical problem in dynamical system -
nonlinear instability of wall-bounded parallel shear flows. The strategy will be
based on a very general observation: under the excitation of noise, no matter
how small the amplitude of noise is, states that are impossible for a
deterministic mathematical model can be explored by a stochastic model. The
issue of particular interest is the transitions to the anomalous states that
occur rarely but have major impact, such as system failure, loss of stability,
etc. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main mathematical tool in this project is the
Freidlin-Wentzell theory of large deviations for small random perturbations of
dynamical systems. One typical scenario of nonlinear instability in many wall-
bounded flows is the subcritical bifurcation of Navier-Stokes equations with
respect to the Reynolds number, where the equation can have at least two stable
solutions for a certain Reynolds number. The Principal Investigator will recast
nonlinear instability in a stochastic setting and regard it as a rare event
triggered by small noise. Mathematically, a question considered is how the
nonlinear instability develops as the amplitude of noise goes to zero. The large
deviation principle asserts that such a transition will occur mainly following a
path given by the minimizer of the action functional. The mail goal of this
project is twofold: 1) Develop efficient numerical algorithms to seek the most
probable transition path that is critical for the development of nonlinear
instability; and 2) Extensive numerical studies of the subcritical bifurcation
of wall-bounded parallel shear flows. The first task will be achieved by hp
adaptive finite element discretization in time direction and spectral method for
spatial discretization incorporating with parallel computing. In particular, the
pressure will be removed from the formula using a divergence-free space such
that one can reduce the number of degrees of freedom and just focus on the
instability. In the second task, the focus is on the relation between the
action-based stability theory and classical stability theories such as linear
stability theory, nonlinear stability theory, nonmodal theory, edge state and
minimal energy perturbation study. More specifically, small noise will be added
to some classical deterministic models in literature to seek extra information
that cannot be given by deterministic stability theories.