* 1620979
* Modest Supports for Sustaining Professional Development Outcomes over the Long-Term
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Judith Sandholtz, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,384,306.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This study will investigate factors influencing the persistence of
teacher change after professional development (PD) experiences, and will examine
the extent to which modest supports for science teaching in grades K-5 sustain
PD outcomes over the long term. Fifty K-12 teachers who completed one of four PD
programs situated in small, rural school districts will be recruited for the
study, and they will participate in summer refresher sessions for two days,
cluster meetings at local schools twice during the academic year, and optional
Webinar sessions two times per year. Electronic supports for participants will
include a dedicated email address, a project Facebook page, a biweekly
newsletter, and access to archived Webinars on a range of topics related to
teaching elementary school science. Modest support for replacement of consumable
supplies needed for hands-on classroom activities will also be provided. The
project will examine the extent to which these modest supports individually and
collectively foster the sustainability of PD outcomes in terms of the
instructional time devoted to science, teacher self-efficacy in science, and
teacher use of inquiry-based instructional strategies. The effects of contextual
factors on sustainability of PD outcomes will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal study will seek answers to
three research questions: 1) To what extent do modest supports foster the
sustainability of professional development outcomes in: a) instructional time in
science; b) teachers' self-efficacy in science; and c) teachers' use of inquiry-
based instructional strategies? 2) Which supports are: a) the most critical for
sustainability of outcomes; and b) the most cost-effective; and 3) What
contextual factors support or impede the sustainability of professional
development outcomes? The project will employ a mixed-methods research design to
examine the effects of PD in science among elementary schoolteachers over a 10
to 12 year period that includes a 3-year PD program, a 4-6 year span after the
initial PD program, and a 3-year intervention of modest supports. Quantitative
and qualitative data will be collected from multiple sources, including: a
general survey of participating teachers regarding their beliefs about science,
their instructional practices, and their instructional time in science; a
teacher self-efficacy measure; intervention feedback surveys; electronic data
sources associated with Webinars; teacher interviews; school administrator
interviews; and receipts for purchases of classroom supplies. Quantitative data
from the teacher survey and self-efficacy measure will be analyzed using
hierarchical modeling to examine growth rates after the original PD and the
change in growth after the provision of modest supports. Data gathered from
other sources will be tracked, coded, and analyzed for each teacher, and linked
to the survey and self-efficacy data for analysis by individual teacher, by
grade level, by school, by district, and by original PD experience. Together,
these data will enable the project team to address the project's research
questions, with particular emphasis on determining the extent to which teachers
make use of the various supports offered, and identifying the most cost-
effective and critical supports.