* 1620196
* Collaborative proposal:   Faculty and Undergraduate Research Student Teams (FURST)
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Erwin Suazo, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2019
* USD 22,000.00

The Faculty and Undergraduate Research Student Teams (FURST) program brings
together small research groups comprised of undergraduate students and faculty
from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI) in order to provide them with a
year-long research experience. The program also provides a one month long
intensive summer immersion for its participants at an established summer REU
site at Fresno State. FURST students get an opportunity to participate in
professional workshops, presentations and academic discussions along with the
REU students, whereas FURST faculty can take advantage of an on-site, in-person
research collaboration with their peers within the FURST program. The program's
main goal is to foster both student and faculty research at PUIs, with the
specific goal of producing student and faculty authored publications, as well as
presentations. The program is designed to be inclusive and accessible to teams
from institutions with varying research focus and support, in order to mitigate
cultural changes at institutions which may not consider research a
quintessential component of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FURST
students will be working on open problems in mathematics under the guidance of
their faculty mentors. Research topics include community detection problems in
networks, expanding the framework and analysis of the cop and robber game, the
use of coarse Ricci curvature in data analysis and interpolation problems, the
study and solution of the non-linear Riccati-Ermakov equation, as well as other
non-linear dispersive partial differential equations. Strengthening their
background in the selected research topic through readings and lecture at their
home institutions will prepare FURST students to engage in research at the same
speed as the REU students during the immersion phase. Students will be expected
to submit the end product of their research for publication in a peer reviewed
journal. FURST faculty will engage in solving open problems in their area of
research while building collaborations with faculty at other institutions.
Faculty are also expected to produce publishable work as a result of
participating in the program. In accordance with the stated goals, the program
will improve access to research for students at PUIs, where such opportunities
are typically limited. It will also (re)-energize faculty at PUIs so that they
remain active in research. By doing so, FURST will help transform the research
culture at the participating institutions, especially since the bulk of the
research activities will take place at FURST teams' home institutions. While
FURST student participants will learn skills through the program that are
invaluable in graduate school and in the scientific workplace, the program will
broadly impact the students at the involved PUIs by demonstrating to them
(through student talks and presentations) that research can be part of the
undergraduate educational experience. Finally, through the immersion in an
active REU site, FURST students will gain exposure to the workings of an REU
program, and will be able to make better informed choices about applying to REU
as a potential next step in their academic development.