* 1620062
* I-Corps: Dense Flexible Interconnects for Advanced Testing and Integration
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Muhannad Bakir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

There is a growing need for the integration and/or stacking of multiple chips
onto the same platform as the continual reduction of device size has begun to
approach physical limits. However, such integration of multiple chips not only
exacerbates fabrication, manufacturing, and assembly, but also lowers the yield
of end products; this increases the possibility for failure to be induced at
various stages of manufacturing processes. As a result, the role of extensive
testing to filter any defective or damaged chips out for an emerging next
generation chips is becoming increasingly significant. However, the testing of
complex next generation chips poses a number of challenges. First, as size of
the structures to be tested is reducing, they are more and more vulnerable to
damage during testing. In addition to this, the distance between adjacent signal
pads is reducing, and thus testing platforms should be able to correspond this
drift. With the increasing complexity of integrated chips, the heat generated
during testing is rapidly increasing adding further challenges to the testing
methodology. Therefore, there is a critical need for a novel platform which can
alleviate some current and possible future hurdles allowing electronic design,
test and packaging companies to continue device and system level scaling for
future generations. With the use of modern electronics spanning from wearables
and smart cars to high performance computing and industries, the ability to keep
pushing the envelope to get smarter and more efficient electronics would have
far reaching effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed testing platform, is a
critical component in the testing of chips and should be able to overcome the
challenges mentioned earlier. This team has successfully demonstrated
microfluidic cooling on interposer level and have benchmarked the performance
compared to the air cooled system. Similarly, the team has carried out extensive
research on design, fabrication, and characterization of mechanically flexible
interconnects which have high out-of-plane compliance. The proposed advanced
testing platform featuring mechanically flexible interconnects and microfluidic
cooling system has the potential to revolutionize next generation testing
applications by providing efficient thermal management during testing and
allowing the probing of dense and smaller structures with minimal damage; this
would allow test cost reduction while preventing overheating during test
However, the assessment of the proposed technology and the inspection of the
readiness for commercialization will be conducted through this program. Also,
through the NSF I-Corps program, the team will conduct interviews with various
commercial entities in the semiconductor and electronics industry to better
understand possible current and future bottlenecks in testing and to investigate
how to best position of technologies for this space. With integrated ICs being
an integral part of majority of the consumer electronics market, the proposed
technology will aid in providing more and more powerful devices to the general
public. this technology will also reduce the number of chips damaged during the
testing phase and will allow higher yields and lower overheads allowing
manufacturers to operate at a competitive price point giving consumers good
value for money.