* 1620901
* Fundamental Understanding on the Role of Structural Defects on Lithiation of Nanoscale Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2015,08/31/2019
* Reza Shahbazian-Yassar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 428,218.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Extensive research worldwide is underway to
find better materials for Li-ion batteries in order to increase their energy and
power. Transition metal oxides offer superior performance as electrodes for
lithium-ion batteries; however, the progress toward their commercial use has
been hindered due to lack of understanding of their electrochemical performance.
In particular, variations in local atomic structure and chemistry need to be
better investigated in order to properly design them for rechargeable battery
applications. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research, this project will work to address this
shortcoming. The principal investigator plans to study the electrochemical
battery reactions inside high-resolution electron microscopes enabling imaging
down to atomic level. With this capability, lithium-ion movements inside the
battery electrodes can be investigated in the presence of structural
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale transition
metal oxides (TMO) are promising materials for lithium-ion batteries. These
materials operate through conversion reactions and are associated with high
energy densities. These materials are highly vulnerable to structural defects
produced during synthesis that can alter lithium ion pathways and affect their
electrochemical performance. The objective of this research activity is to
understand the underlying atomistic mechanisms by which structural defects such
as heterointerfaces and dislocations affect the lithiation behavior of TMOs. To
meet this goal, nanoscale TMOs are subjected to real time electrochemical
lithiation inside atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopes. This
project is expected to yield better understanding on the evolution of localized
strain and electronic structure at the vicinity of structural defects and their
effect on lithium-ion pathways. In addition, the structural evolution of
conversion reaction phases can be investigated in the presence of
heterointerfaces and dislocations.