* 1620947
* I-Corps: Utilizing atomically layered 2D materials for heat-management of coatings
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Volker Sorger, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

In many industries, such as the electric power and distribution sector, energy
losses due to poor heat dissipation are a significant challenge. Heat
dissipating coatings can be developed by understanding and engineering the
interaction of electromagnetic waves with matter which are the key for such
technologies that require targeted optical and infrared characteristics. This
project explores the potential of atomically thin multilayered materials towards
heat dissipation applications; if engineered to specification, these nanoscale-
thin coatings will passively cool an object relative to an uncoated one. This
project investigates the requirements and application space for such coatings
through scientific insights and application demands. Potential first adopters
are expected at power utilities, power distribution, and energy efficient
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to show how
nanostructured, multilayered 2-dimensional materials can be designed to exhibit
specific light-matter-interaction properties. The scope extends to permittivity-
engineering via a metamaterial approach. Specifically the radiation and
reflection spectra are of interest towards emissivity control of a coated
object, thus reducing its relative temperature. The study of broadband
permittivity data of emerging 2-dimensional materials extends the understanding
of photon-electron interaction and radiation profiles. The I-Corps process will
increase public scientific literacy in the STEM field through the interview
method of potential customers. Thus, partnerships between academia, industry,
and start-up ventures are therefore expected to emerge and accelerate the time-
to-market as aligned with the Materials Genome Initiative. At a larger scheme,
an enhanced efficiency along with a reliability-improved power grid supports
both national security and economic competitiveness of the United States.