* 1620063
* Robust Solvers for Coupled Problems with Applications to Electromagnetism and Poromechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* James Adler, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,658.00

The goal of this project is to develop, implement, and study robust and
efficient computational (Partial Differential Equation) solvers for large-scale
systems of equations that describe coupled physical problems. In particular, we
aim to investigate applications in the computation of electromagnetic phenomena
around obstacles, as well as poromechanic applications, such as the study of
groundwater flow in porous media. Designing these solvers represents an
important class of challenging problems in computational mathematics, because
those coupled systems usually describe complex multiphysics phenomena across
different time and spatial scales. Currently, most efficient and robust solvers
are developed for single-physics problems, whereas each tool we develop will
strongly consider the importance of the inherent coupling. The research will
provide new computational paradigms for electromagnetics and poroelasticity,
both of which have crucial applications in physics and engineering, such as
fusion energy applications, shale gas recovery, carbon dioxide consolidation,
and cardiac muscle behavior, to name a few. Finally, the project supports one
graduate student. Through training and collaboration with investigators and
other experts in the field, they will become involved in the broader research
communities of scientific computing and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
of the applications described above corresponds to a discretized coupled system
of partial differential equations (PDEs). Due to the complexity of the multi-
physics and multi-scale phenomena described by such models, an essential
component is efficient and robust nonlinear and linear solvers, due to the fact
that the computational time needed to simulate complex physics is in many cases
dominated by solving the large-scale linear systems of equations representing
the discretized PDEs. Therefore, this research focuses on developing, analyzing,
and implementing efficient iterative methods and preconditioners for coupled PDE
systems. More precisely, this is achieved by two possible approaches. When
structure-preserving discretizations are applied, properties of the PDE models
that are carried over to the discrete model are used to derive an exact block
factorization and we will design novel preconditioners without approximating the
Schur complements. For general numerical schemes, monolithic multigrid methods
will be developed by generalizing the multigrid theoretical framework for
indefinite coupled systems. Finally, by applying these new iterative solvers and
studying their interplay with accurate discretization schemes, the investigators
will create robust and efficient numerical simulations for systems such as
Maxwell's equations and those describing poromechanics. More generally, the new
solvers developed here will provide insight on how to use analytic tools in the
design of algebraic solvers and novel theoretical foundations for the design of
robust solvers for general coupled PDEs will be considered.