* 1620806
* Seeing in the Dark
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Lisa Randall, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Lisa Randall at Harvard
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Randall's research explores
fundamental physics at the smallest scales probed thus far as well as the nature
of the as-yet unidentified dark matter. Understanding the nature of dark matter
and its distribution in the Milky Way is essential for experimental and
observational probes. Professor Randall's research will contribute significantly
to this effort, opening up avenues for dark-matter research that have not yet
been explored. This research program is also highly interdisciplinary, drawing
from particle physics, cosmology, and astronomy, with additional potential
connections to geology, paleontology, and chemistry. As such, this research
contributes to the national interest by furthering the development of
fundamental scientific knowledge within the United States. This research is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. It will not only involve
students and postdocs, thereby helping them develop a broad skill set, but also
serves as a rich backdrop for introducing scientific ideas --- particularly
those in particle physics --- to the general public. The PI's presence in the
public sphere also encourages women and other under-represented groups to pursue
science, while the PI's recent book "Dark Matter and the Dinosaurs: The
Astounding Interconnectedness of the Universe" has provided an ideal platform
for bringing science to the general public and has led to numerous media
appearances. These activities are expected to continue under the current
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, in spite of tremendous progress in
particle physics over the last decade, many important questions remain
unanswered, including the origin of the electroweak scale and the nature of dark
matter. For example, we still do not know what dark matter is, or how its share
of the cosmic energy density can be understood. The PI will investigate these
questions within the framework of "Partially Interacting Dark Matter", and
within one particular realization known as "Double Disk Dark Matter", where a
small fraction of dark matter particles have interesting interactions beyond the
gravitational. This feature can give rise to new testable signatures that can
potentially affect structure formation. Another generic possibility is "Flooded
Dark Matter", which provides a natural way to dilute the entropy in the dark
sectors. This mechanism expands the model-building possibilities for dark-matter
physics. Finally, Professor Randall plans to investigate new mechanisms for
understanding the origin of the weak scale and will study their experimental
implications.