* 1620633
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Orthopedic Implants with a Nano-Engineered Surface Coating
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Garrett Smith, Nasseo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,773.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the clinical success of spinal and
orthopedic implants to keep more Americans healthy and active. Our focus is to
enhance properties of a widely used implant material made of a polymer. As a
hard plastic, it is beneficial for strength but unfavorable for integrating with
surrounding tissue. As a result, a high percentage of polymer implants loosen
because they do not integrate well with bone. Our innovation expands scientific
and technical understanding by investigating a novel nano-engineered surface
coating for polymer implants. The outcome of this proposal could be a
revolutionary implant surface with rapid healing, sound integration, and lowered
risk of implant failures. Surgeons could have higher success rates and save on
operating time. Patients could have fewer complications. Insurers could pay less
for procedures. Manufacturers could offer a superior technology. This novel
surface technology will be applied to spinal implants first and then expanded
into craniofacial, trauma, sports medicine, hip, knee, and extremities
applications. Our goal is to bring this technology to market to provide the tens
of thousands of Americans undergoing orthopedic procedures each year a pain-
free, mobile lifestyle.

The proposed project aims to develop a nano-engineered surface coating on
polymer implants for treating spinal fusions. The goal is to reduce back problem
unions due to inhibited osseointegration by presenting an implant surface that
intimately interacts with host bone down to the cellular level. We plan to do
this by using advanced materials processing techniques for creating nano-
engineered surfaces on polymer substrates (Objective 1). Next, we will validate
with advanced imaging techniques the presence of the nano-engineered structures
on the implant surface (Objective 2). The anticipated outcome will be a novel
surface coating with a nanostructure that has superior material attributes on
the macro, micro and nano levels. Extensive material characterization will
validate the procedure. Successful development of fabrication methods will lead
to mechanical testing (Objective 3). The novelty of this nano-engineered surface
coating is that it relies on the characteristics of the surface itself to create
a rapid and powerful bond with host bone enhancing the bone union process using
biomaterial science.