* 1620331
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Study of  Active Cellular Matter: Simulation, Modeling, and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 109,814.00

Active cellular matter is the basis of novel synthetic active fluids made of
mixtures of suspended cytoskeletal filaments and molecular motors. By consuming
chemical fuel, the molecular motors (e.g., kinesins) can bind to and create
actively moving crosslinks between the biofilaments (e.g., microtubules) to
drive their relative motion, which leads to large-scale collective motions in
the filament/motor mixture through hydrodynamic coupling. Synthetic active
suspensions made of small numbers of components reveal how higher-order aspects
of assembly and organization are built in living cells. These systems also
present new challenges to our understanding, design, and analysis of materials,
and have the potential to provide valuable new technologies such as autonomously
moving and self-healing materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the
investigators study active cellular matter composed of microtubules and
molecular motors through multiscale methods, and tightly coupled modeling,
analysis, and simulation. The project aims to understand the fundamental
interactions underlying stress generation within bundles of rigid/flexible
biofilaments that undergo dynamic instability, as well as the nonlinear dynamics
and hierarchical pattern formation in large-scale collective motions. The
project will also predict key material properties including its coherent
structures, local heterogeneity, time- and length-scales, and material rheology.
To resolve the physics at different length- and time-scales, several methods
will be developed and integrated: (1) microtubule-motor interactions will be
simulated using a kinetic Monte Carlo method; (2) the hydrodynamic interactions
between objects of various shapes will be modeled using a nonlocal slender
body/boundary integral method, together with fast summation methods; (3) a
pseudo-spectral method will be implemented to simulate the collective motion
through a continuous active liquid-crystal type model.