* 1620483
* Development and Application of Turbulence Models in Numerical Geodynamo Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

Numerical simulations of geophysical and astrophysical flows are a powerful tool
for studying processes in various contexts. All of these applications share the
challenge of resolving flow over a vast range of spatial scales. In most cases
the computational requirements of the application exceed the limits of available
resources, so researchers confine their attention to the largest-scale flows and
parameterize the influence of small-scale turbulence. Complications can arise
from contributions due to planetary rotation, fluid stratification, and the
presence of a magnetic field, all of which alter the structure of the small-
scale flow and affect the way this flow should be parameterized. Our project
addresses the pressing need for a flexible and adaptive method for incorporating
practical complications into models for small-scale turbulence. The tools
developed in this project will directly benefit our understanding of the origin
of the Earth's magnetic field, offering the prospect of better forecasts for
changes in the magnetic field. The same approach can also be extended to other
applications, including geophysical flows in the atmosphere and oceans, as well
as astrophysical flows in accretion disks around stars and other
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work represents the culmination of
nearly ten years of effort to build a predictive model that quantitatively
accounts for the influence of turbulence with no ad hoc or tunable parameters.
The approach is based on an adaptive implementation of the scale-similarity
model, which has been successfully tested in both plane-layer and spherical-
shell dynamo models. The investigators plan to implement the scale-similarity
model in an open-source dynamo code, Calypso, to address the processes
responsible for generating the Earth's magnetic field. They conservatively
estimate that the new dynamo model will allow the investigators to refine the
fluid properties used in simulations by two orders of magnitude, substantially
improving the reliability of numerical simulations and the scientific inferences
drawn from them. They will test their implementation using output from an
independent high-resolution simulation from the Computational Infrastructure for
Geodynamics (CIG) with support from the DOE INCITE Program. Harnessing similar
resources in simulations that incorporate turbulence models will allow the team
to dramatically push the limits on what is currently feasible. They expect to
gain new insights into the processes that generate the Earth's magnetic field
and provide a computational framework for interpreting modern satellite
observations and for forecasting changes in the magnetic field.