* 1620628
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Shrock, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,950,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Maria C. Gonzalez-Garcia,
Christopher P. Herzog, Patrick Meade, Leonardo Rastelli, Martin Rocek, Robert
Shrock, Warren Siegel and George Sterman at Stony Brook
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics is constantly evolving as new
techniques and capabilities are developed to understand the natural world. This
award supports research in a broad but deeply related set of topics in
Theoretical Physics, and engagement at each of these frontiers of knowledge
serves the national interest by advancing fundamental scientific progress in the
United States. Investigations will include the analysis of high-energy
collisions of elementary particles, which probe the fundamental laws upon which
the material universe is based, and proposals for new experiments involving
elementary particles and atomic nuclei. These subjects are closely related to
the deep mysteries of gravity, space and time, and the possibility that all of
the known forces in nature are related, possibly unifying gravity itself with
the forces that are seen in electrical phenomena, in radioactivity, and in
nuclear physics. The theoretical methods developed in particle and nuclear
physics have also been found to have exciting applications to chemical compounds
and metals with unusual properties, like superconductivity. New theoretical
methods, sometimes relying on modern computational capabilities, are making
possible reliable predictions for the properties of solids and liquids that were
previously thought intractable. This research, by advancing our knowledge of the
laws of nature and by contributing to a better understanding of the physical
universe, including practical materials, has significant broader impacts and
implications for our world view. Indeed, many of the topics under study by the
senior participants are frequently discussed in the media, including the Higgs
boson, black holes, the role of neutrinos in the Universe, string theory, the
quark-gluon plasma, and quantum entanglement. The research carried out under
this award will also serve in the training of graduate students and mentoring of
postdoctoral fellows at the highest levels. The faculty on this proposal conduct
their research with graduate students, and share their experience and expertise
with undergraduates and community members, in and beyond the classroom.
Individual members will also continue their own outreach activities, which have
included successful traditions in high-school research mentoring and in the
organization of science playwriting competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
technical level, this award will support research over a wide range of
theoretical physics, largely based on quantum field theory and string theory.
Recent years have seen a strengthening engagement of theory and experiment in
particle physics, with new and exciting data from the Large Hadron Collider,
from neutrino observatories and cosmic ray satellites. These new sources of
information concerning our universe enable theorists to test long-standing ideas
against evolving data, and to develop new theoretical methods to guide
experiment. At the same time, novel applications of quantum field and string
theory, such as applications of duality and the conformal bootstrap, have been
developed in and beyond particle physics, opening unexpected avenues of research
into nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and quantum information,
sometimes with applications in pure mathematics. As active participants in these
historic developments, the senior personnel of this award will continue and
develop their work in high energy collider phenomenology, quantum
chromodynamics, in neutrino and astroparticle physics, in applications of gauge-
gravity duality, conformal field theory, extensions of the Standard Model,
electroweak symmetry breaking, superstrings, and the geometry of supersymmetric
gauge theories. This research will also help train a new generation of theorists
at the postdoctoral and graduate levels.