* 1620150
* Adaptive and high order PDF methods for nonlinear filtering problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Yanzhao Cao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 160,000.00

This research project investigates efficient and fast numerical algorithms of
nonlinear filtering problems. The goal of nonlinear filtering is to obtain best
statistical estimate of the state, which can be the trajectory of an unmanned
aerial vehicle, of a stochastic dynamical system based on noisy partial
observations of the state. As a key tool for data assimilation, nonlinear
filtering has applications in vastly diverse research areas including biology,
mathematical finance, signal processing and target tracking. A particular
example of target tracking is the guidance and surveillance of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV) which have been playing an essential role in national security
and defense. Through nonlinear estimates of target location based on the
observations from multiple sensors, nonlinear filtering forms a core component
in unmanned aerial vehicle targeting and navigation systems. Because of vast
amount data at an increasing rate of availability, traditional nonlinear
filtering methods such as Kalman filter and particle filter are often inadequate
to handle high dimensional and highly nonlinear problems. This research project
aims to develop fast and adaptive numerical algorithms to attack such nonlinear
filtering problems. Several graduate students will participate in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to conduct research in developing high
order and adaptive numerical algorithms and the corresponding numerical analysis
on nonlinear filtering problems. The focus is on the PDF filter, which solves
the nonlinear filtering problem by solving the conditional probability density
function (PDF) for the optimal filter through a stochastic partial differential
equation or a backward stochastic differential equation. We will develop two
classes of algorithms: the first solves the Zakai equation on adaptively
constructed computational domains and on sparse grids; and the second solves a
class of backward stochastic differential equations. Both algorithms overcome
three difficulties for the PDF filter: i) high dimensionality; ii) low
regularity; iii) unbounded domains. The overarching objective of this proposal
is to make the PDF filter a highly competitive numerical method for nonlinear
filtering problems. In particular, the novel BSDE based PDF filter studied in
this proposal achieves a high order of convergence, which is much faster than
all other existing nonlinear filtering methods.&lt;br/&gt;