* 1620851
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Implementation of Rigorous Instructional Materials in Middle-Grades Mathematics:  Developing a System of Practical Measures and Routines
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Kara Jackson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,055,216.00

The goal of this 5-year research project is to improve the implementation of
rigorous instructional materials in middle-grades mathematics at scale. Many
projects seek to improve mathematics instruction, but are not able to easily
track their efforts at improvement. The primary product of this project will be
a system of practical measures and routines for collecting and using data that
both assesses and supports the implementation of rigorous instructional
materials in middle-grades mathematics. In contrast to research and
accountability measures, practical measures are assessments that require little
time to administer and can thus be used frequently. The data can be analyzed
rapidly so that teachers can receive prompt feedback on their progress, and
instructional leaders can use the data to decide where to target resources to
support improvement in the quality of instruction and student learning. The
system of practical measures and routines will include 1) measures of high-
leverage aspects of teachers' instructional practices that have been linked to
student learning (e.g., rigor of tasks, quality of students' discourse) and
attend to equitable student participation; and 2) measures of high-leverage
aspects of key supports for improving the quality of teachers' practice (e.g.,
quality of professional development; coaching); and 3) a set of routines
regarding how to use the resulting data to engage in rapid, improvement efforts.
A key principle of the proposed project is that the system of measures and
routines can be adapted to a wide range of school and district contexts. This
project is supported by the Discovery Research preK-12 (DRK-12) program. The
DRK-12 program supports research and development of STEM education innovations
and approaches in assessment, learning, and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will establish three research-practice partnerships with five districts,
in three different states, that are currently implementing rigorous
instructional materials in middle-grades mathematics. Year 1 will focus on the
development of a set of practical measures of classroom instruction. Year 2 will
focus on testing the use of the classroom measures in the context of supports
for teachers' learning, and the development of practical measures of key
supports for teachers' learning. Years 3-4 will focus on how the project can
"learn our way to scale" (Bryk et al., 2015), which requires strategically
implementing measures and routines in increasingly diverse conditions. The
project will engage in rapid improvement cycles in which researchers will work
alongside district leaders and professional development (PD) facilitators to
analyze the data from the measures of both classroom instruction and the quality
of support for teacher learning to test the effectiveness of improvements in
intended supports for teacher learning and to adjust the design of the support
based on data. Across Years 1-4, the project will use recent developments in
technology and information visualization to test and improve 1) the collection
of practical measures in situ and 2) the design of data representations (or
visualizations) that support teachers and leaders to make instructional
improvement decisions. In Year 5, the project will conduct formal analyses of
the relations between supports for teachers' learning; teachers' knowledge and
classroom practices; and student learning.