* 1620423
* X-ray and Spectroscopic Studies of Subduction-Related Phases: Probing the Mid-Point of Volatile Recycling in the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 370,000.00

How the major materials of our hydrosphere and atmosphere, such as water and
carbon dioxide, are cycled into the deep Earth within solid mineral phases via
plate tectonics, and then ultimately released as fluid phases at high pressures
and temperatures, is of key importance for how subduction-associated volcanism
(like the circum-Pacific "Ring of Fire") is produced, and also possibly for the
occurrence of deep earthquakes (at depths greater than ~200 km). In this
project, the investigators plan to examine water- and carbon-containing minerals
of relevance under the high-pressure and high temperature conditions under which
they release water and carbon dioxide to determine: (1) their properties that
govern when water or carbon dioxide are released at depth; and (2) whether water
or carbon dioxide are released gradually or abruptly. These results will
constrain how the water that ultimately generates circum-Pacific volcanism via
water-induced melting is released at depth in the planet, and help in the
modeling of magma production at depth; and will explore how carbon dioxide is
released at depth and the form in which it might be transported to the surface.
Thus, these results have fundamental relevance for the production of volcanism
at continental margins, and for how deep subduction-related earthquakes (which
are likely greased by fluids) are generated. In conducting these experiments,
the group will spearhead the development of a new facility, which will be
available to the scientific community as a whole, which is designed to conduct
high-pressure/high-temperature characterizations of materials at the Advanced
Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Labs. The group extensively engages
undergraduates in its research effort, and the graduate students supported by
this grant include a military veteran. The results are also incorporated into
undergraduate curricula at the PI's institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator team plans to: (1) examine the properties of important carriers of
volatiles into Earth's mantle at simultaneous high pressures and high
temperatures using high precision single-crystal x-ray diffraction; and (2)
characterize the properties of carbonates of relevance to carbonatite
petrogenesis at high pressures using infrared and Raman spectroscopy. In tandem
with the first objective, the establishment of a new, community-accessible,
high-pressure/high-temperature synchrotron-based single crystal x-ray
diffraction facility will be facilitated by this support. The cycling of water
and carbon dioxide into and out of Earth's interior are pivotal processes that
impact both the properties of the solid Earth (through their effects on melting
and rheology) and Earth's surface (through the volume of the hydrosphere and the
composition of Earth's atmosphere). The team proposes to probe the properties of
volatile-bearing phases under subduction conditions to gain insights into: (1)
the polymorphism of volatile-bearing phases in Earth's mantle (or, what is
degassing at depth); (2) the structures of volatile-bearing phases at high-
pressures and temperatures (to examine why these phases hold volatiles); and (3)
how phases that are known to carry water to depth (and particularly lawsonite
and phengitic micas) behave as they approach (and hopefully exceed) their
dehydration conditions. They also will provide new constraints on the rich
polymorphism of phases associated with the binding of the carbonate ion under
mantle conditions: the focus here will be on alkali-rich carbonates, which have
recently been demonstrated to be associated with deep carbonatite melting, and
which have largely been uninterrogated at high pressure conditions. The team
will utilize this project to deploy two graduate students to assist, work
through, shake down and debug a new, world-class high-pressure single-crystal
x-ray diffraction set-up that will be set-up and commissioned over the next year
at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley National Labs (LBNL).
This facility will be available to the community as a whole through the General
User Program proposal process of the ALS (the facility will also be part of the
COMPRES-Consortium's Approved Program at the ALS, and thus will have assistance
for users who are awarded time). In addition to this deployment of new community
infrastructure, the PI will: (1) contribute to the education of a diverse group
of graduate students (currently, one military veteran, one returning female) and
undergraduates; (2) continue to publish/contribute to the literature on topics
of broad interest for those interested in the natural history of the planet (and
promote these as appropriate with press releases); and (3) incorporate new
results into UCSC undergraduate teaching (typically, to ~90 earth sciences
majors per year).