* 1620352
* A Scalable High-Order Discontinuous Finite Element Framework for Partial Differential Equations: with Application to Geophysical Fluid Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tan Bui-Thanh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,917.00

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are pervasive in engineering and science,
and their numerical solutions are of paramount importance in understanding
complex, natural, engineered, and societal systems. Though the past decades have
seen tremendous advances in both theories and computational algorithms for PDEs,
scalable numerical methods for complex, coupled, and multiphysics systems that
fully exploit the extreme-scale computing systems remain challenging. This
becomes the major impediment for future exascale systems unless dramatic changes
in mathematical methods and computational algorithms take place. However, not
much work has been done for this critical component of computational
mathematics. Thus, there is a critical need to develop advanced mathematical
discretizations that can enable scientific applications to harness the potential
of extreme-scale computing in order to continue the pace of scientific
discoveries and to promote the progress of science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
PI will develop a high-order discontinuous finite element (FE) framework,
including the weak Galerkin and the hybridized discontinuous Galerkin methods,
and its scalable solver for geophysical fluid dynamic applications. In
particular, the PI will design and rigorously analyze an abstract high-order
discontinuous FE framework for a large class of PDEs including elliptic,
parabolic, and hyperbolic types. The PI will also develop, analyze, and
implement scalable solvers. Both hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic models will be
developed and served as test beds for the developments. The advanced
computational and mathematical methods developed in this project will
potentially impact the computation of geophysical fluid dynamics. The project
will contribute a competitive extreme-scale discretization for the dynamical
cores of future high-resolution earth system models.