* 1620661
* Multidiscipline Approach to the UV Completion of the Standard Model: Astrophysics, Cosmology, and Collider Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Luis Anchordoqui, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 219,999.00

This award funds the research of Professor Luis Anchordoqui at CUNY Lehman
College.

After nearly twenty years of planning and construction, the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is now the world's largest and most powerful particle collider.
By colliding elementary particles against each other at high energies,
physicists expect to learn about the fundamental constituents of matter and
their interactions at higher energies and smaller distances than have ever been
previously explored. Currently the most successful theory for explaining how
these elementary particles interact at the highest possible energies is string
theory. String theory has the advantage of not only explaining the existence of
all of the elementary particles as different excitations of a fundamental
string, but also explaining how gravity might be unified with the other, non-
gravitational forces. In his research, Professor Anchordoqui aims to develop
methods to search for and test some of the ideas coming from string theory at
the LHC. As a consequence, research in this area advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions:
the discovery and understanding of new physical laws. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor Anchordoqui will
involve graduate students and postdocs in his research, and thereby provide
critical training for junior physicists beginning research in this field. He
also intends to give public lectures on his research results, and develop new
course curricula based on results from the LHC.

More technically, Professor Anchordoqui will consider extensions of the Standard
Model based on open strings ending on D-branes, with gauge bosons emerging as
strings attached to stacks of D-branes and with chiral matter emerging as
strings stretching between intersecting D-branes. Assuming that the fundamental
string mass scale is in the TeV range and the theory is weakly coupled,
Professor Anchordoqui will develop a number of search strategies that would
signal string physics at the LHC. These include a re-examination of the so-
called "Green-Schwarz mechanism", a modification of an action functional of a
quantum field theory involving higher gauge fields that makes a quantum anomaly
of the original action functional disappear, as well as the study of the minimal
left-right symmetric intersecting D-brane model. He also plans to investigate
whether the (possible) discrepancy between observation and theoretical
calculation of the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon can be explained in the
context of low-mass-scale string resonances. Professor Anchordoqui will also
undertake a phenomenological analysis of inflationary potentials exhibiting
S-duality. Professor Anchordoqui is also involved with the Pierre Auger
Collaboration, searching for the origin and nature of the highest-energy cosmic
rays and studying particle interactions at center-of-mass energies well beyond
those attained at the LHC.