* 1620777
* Toward Solving Cosmic Particle Mysteries with Neutrinos and Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kohta Murase, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 115,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Kohta Murase at the
Pennsylvania State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new frontier in particle
astrophysics has just opened up with the recent discovery of high-energy extra-
terrestrial neutrinos by the the Gigaton-scale neutrino detector known as
IceCube. Neutrinos are ghostlike neutral particles which can escape from dense
regions in the Universe; because they interact so weakly with other forms of
matter, they arrive undeflected at Earth and thus tend to point directly back to
the distant astrophysical sources that produced them. The origin of these high-
energy neutrinos recently discovered by IceCube is a new mystery in the field,
and solving this problem would allow us not only to understand the microphysics
and mechanisms of the sources but also to obtain important clues about an old
mystery, the origin of cosmic rays. More general, this discovery allows us to
utilize neutrinos as probes of neutrino properties, dark matter, and other forms
of fundamental physics. A major goal of Professor Murase's research is to
address these new and old problems through combinations of data coming not only
from neutrinos but also from gamma rays, through theoretical calculations of
particle production and propagation. This research is interdisciplinary,
including topics in astrophysics and particle physics and connecting theoretical
ideas directly to experimental and observational data. As a result, this
research will advance the national interest by promoting the progress of
fundamental science. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. It will involve and thereby provide training to graduate students
involved in this research, and key concepts of particle astrophysics will be
disseminated among educators at high schools and community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, one of the key ingredients in
this research is the strategic multi-messenger approach in which predictions for
different astroparticles (neutrinos, gamma rays, and cosmic rays) are confronted
with data. With sophisticated calculations including all relevant microphysical
processes, the PI will test various models for the astroparticle origins and
extract fundamental insights into the source physics of extreme astrophysical
objects. The multi-messenger connection among the measured neutrino, gamma-ray,
and cosmic-ray backgrounds will be examined, and source classes of cosmic-ray
accelerators that cannot be directly probed by gamma rays will also be studied.
The results of this study should be useful for the design of proposed next-
generation neutrino and gamma-ray detectors.