* 1620729
* DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 25,500.00

The 22nd installment of the conference "DNA Computing and Molecular Programming"
will be held at Ludwig-Maximilians-University in Munich, Germany from 4th till
8th of September 2016. The conference will bring together a wide range of
speakers; from leading theoretical computer scientists/mathematicians through
theoreticians who actively collaborate with experimentalists, to molecular
biologists, biochemists and engineers whose experimental work supports
development of new scientific and computing platforms. Since 1994, the
conference has been held 21 times (http: //www.dna-computing.org/index.html)
with alternating locations cycling every four years: North America, Europe,
North America, Asia (in 2015 it was held in Boston at Harvard University). The
conference is organized under the auspices of the International Society for
Nanoscale Science Computing and Engineering (ISNSCE) (http://www.isnsce.org).
The community has been exceedingly influential in catalyzing the development of
novel fields of research such as cellular computing, applications to synthetic
biology, as well as the extremely successful DNA origami technique. The main
objective of this conference is (a) to advance the field of nucleic acid
computing and molecular programming by bringing interdisciplinary research
communities together and promoting open scientific interactions, and (b) to
promote open discussions and provide opportunities for cooperation, in
particular interactions between graduate students and established researchers
from all countries in inciting new research developments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Several major directions of
research under the umbrella of the "DNA Computing and Molecular Programming"
conferences are being developed and advanced: (a) Molecular computing models,
(b) Foundations of self-assembly, (c) DNA nanotechnology, (d) Chemical reaction
circuits, (e) Molecular robotics. The conference presents the most significant
results in these topics and features the most prominent researchers in the
field. Moreover, several major developments in the field have been initiated
through interactions fostered by this conference such as: novel molecular
computing models, strand displacement processes, DNA tiles and algorithmic self-
assembly, molecular walkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;By
bringing together leading scientists in this multidisciplinary area of research,
the conference represents an exciting venue for the exchange of knowledge and
ideas. Computer science, mathematics, theoretical and experimental physics,
chemistry and molecular biology are among the disciplines represented. The field
of DNA computing and molecular programming remains extremely open to new ideas
and open access policies. Individual groups, for example, share their results
long before they are being published. One of the central goals of this
conference is to further foster this spirit and stimulate the open exchanges as
well as to promote interaction among graduate students and recent Ph.Ds from
around the world. As has been proven in the past, these interactions will result
in long-lasting research collaboration, as well as promote exchange of ideas in
their current research interests. The conference has an excellent track record
in bringing diverse groups together. The community has been extremely successful
in attracting new students as well as promoting new scientific developments and
has steadily grown over the years with over 220 participants (over 90 students)
in 2015. In the last 10 years, DNA nanotechnology, which was practiced in a
handful of laboratories world wide, has grown to be explored in hundreds of
places worldwide. A large number of these scientists have been exposed to
DNA/RNA nanotechnology through scientific meetings, most notably, the above
named conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Collaboration: The
conference DNA Computing and Molecular Programming is organized at the Ludwig-
Maximilians University (LMU) in Munich 9/4--9/8, 2016 in cooperation with Tech
University in Munich (TUM). This is an international collaboration among
organizers from Germany, Denmark and USA. Partial funding has been secured
through the Center for Nanoscience (PI-Tim Liedl, LMU) and Nanosystems
Initiative Munich (PI-Fredrich Simmel, TUM). Additional funding comes from
Bundesministerium f√ºr Bildung und Forschung BMBF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
funds will support US student travel to the conference. Preference will be given
to under-represented and minority students. Partial support from the NSF's
Global Venture Fund in the Office of International Science and Engineering and
program fund from the Directorate of Computer and Information Science and
Engineering is gratefully acknowledged.