* 1620072
* I-Corps: Commercialization of Novel CO2 Measurement Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Xuewu Liu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

To measure the aquatic environmental effects caused by fossil fuel combustion
and increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), accurate measurements
of CO2 system parameters are needed for seawater, lake waters, and river waters.
There is currently a lack of low-cost instrumentation for precise and accurate
on-site monitoring, and discrete CO2 system measurements of collected samples.
Building on the team's previous successful development of instrumentation for
measurements of nutrients, trace metals and CO2 system parameters, this I-Corps
team proposes to translate its technologies into a scientific instrument company
by commercializing an array of instruments for use in a variety of research
entities, teaching institutions and industries. The core business of the company
is to design, construct and manufacture CO2-system measurement instrumentation
that includes use of multiple platforms - underway shipboard systems, laboratory
systems, and in situ systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
offers an array of different instruments to meet customers' needs. For research
institutions, the proposed technology provides state of the art instrumentation
that meets the most demanding requirements for data precision and accuracy. The
proposed in situ instruments are user configurable for different measurements,
significantly reducing acquisition costs. The proposed underway shipboard system
provides full characterization of the CO2 system, and a small footprint that
cannot be matched with any other technologies. For regulatory agencies, and
fisheries industries, to monitor and mitigate the effects of ocean acidification
this technology offers very low cost pH sensors that have a precision better
than 0.01 pH unit. Through the founding of an advanced instrumentation company,
this team will transition customized prototype instruments to commercial
instruments by integrating different measurement components into user friendly
packages. Collectively these instruments will provide powerful tools for
environmental science and, in particular, important new capabilities for
investigation of CO2-system chemistry and the impact of ocean acidification on
the environment.