* 1620555
* Ion-Trap-Based Quantum Computers: From Benchmarking to Outperforming Classical Digital Computers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* James Freericks, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 269,711.00

Our use of of quantum physics began around the turn of the 20th century, when
scientists started exploring the ultrasmall world of atoms and electrons. While
much of the theoretical basis for quantum mechanics was worked out in the
1920's, we still do not employ significant technologies that take into account
the bizarre behaviors that are possible due to the quantum world (like
teleportation or quantum interference). Recently, there has been significant
advance in a new paradigm for computing, called quantum computing. With its
operation based on the quantum-mechanical effects between its constituents, it
can usher in a new realm of computation--where a small quantum computer can hold
more memory than that of every conventional computer ever built (or to be
built), or it can rapidly solve hard problems like finding the prime factors of
large numbers and thereby breaking our current standards for encryption. While
we don't yet have the "Microsoft quantum surface" devices available in stores,
research labs have produced so-called quantum simulators, which emulate the
behavior of coupled quantum systems and allow their properties to be read off at
the end of the computation. This research project will work on finding ways to
verify the correctness of these quantum computers when they surpass the
abilities of conventional computers. This is done by finding special cases,
where conventional computers can predict the results, and determining how to run
the quantum computers for those special cases. In addition to the research work
proposed, this project has a significant outreach component, where the group
will be launching a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) entitled "Quantum
mechanics for everyone" on EdX in the fall of 2016, which will teach quantum
mechanics principles with minimal math (no more complicated than taking square
roots) and with a series of interactive computer demonstrations, tutorials, and
illustrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three main themes will be pursued in this
work: (1) Examining effects of the lattice vibrations on the performance of ion-
trap-based quantum simulators by looking at both spin squeezing effects (where
the Heisenberg uncertainty principal can be partially beaten) and on computation
in the long-range interacting limit; (2) Determining techniques to speed up
quantum computation from clock frequencies in the 10s of KHz to clock
frequencies that can be pushed in the MHz range or further; and (3) Discovering
whether macroscopic quantum tunneling effects, or fragile quantum states (like
the so-called NOON states) can be formed and employed in these quantum
simulators. The type of quantum simulator we work with is one that is built out
of trapped ions that are driven by lasers that apply spin-dependent forces on
the ions (where the spin degree of freedom is often a hyperfine state of the
ion). The lasers push the ions according to their internal quantum states, while
the coupling to the lattice vibrations drives a subsequent coupling between
those internal states. By properly engineering these couplings, one creates a
quantum computer/simulator. This theoretical work will pair closely with
experimental work at NIST Boulder (Penning trap), Maryland (linear Paul trap),
and UCLA (planar Paul trap).