* 1620138
* Analysis and Computation for Inverse Problems in Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* William Rundell, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Many objects of physical interest cannot be studied directly. Examples include
the following: imaging the interior of the body, the determination of cracks
within solid objects, and material parameters such as the conductivity of
inaccessible objects. When these problems are translated into mathematical terms
they take the form of partial differential equations, the lingua franca of the
mathematical sciences. However, since one may have additional unknowns in the
model, these introduce unknown parameters in the equations that have to be
resolved by means of further measurements. Specific problems addressed in this
project include the recovery of the location and shape of interior objects from
surface measurements or the determination of obstacles from acoustic or
electromagnetic scattering data.

In this project the PI deals with the practical aspects of such "inverse
problems" from a mathematical and computational perspective. The main challenge
is when a unique determination can be made from a given amount of data, but as
these inverse problems are characterized by often severe "ill-conditioning",
meaning that even when there is only one solution to the problem, two very
different objects may produce data sets that are infinitesimally close. This
lack of stability aspect makes designing and analyzing algorithms for the
efficient numerical recovery of the unknowns extremely challenging. The PI will
concentrate on developing extremely fast algorithms designed to detect
significant features utilizing only minimal data. The PI also looks at inverse
spectral problems, and a classic example of which is to be given the vibrational
frequencies of a body and seek to determine its internal construction. Here the
body can be a metal beam or a star such as the sun. A central theme of this
proposal is the investigation of inverse problems for so-called anomalous
diffusion models. Classical diffusion is based on Brownian motion and has its
roots in 19th century physics together with Einstein's 1905 random walk model.
Here a very localised disturbance spreads with the characteristic shape of a
Gaussian and, further, the process is Markovian; at a given time step the state
depends only on that at the previous time step. While this serves well for a
wide range of models, it fails for those that exhibit a "history" or "memory"
effect. This includes many materials that been developed over the last twenty
years as well as economic forecasting such as stock and commodity market
modeling. It turns out that degree of ill-conditioning in anomolous diffusion
inverse problems can be very different from those of the classical case
suggesting that indeed fundamental new physics is involved. From a mathematical
and computational standpoint this comes at a price; the resulting analysis is
considerably more complex and challenging. The project also has a significant
educational component in the training of graduate and undergraduate students.