* 1620231
* A Hierarchical Multiscale Method for Nonlocal Fine-scale Models via Merging Weak Galerkin and VMS Frameworks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Arif Masud, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 164,274.00

Many problems in the natural sciences and engineering involve phenomena that
possess a spectrum of material, spatial, and temporal scales which correspond to
coarse and fine scale physics. Very often fine scale physics is also nonlocal
and therefore these problems pose a great challenge to the current computational
techniques. Nonlocality of fine-scales and advecting sharp gradients are two key
ingredients in the modeling of several classes of fluid dynamics problems. This
research effort focuses on the development of variationally based methods for
problems with steep gradients and discontinuities in the underlying fields and
wherein fine scales have a nonlocal feature. Of specific interest are
propagating steep fronts for which interacting discontinuities challenge the
stability of the numerical methods. Typical examples are chemically reacting
fluids permeating through porous elastic solids where fast reaction rates
produce steep concentration fronts. Such problems arise in (i) high temperature
injection molding of fibrous composites in micro and nanomaterials engineering,
and (ii) enhanced oil recovery and secondary shale gas recovery processes in
petroleum engineering. Another class of problems from mathematical physics is
advection dominated viscous flows leading to anisotropic turbulence.

The PI will develop a unique and novel, simultaneous top-down and bottom-up
multiscale approach for consistent representation of both the hierarchy of
scales as well as the structure of inter-scale coupling operators for complex
fluid mechanics problems. It blends ideas from the Variational Multiscale (VMS)
method that helps decompose the governing system of equations into coarse-scale
and fine-scale sub-problems and then employs Weak Galerkin (WG) ideas at the
fine-scale variational level to extract models for the finer physics. Weak
continuity of functions that is facilitated by the Weak Galerkin method results
in fine-scale models that are nonlocal. A further generalization of WG via
Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) ideas provides a framework to develop methods for
problems with sharp gradients on sound mathematical basis. This notion leads to
variationally derived Discontinuity Capturing (DC) methods that are independent
of the user-defined or user-designed parameters. Emphasis is placed throughout
on variationally consistent interscale coupling with rigorous treatment of the
continuity conditions that are critical for the mathematical and algorithmic
stability. The resulting computational algorithms will be ideal for massively
parallel computing on distributed systems where message passing traditionally
has been a bottle neck. The variational structures underlying the new methods
will increase local-solves that are cost effective because of local resident
memory on the new generation of processors while substantially reducing global
communication between processors, thereby leading to efficient and economic
computations. The mathematical frameworks and computational algorithms emanating
from this work will be broadly disseminated by publication in high-quality
archival journals, and by presentations at high impact conferences.