* 1620740
* Entangling Qubits with High Fidelity via Nonlocal Echo Sequences
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Jason Kestner, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 209,995.00

Quantum computers have the potential to provide numerous benefits for the modern
information-based economy, for example faster search algorithms, enhanced
security, and more efficient ways to do mathematical calculations. However, it
is challenging to make reliable components, such as quantum gates, for quantum
computers. A quantum computer operates quite differently from current computers,
since it takes advantage of the fact that an unusual set of rules, quantum
mechanics, governs the behavior of the very small objects that make up the
logical bits, or "qubits" of the computer. The problem is that qubits are very
delicate, and any imperfections in the control or undesired perturbations
(noise) can ruin the computation. The goal of this project is to discover ways
to operate a quantum computer so that it self corrects certain types of errors
that may occur during the computation. This will be done through the use of a
controlled sequence of light pulses to "entangle" pairs of qubits, a unique
feature of quantum mechanics that allows them to share information in such a way
that it cannot be accessed by measuring the qubits individually. By designing a
sequence of control signals that can reliably entangle pairs of qubits, it
should be possible to enable qubits to undergo a self-correcting trajectory and
end up in a particular, desired quantum state even in the presence of noise,
bringing the field of quantum computation a step closer to realization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a novel two-qubit dynamically
protected entangling protocol that assumes only access to high-fidelity single-
qubit gates (which can be produced with existing methods) and a noisy, but well-
characterized, two-qubit gate. The primary application of this project will be
to the entangling of quantum dot spin qubits, since noise in these otherwise
very promising systems is particularly limiting at the moment. The noise (both
electrical and hyperfine) is predominantly low-frequency, typically with a 1/f
power spectral density, so that such a composite pulse sequence approach is
reasonable. A combination of analytical and computational methods will be used
to search for optimally robust sequences, using simulated randomized
benchmarking to characterize their performance. The solutions will be designed
to be modular such that they can be used simultaneously with pulse shaping and
other fidelity-enhancing techniques to substantially reduce errors within the
logical space of any qubit platform. This is a vital step towards the
application of scalable, fault-tolerant quantum computing.