* 1620487
* Numerical Methods for Fluctuating Motion of Interface
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bo Li, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Interfacial fluctuations are common in many physical and biological systems.
Understanding the principles that underlie such fluctuations has far-reaching
scientific and technological consequences. For instance, the manipulation of
interfacial fluctuations in the so-called molecular beam epitaxy of growing
nanometer-scale semiconductor materials can largely improve the quality and
functionality of such materials that are widely used for high-technology
electronic and military sensor devices. Effective treatment of some fatal
diseases relies critically on our knowledge of anomalous water-protein
interfacial structures that result from fluctuations and biological mutations
and that characterize such diseases. This project develops a state-of-the-art
computer program to investigate how the fluctuation affects the structures and
long-time dynamics of interfaces, with a particular application to the binding
of a drug molecule to a target protein that is a crucial step in the computer-
aided drug design. The success of this project can therefore potentially help
reduce the high cost often needed for laboratory experiments and speed up the
process of drug discovery. In addition, this highly interdisciplinary research
brings unique opportunities for students at different levels, particularly those
from under represented groups, to receive training at the interface of
mathematical and biological sciences. Such training is critical to keeping our
nation's strength in scientific research in a highly competitive international
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computationally tracking the motion of
fluctuating interface is in general rather challenging, as such motion involves
multiple but correlated spatial and temporal scales, high energy barriers
between one stable interfacial structure to another, and the coupling of
interface and bulk processes. The PIs construct two methods to overcome some of
these difficulties. One is the stochastic level-set method that describes the
fluctuating interface by solving a stochastic differential equation. The noise
in the equation is spatially localized on or near the interface. Rigorous
stochastic analysis is carried out to reformulate such an equation for accurate
and efficient computations. The other is a stochastic lattice-phase method that
treats the coupling of both interfacial and bulk fluctuations. This method
describes the interface geometry by assigning a binary value on each of the
discrete sites, and minimizes a Hamiltonian of all possible discrete binary
fields using a Monte Carlo simulation method. This Hamiltonian mimics the
continuum one with spatial gradient-square term and a double-well potential. The
mathematical analysis using the notion of Gamma-convergence reveals the
interplay between the numerical grid size and the interfacial width, and
directly guides the design of fast algorithms. The PIs also develop a parallel
computational algorithm with the GPU implementation to speed up their
computations. They combine their new techniques with a molecular solvation
theory to study molecular recognition, particularly the binding of a small drug
molecule to a target protein. The computational models, numerical algorithms,
and computer codes developed in the project can be incorporated into existing
software that are used on a daily basis to study biomolecular interactions, and
in particular, for computer-aided drug design