* 1620212
* Hybrid Computational Methods and Algorithms for Complex Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yi Sun, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 165,741.00

In this project the PI will develop new hybrid computational methods and
algorithms to study complex biological systems and problems arising in
biomaterials and tissue engineering: (a) cellular aggregate fusion via cell
self-assembly; (b) bacterial patterns formation in biofilm growth. This research
will positively impact the applications in biomaterials, biotechnology, and
biomedical sciences, which include bio-printing technology for fabricating
tissues and organs, study of cell motions, drug design and ultimately
regenerative medicine. The hybrid computational tools and algorithms developed
in this project will help us to better understand complex mechanisms in the
cellular system and the bacterial system. The computational framework developed
here will be broadly applicable to build up similar hybrid models in
(bio)material sciences and (bio)fluid dynamics. Broader impacts of the education
plan is to increase the representation of underrepresented minority groups in
computational mathematics and mathematical biology. In addition to the training
of doctoral graduate students, undergraduate students will also be integrated
into the proposed research projects.

For the thrust (a), the PI proposes to investigate how the adhesion molecules
effect the fusion processes by integrating hybrid models for molecular signaling
pathways with those for mechanical motion. In particular, signaling pathways,
actomyosin dynamics and the cellular level mechanical polarization are modeled
by continuum variables, whose evolution and transport are governed by systems of
reaction and reaction-diffusion (RD) equations. Whereas, mechanical motion of
the cellular system is described by an on-lattice model based on the kinetic
Monte Carlo (KMC) algorithm. Communication between the lattice model and the
continuum scale RDs is carried out via a suite of multiscale protocols. For the
thrust (b), the PI proposes to study several major factors that affect the
formation of bacterial patterns in biofilms: bacterial chemotaxis, motility, and
interactions. In the proposed hybrid model, each of bacteria is characterized by
an individual off-lattice particle or an elongated rod shape with its location,
orientation, and its state of stress exerted by local environment, while the
dynamics of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) in the environment is
described by continuously changing fields. The hybrid model is described by a
system of ordinary and partial differential equations.