* 1620875
* Collaborative Research:  SHINE:  Study of Long-Term Variability of Solar Chromospheric Activity in Multiple Solar Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Yan Xu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 353,842.00

This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at building a multi-decadal database of
H-alpha images using various sources and studying the long-term variation in the
database to understand the cyclic behavior of the solar activity. The three
project teams will study the statistical properties of filaments, track
differential rotation and meridional flows, and investigate the chirality-
hemispheric helicity relation, which is essential for understanding the long-
term variation of magnetic fields, interior flows and helicity. The project has
a strong education component since all three PI institutions have very active
programs in education and outreach; the NJIT and CSUN have highly diverse
environment, with many minority students. This SHINE project is
multidisciplinary in nature since it requires expertise in computer science,
engineering, statistics, and physics. The project will promote strong
international collaborations for the benefit of advancing space weather research
both in the USA and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research plan of this
3-year SHINE project includes three main tasks. The first task is to study the
long-term variation of the statistical properties of filaments that carries
important information about the magnetic signature of the solar cycles. The
project team will focus the research on the statistical and cycle dependent
properties of filaments, in particular polar crown filaments that are related to
the interface between the new and the old solar cycles. The second main task is
to track plasma flows using features from H-alpha images as proxy for the
magnetic features. The most important components include the differential
rotation and meridional flows. Both are closely related to the dynamo signature
of solar cycles. Since the SOHO and SDO data are limited to solar cycles 23 and
24, which may be atypical in respect to low level of activity, to accomplish
this task the project team will utilize their own data, which spans over 9 solar
cycles of both high and low amplitudes. The third task is to investigate the
distribution of filament chirality and their cycle variations, which reflect the
global structure of helicity. The project is directly relevant to the NSF's
SHINE program, because it will provide important knowledge about the long-term
variation of the global solar activity, which is the major source of high-energy
disturbances in the solar, heliospheric, and interplanetary environment. Such
knowledge is critical for accurate modeling and prediction of space weather
conditions from the solar surface to the Earth and beyond. The research and EPO
agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.