* 1620604
* 3-D Mantle wedge flow pattern and seismic anisotropy: Effects of oblique subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ikuko Wada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 133,694.00

This project looks to improve our understanding of the inner workings of
subduction zones. The particular focus of this work on modeling the interface of
two colliding plates, the mantle wedge, can help us to better understand how
subduction zones are responsible for the location of volcanic arcs and how the
conditions at that depth and composition can lead to earthquakes in areas like
Hikurungi, Japan and the Aleutians, Alaska. The project will build a suite of 3D
models and codes that The work will support a new researcher and a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shear waves splitting measurements indicate
complex variations in the seismic anisotropy of the mantle wedge among different
subduction zones. Deformation in the upper mantle causes seismic anisotropy
through its effect on the lattice-preferred orientation (LPO) of anisotropic
minerals and shape-preferred orientation of elastically distinct material, such
as fluid-filled cracks. Earlier 3-D subduction modeling studies indicate that
oblique subduction, 3-D slab geometry, and margin curvature cause complex
spatial variations in mantle wedge flow directions, likely generating complex
shear wave splitting patterns and making the interpretation of
splitting&lt;br/&gt;measurements difficult. In this study the researcher and
graduate student will investigate the effect of 3-D mantle wedge flow patterns
on the development of LPO and seismic anisotropy, focusing particularly on the
role of oblique subduction. They will calculate mantle wedge flow fields for a
range of subduction obliquity, slab geometry, and margin curvature. Using the
calculated mantle flow field to compute LPO and shear wave splitting parameters
the work will compare the calculated splitting parameter values with observation
to systematically quantify the contributions of these factors to the observed
anisotropic structures of mantle wedges globally.