* 1620910
* Collaborative Research: Connected Biology: three-dimensional learning from molecules to populations
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,475,187.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will contribute to this mission by designing, developing,
and examining the learning outcomes of a new curriculum unit for biology that
embodies the conceptual framework of the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). The curriculum materials to be developed by this project will focus on
two areas of study that are central to the life sciences: genetics and the
processes of evolution by natural selection. These traditionally separate topics
will be interlinked and will be designed to engage students in the disciplinary
core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and the science and engineering practices
defined by the NGSS. Once developed, the curriculum materials will be available
online for use in high school biology courses nationwide.

This project will be guided by two main research questions: 1) How does learning
progress when students experience a set of coherent biology learning materials
that employ the principles of three-dimensional learning?; and 2) How do
students' abilities to transfer understanding about the relationships between
molecules, cells, organisms, and evolution change over time and from one
biological phenomenon to another? The project will follow an iterative
development plan involving cycles of designing, developing, testing and refining
elements of the new curricular model. The project team will work with master
teachers to design learning sequences that use six case studies to provide
examples of how genetic and evolutionary processes are interlinked. An online
data exploration environment will extend learning by enabling students to
simulate phenomena being studied and explore data from multiple experimental
trials as they seek patterns and construct cause-and-effect explanations of
phenomena. Student learning will be measured using a variety of assessment
tools, including multiple-choice assessment of student understanding, surveys,
classroom observations and interviews, and embedded assessments and log files
from the online learning environment.