* 1620649
* Synergistic Explorations of Hydromagnetic Core Turbulence via Simulations and Asymptotics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Keith Julien, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 475,046.00

The Earth's magnetic field is generated by fluid motions deep within the molten
iron outer core. Owing to its remoteness, direct observations of core motions
are not possible. This limitation hinders our ability to understand the physics
that control the dynamics and evolution of the core and the observed geomagnetic
field, and places an emphasis on the development of more accurate modeling
techniques. The proposed work will investigate the physics of the core and
associated magnetic field via the development and simulation of new mathematical
models that will allow systematic variation of the ingredients thought to be
important in the core. This is an interdisciplinary project that brings together
scientists from both the geophysics and applied mathematics communities who
possess skill-sets in the important application areas of modeling, computation
and experimentation. The proposed work will provide valuable training for a
graduate student and postdoctoral researcher in the nationally important
scientific and mathematical fields of geophysics and applied mathematics.

The lack of direct observations of the core hinders our ability to understand
the details of geomagnetic field observations and make predictions on its
temporal evolution. Overcoming this limitation requires the further development
of accurate models and the theoretical understanding of various flow regimes
that might be possible within the core. Presently, direct numerical simulations
of the geodynamo lack consensus on the precise nature of the dominant force
balances in core turbulence due to lack of spatiotemporal scale separation
resulting from finite computational resources. This proposal seeks funding to
investigate dynamical regimes that are thought to be relevant for the Earth's
liquid outer core and the geomagnetic field via a combined approach of numerical
simulations and asymptotic model development that is guided by data obtained
from ongoing laboratory experiments. A major goal is to explore and advance our
understanding of the dynamical and statistical consequences of differing force
balances in core turbulence settings by explicitly controlling the relative
strengths of an externally imposed magnetic field and the system rotation rate.