* 1620046
* LATITUDINAL VARIATION IN THE DETERMINANTS OF COMMUNITY STRUCTURE
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Adam Siepielski, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 202,024.00

Levels of species diversity vary naturally among different environments. Much of
the theory developed to understand how species diversity is maintained in
particular habitats is built on the assumption that different species occupy
unique niches. This means that multiple species can live together only because
each species interacts with the environment in different ways. However, evidence
also suggests that many species are nearly identical to one another in how they
interact with the environment. Neutral ecological theory has been suggested as
an alternative to niche-based theory in order to explain the apparent redundancy
of coexisting species. It states that every species may not occupy its own niche
and that diversity is maintained instead by species only slowly being lost by
random chance. This project will conduct observational studies and field
experiments to distinguish between these two alternative theories in structuring
damselfly assemblages found in lakes throughout western North America. The work
specifically focuses on examining how the relative importance of neutral versus
niche-based processes may vary spatially with latitude. Latitude may play an
important role because repeated glaciation at northern latitudes has limited the
persistence of local communities there, and thus restricted the ability for
niche differences to evolve in northern relative to southern communities. This
research will provide valuable information for understanding how mechanisms
allowing species coexistence may vary spatially, which is critical to
constructing effective biodiversity management strategies.

The importance of biological diversity to humanity ranges from clean water to
medicine, to recreation and art. This project will incorporate a range of formal
and informal education activities on the topic of biological diversity, that
include enhancing the science curriculum for local K-5 elementary schools,
developing an undergraduate research-based curriculum, and creating a citizen
science project to encourage public participation and to contribute to public
understanding of biodiversity. In addition, undergraduate students will be
engaged in all components of the scientific research enterprise.