* 1620884
* I-Corps: Living Patio Umbrella: Customer Discovery in the  Restaurant, Hospitality, Recreation, Institutional and Entertainment Industries
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2016
* David Tilley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The outdoor dining, hospitality, recreation, building, property management and
entertainment industries, as well as homeowners and institutions, strive to
provide comfortable and environmentally friendly places for people to eat,
lounge, play, study, congregate, and socialize outside. In today's modern
economy, many people spend the vast majority of their time indoors, but would
prefer to be outdoors. However, for people to be comfortable outdoors in many
situations, they need places that are shady, cool, inviting and
comfortable&amp;#894; for it to be environmentally friendly they need the
comfort delivered using sustainable practices and materials. Patio umbrellas are
a common way to shade outdoor space, with about $500 million sold annually.
Commercial grade patio umbrellas often sell in the range of $150010,000.
Conventional patio umbrellas provide shade and some comfort, but they do little
else for people. Plants, like trees, are often thought of in the same breath as
shade (think "shade tree"). Plants not only block the Sun, but they also use
water to cool the air surrounding them, provide beauty and naturalness, and are
known to remove poisonous chemicals from the air. Plants are being used more and
more on the roofs and walls of buildings to make them more environmentally
friendly. This team has invented the Living Patio Umbrella which has the
artificial canopy of a conventional umbrella replaced by plants. The invention
is unique because of its modular structural design, novel placement of the soil
container, and its micro-controlled, automated irrigation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary Customer Discovery (CD), conducted as
part of the UMD I-Corps regional program, provided feedback on 1) the technical
design, 2) the ability to meet specific needs of customer segments (i.e.,
restaurants, property management, architecture, and resorts) and 3) insight on
business models that we should consider. The team's aim for the NSF I-Corps
national program is to continue customer discovery as part of the Lean Startup
process to determine whether the team's initial hypotheses about the value
propositions fit with the needs of identified customer segments. The team also
aims to use the Business Model Canvas to develop and test hypotheses about how
to operationalize the living umbrella into a green startup. The team will attend
the course kickoff, participate in NSF webinars, interview at least 100
customers, and attend NSF's lessons learned session. In addition, the team
intends to interview potential key partners, such as nurseries, to test
hypotheses about business models for the proposed startup. If a strong product
market fit is discovered, then the research team will form a Startup company
named Living Canopies Ltd. to commercialize the Living Umbrella under exclusive
license from the University of Maryland.