* 1620922
* Collaborate Research: Integrating Sustainability Grand Challenges and Experiential Learning into Engineering Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 09/30/2015,12/31/2018
* Amy Landis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2018
* USD 154,652.00

The goal of this TUES Type 2 project is to incorporate sustainability grand
challenges and experiential learning into classrooms and throughout engineering
programs, with the aim of attracting and retaining a talented and diverse set of
students who are prepared to tackle the engineering challenges of a global
economy. The project team is developing and implementing three stand-alone
sustainability courses and 14 modules at five partner institutions (Arizona
State University, Mesa Community College, University of Pittsburgh, Community
College of Allegheny College, and Laney College) and evaluating the
effectiveness of the modules and classes on student, faculty, and program
performance. Specifically, this project (1) creates and (2) implements ready-to-
use content for three new stand-alone sustainability courses and fourteen
modules, (3) evaluates the effectiveness of each course and module based on
student and faculty feedback and performance, (4) evaluates the different
degrees of program-wide curricula change: the stand-alone course method and the
module method, and (5) disseminates the courses, modules, and findings to other
institutions.

The stand-alone courses (Life Cycle Assessment, Green Buildings, and
Sustainability Topics) and sustainability modules employ experiential learning,
which has been shown in educational research to enhance the quality of student
learning, and build on the team's sustainability engineering educational
expertise. Flexibility is built into the stand-alone course materials and
modules to accommodate the resources of different faculty and facilitate the
adoption of these courses across different universities. The team is developing
engaging activities for students both within the classroom and in the real world
and increasing faculty expertise by mentoring numerous faculty over the four-
year project. Moreover, the project includes well-integrated activities to
address research questions on the effectiveness of the stand-alone courses' and
modules' methods for incorporating sustainability topics. Evaluation includes
student-centered evaluation of learning outcomes for each module and course,
evaluation of faculty and institutional outcomes for the two different methods
of course integration, and evaluation of outcomes from the collaborative
project. Results are used to create recommendations on how institutions can best
integrate sustainability and systems thinking into engineering curricula and to
advance the understanding of faculty and institutional barriers to integrating
sustainability and experiential learning into curricula.

This project creates resources aimed at different engineering courses across the
range of undergraduate levels; the program is reaching hundreds of
undergraduates at two research universities and three community colleges. This
project has the potential to facilitate integration of sustainability education
into existing curricula by developing flexible curricular material and
identifying and minimizing barriers to implementation of sustainability
education and experiential learning. Faculty development workshops and mentoring
activities are employed to facilitate dissemination and adoption of the
developed courses and module.