* 1620451
* IBSS-L: Understanding Social and Geographical Disparities in Disaster Resilience Through the Use of Social Media
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Nina Lam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 834,585.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine whether social and
geographical disparities exist during the four phrases of emergency management
(mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery). The investigators will use
multiple perspectives and scales to address the research questions, including
analysis at the community, individual, and organizational scales. Findings from
this project will provide valuable insights into the interplay among regional
disparities, individual social networks and behavior, and
governmental/organizational policies. This project will expand knowledge of
whether social media use may serve to overcome or further deepen the social and
geographical disparities in each phase of emergency management. The project will
enhance understanding of how to conduct efficient mining of social media data in
order to produce useful and valid scientific information, thereby advancing both
social science and information science research by developing and testing
algorithms that can be used to mine noisy and imperfect data from sources like
Twitter. The knowledge gained from this project will help develop strategies to
reduce disparities, create effective social media campaigns and emergency
management outreach, and promote resilience to disasters. The methods used in
this project will be applicable to study other disasters in other
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the sources, patterns, and
consequences of social and geographical disparities in disaster resilience is
critical to building long-term resilient, healthy, and sustainable communities.
Traditional resilience analysis has been confined mostly to the use of static
data collected at scheduled intervals. With the advent of the "Big Data" era,
real-time human response data extracted from social media could provide new
opportunities for studying disparities in disaster resilience. The investigators
will compare Twitter data from two events, Hurricane Isaac and Hurricane Sandy,
both of which occurred in 2012. They will pursue four interrelated research
components: (1) development of data-mining algorithms for the evaluation and
visualization of Twitter data; (2) analysis of social media and resilience
disparities at the community (zip-code) level across the emergency management
cycle; (3) an online survey of Twitter and non-Twitter users to understand
effects of social media use on individual resilience, social networks, social
support, and social disparities; and (4) analysis of bi-directional
communication among residents and governmental and non-governmental
organizations throughout each event cycle. Through an investigation of the
Twitter data before, during, and after the hurricanes coupled with analysis of
online surveys, the researchers will be able to address a set of core research
questions: (1) Are there distinct geographical and social disparities in the use
of social media in disaster resilience? (2) What are the sources and
consequences of such disparities? (3) How do these disparities vary across the
four phases of the disaster cycle? (4) How do these disparities affect
resilience? (5) How can social media data be used to improve resilience? This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.