* 1620841
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at the Fourteenth International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS-16)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Matthew Taylor, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 04/30/2017
* USD 18,000.00

This award supports the participation of a select group of graduate students
from US institutions at the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2016) and the accompanying doctoral mentoring
consortium (DMC) to be held in Singapore, May 9-13, 2016. AAMAS is the premier
conference on multi-agent systems. There is an increasing interest in research
on agents worldwide because of the many technologies where agents are applicable
including: information retrieval, electronic commerce, robotics, and education
tasks among many others.

The DMC will be held before the start of the main conference, enabling the
students to participate fully in all aspects of both the conference and the
consortium. The activities at the DMC will involve interactions at multiple
levels, where: 1) students will present and discuss their work with their peers;
2) students will hone their ability to succinctly describe their research in a
one minute elevator pitch; 3) student research will be shown at a poster
session, open to any conference attendee; and 4) students will be paired with a
mentor from the senior program committee, who will meet with them privately
during the conference to provide feedback on their dissertation topics. The DMC
usually features a selection of invited speakers and culminates with a career
advice panel with researchers from academia, industry, and government. During
the course of the conference, students will have the opportunities to maximize
international interactions and make new professional connections.