* 1620866
* I-Corps: Chaotic Hybrid Encryption Communication Kit (CHECK)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Benito Fernandez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The last decades, information has emerged as the most important asset to protect
for corporations and persons. We often see in the news that cyber-attacks no
longer exclusively target the military or enterprise.The world is more virtual,
and thus more exposed. Everyone - from world governments to business to private
citizens - demands secure communications. There are several patented methods of
encryption available in the market today, most of which rely on digital schemes
to encrypt and decrypt messages. Methods of attack and defense in cyberspace
require constant change, similar to biological arms races between, for instance,
disease and immunity. This project proposes a novel method and apparatus that
can combine analog,computing, digital computing and chaos in order to generate
potentially in nite keys for encryption and decryption. This I-Corps team has
successfully developed intellectual property and a software-only proof-of-
concept of this technology. The long term vision of the invention includes
building a hardware encryption device to secure peer-to-peer communication.
Since the solution will ultimately be implemented in hardware, it will execute
faster than current techniques of similar complexity. In summary, this invention
is a novel way to perform encryption that has tremendous potential to protect
both critical national infrastructure and individual
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology will provide software-
programmable mixed-signal circuitry capable to solve Ordinary Differential
Equations (ODEs) very fast. By configuring the system as a digitally-tunable
hybrid chaotic oscillator the device generates a stream of continuously changing
keys ("infinite key"). The keys are used by the encryption/decryption algorithm
at both ends of the communication. The encryption scheme relies on the
synchronization of two chaotic oscillators, running separately on a hardware
device which generates the same sequence of keys to recover messages. The device
supports integration with industry standard encryption algorithms and can be
installed on organizations using Cyber Physical Systems (CPS). Most CPSs are
fully integrated with computational systems with real-time requirements and
limited processing resources. This team will select two or three industry
(sectors) to resolve through specific applications that use the proposed
technology and rank them. The team will also conduct a market assessment and
prospect interviews with potential customers in order to validate the need for
the proposed technology. Eventually, these might be candidates to alpha/beta-
test to validate the proposed technology.