* 1620843
* Strengths and Weaknesses of Simulated Quantum Annealing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This project will investigate the benefits of quantum annealing for solving
computational problems. It is known that quantum computers that use quantum
mechanical phenomena (such as tunneling, interference, superpositions, and
entanglement) to process information would be able to solve certain problems
that are infeasible to tackle with current day classical computers. However,
there are other computational tasks for which a quantum computer would not
provide any significant benefit. This project on quantum computation
investigates the extent to which quantum computers will outperform classical
ones by comparing the capabilities of quantum algorithms to the power of the
best possible classical algorithms. Quantum annealing is a heuristic quantum
approach for solving general optimization problems. In comparison, simulated
quantum annealing refers to a class of classical algorithms that simulate
quantum annealing dynamics. This project will investigate the extent to which
these classical algorithms are capable of efficiently simulating quantum
computing protocols. The outcomes of this research should clarify whether
quantum computers are needed to achieve the performance of quantum annealing
algorithms, or if this performance can be reproduced using classical
simulations.

This project will quantify the computational power of algorithms that simulate
the quantum mechanical process of annealing. One focus of this project is on the
ability of algorithms that use Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) techniques to find the
ground state in settings where quantum adiabatically these states are found
efficiently. It is sometimes claimed that Quantum Adiabatic Optimization (QAO)
will be superior to classical optimization as it is able to quantum tunnel
through barriers to find the global minimum of cost functions. There is however
also recent evidence that path integral Quantum Monte Carlo algorithms are able
to efficiently simulate this behavior. Part of this project will analyze if the
power of QMC tunneling is indeed identical to that of QAO tunneling. A situation
where QMC appears to fail in simulating quantum adiabatic systems is in the
presence of so-called "topological obstructions". This project will investigate
ways to adjust QMC algorithms to overcome such obstructions. Another topic of
research concerns the possibility of designing a black-box problem that can be
solved efficiently using standard adiabatic optimization but that provably does
not have an efficient classical simulation.