* 1620073
* Collaborative Research: AIM &amp; ICERM Research Experiences for Undergraduate Faculty (REUF)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Leslie Hogben, American Institute of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 231,702.00

Enabling more Americans to earn undergraduate and graduate degrees in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) is important to improving
American innovation capabilities. Participating in research as undergraduates
improves retention in STEM majors and encourages students to pursue graduate
degrees. Faculty at colleges and universities that focus on undergraduate
education are critical to this mission, yet in many cases such faculty receive
little support to do research with the students they teach or continue their own
research, and doctoral programs often fail to train their graduates to mentor
undergraduate research. To address this national need, the American Institute of
Mathematics (AIM) and the Institute for Computational and Experimental Research
in Mathematics (ICERM) will conduct a series of four annual Research Experiences
for Undergraduate Faculty (REUF) workshops during the summers of 2016, 2017,
2018, and 2019. Each REUF workshop and ongoing activities will provide a new
group of faculty participants at undergraduate institutions that have limited
research support with a research experience investigating open questions in the
mathematical sciences and equip them to engage in research with undergraduate
students at their home institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At each REUF workshop
four senior mathematicians (leaders) who have experience doing research with
undergraduate students will present problems in a variety of areas, after which
the participants and leaders will divide into groups and work on the problems;
the workshop will conclude with group presentations of each project. Most of the
time will be spent doing research, but there will also be whole group
discussions about topics such as best practices in undergraduate research led by
the (co)-principal investigators, who also meet daily with the leaders. There
are opportunities to continue work on the projects started in the workshop, and
some participants will become involved in long-term research collaborations with
other faculty at the workshop. The recruitment efforts for REUF will target
faculty at undergraduate colleges and universities that serve a large proportion
of students who are underrepresented minorities, person with disabilities, or
first generation college students, as well as faculty who are themselves
underrepresented or have disabilities. The REUF project will lead to more and
better undergraduate research experiences for the students of the faculty
participants, and greater engagement in mathematical research by the faculty
participants, thus expanding and diversifying the mathematical workforce.