* 1620616
* Sound Velocities and Elastiicity of Deep-earth Mat
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Jay Bass, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 398,000.00

The nature of Earth's interior is highly uncertain, despite its intimate
relationship to processes on Earth's surface such as seismicity, volcanism,
tectonic mountain-building processes, and re-cycling of water and carbon dioxide
into Earth's interior. Earth's internal structure is also related to its thermal
state, the convective flow of material, and its evolution through time. There
are few direct samples of rocks from the Earth's mantle, and even these give a
highly incomplete view of Earth's mantle, down to only several hundred
kilometers depth. By far, the most complete information we have on Earth's
interior mantle and core come from seismology in the form of 3-D tomographic
images of velocity structure. Interpretations of this seismological information
in terms of, for example, chemical composition and thermal state, require
laboratory measurements of sound velocities on the materials that are likely
present at depth. However, such measurements at the extreme pressure-temperature
conditions of Earth's interior are quite challenging and until recently were in
most cases not technically feasible. This project will use recently-developed
experimental facilities and techniques to measure the velocities of candidate
mantle minerals at the actual pressures and temperatures of the Earth's mantle,
from 30-2900 km depth. This project builds upon over a decade of NSF-funded
technology development in the PI's laboratory which makes such measurements
possible. The results of this project should give far better and more accurate
understanding of the state of the Earth's mantle, placing far tighter
constraints on its 3-D chemical composition, the nature of lateral and radial
heterogeneity, and thermal structure. Technical advances made in the course of
this project should be of great interest in cognate condensed matter sciences,
and in materials engineering. This project will provide advanced scientific
training for graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, and should better
enable them to pursue their career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve the measurement of sound velocities of candidate materials of Earth's
mantle at extreme pressure-temperature conditions matching or close to those
present in the mantle. Experiments will be performed by the technique of
Brillouin light scattering on samples that are compressed in a diamond anvil
cell (DAC). Silicate and oxide samples will be heated using a CO2 infrared laser
to produce extreme simultaneous pressure-temperature conditions closely
approximating actual mantle conditions. Measurements will be carried out on
single-crystal samples where possible, thus giving information on velocity
anisotropy which can be used to constrain dynamic flow of material at depth.
Measurements will be performed on isotropic polycrystalline samples as well.
Emphasis will be put on the most likely candidate phases of the upper mantle,
transition zone, and lower mantle. The results of this project should place much
tighter constraints on the chemical composition, mineralogy, and thermal
structure of the mantle, including any possible radial chemical stratification
and lateral chemical heterogeneity.