* 1620622
* Collaborative Research: Detection and mechanics of sinkhole activities in central Florida
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Sarah Kruse, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,193.00

Sinkhole activity in central Florida is a major natural hazard. Over the past
several years, two events in particular attracted media attention. In March
2013, a sinkhole collapsed beneath a house in Seffner and "swallowed" a person
from his bedroom. In August 2013 a sinkhole collapse destroyed a resort complex
near Disney World. These dramatic events, however, are just extreme examples
that stand out from a steady stream of about $200 million per year in property
damage claims, which spike at times of anthropogenic groundwater withdrawals.
Detecting incipient sinkhole activity is a challenging task, because most of the
activity occurs in the subsurface. However, in some cases sinkhole activities
also induce surface subsidence, which can be detected by space-based
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) observations. This project is a
follow up of a proof-of-concept project funded by NSF, in which the researchers
demonstrated that InSAR observations can detect localized patterns of surface
changes in central Florida. However, the detection of slow subsidence using more
advanced InSAR time series techniques requires longer span of acquisitions than
obtained during the limited duration of the initial project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this renewal project, we propose to continue the InSAR-
based detection of sinkhole activity in central Florida by extending the
observation period for two additional years. The longer time series will allow
us to reduce the effect of measurement noise and detect localized slow
subsidence induced by sinkhole activity. The proposed project also includes
geophysical surveys to map sinkhole structure and soil sampling at selected
field sites. In addition, a mechanical modeling effort will examine whether, at
the field sites, InSAR-detected subsidence is compatible with measured
properties of cohesive soils, field data, and simple models for sinkhole
subsidence. This modeling method could be used to assess whether observed
subsidence represents a likely precursor to collapse.