* 1620328
* Self-Healing Materials Enabled through Embedded Sensing and Stimulus Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Henry Sodano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 04/30/2017
* USD 237,133.00

The research objective of this award is to study a new form of autonomous
material that senses the presence of damage and use stimulus to not only heal
the material but to toughen it against the propagation of damage. This objective
will be accomplished through the synthesis of light activated shape memory
polymers that incorporate cinnamic moieties, which are able to undergo efficient
photoreversible cycloaddition reactions when exposed to alternating wavelengths
of light. This reversible reaction will be used to actively cleave and reform
covalent crosslinks to mitigate the propagation of damage though local modulus
changes at the crack tip, achieve shape recovery for crack closure and to
ultimately reform crosslinks across the crack face to recover the strength of
the material. A fiber optic network will be employed to detect and signal the
presence of damage while providing a mechanism to deliver stimulus directly to
the crack tip. The shape memory effect will provide a means to recover the
plastic strain induced at the crack front thus returning the material to its
original geometry, relaxing built up stresses and bringing the crack faces into
intimate contact to allow healing of the damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this award focus on the bridging of structural health
monitoring and autonomous systems that can react to heal damage in a controlled
and repeatable manner. This includes the design of sensor systems and signal
conditioning hardware in coordination with the host structure rather than the ad
hoc deployment currently used. Furthermore, this research will impact the
current state in photoresponsive polymers allowing their integration into a
range of new applications. The goal of the education component is to use the
concept of biologically inspired systems and smart materials to demonstrate the
multidisciplinary character of modern engineering and to stimulate the
educational growth of students.