* 1620198
* Collaborative Research: Algorithm and Theory for Interface Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Lingxing Yao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 162,703.00

Phenomena in which a fluid interacts with an immersed elastic structure abound
in nature and in everyday life. Such fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems
include the swimming of microorganisms, the flying of birds, blood flow in the
heart, and the deformation of leaves in the wind. One powerful way to understand
such FSI problems is through computer simulation. Many FSI problems lead to
challenging computational problems that call for significant improvements over
currently available algorithms. The immersed boundary (IB) method is a popular
computational method for FSI problems, and one major goal of this project is to
understand the mathematical properties of the IB method to aid in the
development of faster and more robust numerical algorithms. Another goal is to
adapt the IB method so that it can handle problems in which fluid (water) can
flow through an elastic structure. Such problems are particularly important for
the understanding of movement and shape changes of biological cells. This cell-
biological aspect of the work will be performed in collaboration with
experimental biophysicists. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students in the mathematical and computational sciences through research on
these problems.

This project consists of two major aims in theory and algorithmic development
for computational problems with moving membrane interfaces. On the theoretical
side, the PIs will establish a convergence theory for the immersed boundary (IB)
method. The IB method is a widely used numerical method for fluid structure
interaction problems, but despite its popularity, its convergence properties are
poorly understood. Convergence analysis for the IB method will be one of the
first to be established for a fluid structure interaction algorithm in which a
dual grid is used; one for the fluid and another for the elastic structure. Such
an analysis will clarify the effect of grid and time discretization parameters
on the stability properties of the IB method. On the algorithmic side, the PIs
will develop a numerical scheme to handle electrodiffusion of ions and
transmembrane water flow in the presence of deformable elastic membranes. A
novel feature of the osmotic water flow problem in contrast to conventional
fluid structure interaction problems is that the interfacial membrane does not
move with respect to the local fluid velocity and that this slip velocity is
controlled by the jump in concentration of a diffusing chemical across the
membrane interface. The fluid structure interaction will be treated with the IB
method whereas chemical diffusion will be treated using a Cartesian embedded
boundary method. This algorithm will be applied to study the interplay between
electrophysiology/osmotic water flow and cell mechanics, an area that is poorly
explored theoretically but whose importance is becoming increasingly clear.