* 1620074
* Beyond the Standard Model in Particle Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Rabindra Mohapatra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,650,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Kaustubh Agashe, Zacharia
Chacko, S. James Gates,Jr. Rabindra N. Mohapatra and Raman Sundrum at the
University of Maryland. The project deals with understanding the fundamental
forces and matter in the universe. Our current understanding of them is based on
the standard model, which has been extremely successful in explaining most known
natural phenomena. There are however several aspects of the model that indicate
that there is a lot of unknown physics beyond it waiting to be unearthed. The
existence of masses for a tiny particle called neutrino that fills the universe
and the existence of dark matter, the dominant form of matter in the universe,
are but two examples which the standard model cannot explain. On a conceptual
level, why the recently discovered Higgs boson weighs as much as it does, why is
there more matter than antimatter in the universe, and why there are three kinds
of building blocks of matter which are very similar, are some other examples
that cry out for physics beyond the standard model for their understanding.
Using the new funding, the investigators will continue their attempts to solve
these problems, using approaches suggested by them and others, and propose ways
to test them at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) as well as planned neutrino
experiments at Fermilab. It is hoped that these studies will uncover new forces
and new forms of matter which will revolutionize our thinking about the universe
and its evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are recognized in the
community for having made seminal contributions to some of the major approaches
to address the problems mentioned : warped extra dimensions (known as "Randall-
Sundrum models"), existence of new boson fermion symmetries (known as
supergravity) and ways to break this symmetry (known as "gaugino- and anomaly
mediated susy breaking"), twin Higgs theory as a way to understand the Higgs
boson mass, grand unification of all forces and matter, left-right symmetry of
all forces as a precursor to grand unification and seesaw mechanism for
understanding why neutrino masses are so tiny. Together with their postdocs and
students they want to continue their activities while at the same time paying
attention to any new discoveries from LHC as well as other experiments