* 1620625
* Problems in Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Robert Sugar, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2017
* USD 158,553.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Joseph Polchinski and
Robert Sugar at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB).

The research of these two professors is in the field of high energy physics. The
long-term objectives of this field are to identify the basic building blocks of
matter and to determine the interactions among them that give rise to the
physical world we observe. Great progress has been made towards these objectives
through the development of the so-called Standard Model of high energy physics,
which provides fundamental descriptions of three of the four interactions of
nature: the strong, electromagnetic and weak. What is missing is a fundamental
theory of gravity, and the unification of gravity with the other interactions.
The objective of Polchinski's work under this grant is to create these missing
elements. Sugar's research, by contrast, is aimed at making very precise
calculations which, when combined with equally precise experiments, will provide
rigorous tests of the Standard Model and possibly point to breakdowns of this
model that will require the development of new physical ideas. Thus, research
under this award advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions. In addition to contributing
to a deeper understanding of the fundamental laws of physics, this project is
also expected to have significant broader impacts. The education of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows is a major activity of the grant. Moreover,
part of the effort associated with Professor Sugar's research is aimed at
developing large-scale computational infrastructure for the entire U.S.
community of physicists working in related areas. The approach being taken has
broad possibilities for application to computationally-intensive problems in
many areas of science and engineering.

More technically, research in quantum gravity will focus on the dynamics of
strings and branes, especially near the black hole horizon. The role of brane
dynamics in string compactification will also be made precise. A wide range of
questions in quantum field theory and holography will be studied, focusing on
basic principles. Research in lattice gauge theory will be directed at the
generation of gauge configurations for multiple applications, the properties of
the light pseudoscalar mesons and B mesons, and the anomalous magnetic moment of
the muon.