* 1620101
* Integrating Three-Dimensional Earthquake Rupture Dynamics, Ocean Acoustic Waves and Tsunami: Effects of Inelastic Failure in the Accretionary Wedge
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Shuo Ma, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 272,652.00

Shallow Subduction zones (upper 10 ? 15 km) host earthquakes on shallow-dipping
plate interfaces and efficient in generating tsunami. The physics of tsunami
generation from earthquake ruptures is, however, not well understood. This
research will extend the researcher's previous earthquake rupture models to 3D
and integrate these models with ocean acoustic waves and tsunami models. The
fully coupled system of earthquake rupture and ocean acoustic waves and tsunamis
provides the principal theoretical means for understanding the physics of these
earthquakes and tsunami generation. These models can also be used extract useful
signals that can be used in differentiating underlying mechanisms and tsunami
early warning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses one of the major
unsolved problems in earthquake mechanics: the physics of anomalous rupture
characteristics and tsunamigenesis in the shallow subduction zone. Why can these
earthquakes generate tsunami efficiently but radiate weak high-frequency energy?
What gives rise to slow rupture velocity and low moment-scaled radiated energy?
Is tsunami generated by large shallow slip near the trench, distributed
inelastic deformation in the wedge, or both? Can ocean acoustic waves be used in
tsunami early warning? How does time-dependent seafloor deformation affect near-
field tsunami? This 3-year research project will include the following
activities: (i) Develop an updated Lagrangian finite-element approach to fully
couple tsunami and ocean acoustic waves with earthquake rupture in 2D and 3D,
and validate it with an existing Eulerian approach. (ii) Simulate along-strike
rupture propagation with and without inelastic wedge failure and examine how
they may significantly affect tsunami and ocean acoustic waves. Test and extract
signals that can be used in tsunami early warning. (iii) Develop dynamic rupture
models of representative tsunami earthquakes and simulate waveforms to
regional/teleseismic distances. Examine the resolving power of teleseismic,
high-rate GPS, and tsunami data.