* 1620418
* OP: Collaborative Research: Landau levels and Dirac points in Continuous Photonic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Michael Weinstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 172,191.00

The science describing the interaction between light and matter has produced a
wide variety of technologically important applications that our society has come
to rely on (for example, fiber optics that form the backbone of the internet,
lasers used in industries ranging from telecommunications to manufacturing,
solar cells used for sustainable energy, and many others). For decades,
researchers have been trying to increase the strength of coupling between light
and matter by engineering artificial dielectric structures (like silicon or
glass) to be in resonance with incoming light. Nearly all such structures have
been patterns that are periodically repeating in space: a kind of microscopic
scaffolding. One of the principal goals of this project is to show that certain
non-periodic structures with no repeating units can facilitate stronger light-
matter coupling than periodic designs. This could open a new design principle
for light-matter interaction and lead to applications like more efficient
lighting, solar cells, or even components for optical quantum computers. The
principal investigators will engineer photonic structures (both waveguide arrays
in silica and photonic crystals in silicon) to have Dirac points in their band
structure. These structures will be "strained" (either imparting physical strain
or by fabricating artificially-strained structures) in such a way that they
become aperiodic and experience a "pseudomagnetic field." This pseudomagnetic
field causes the eigenvalue spectrum to become highly degenerate, leading to a
large density-of-states, which in turn causes stronger light-matter coupling
(Purcell enhancement). This project is a cross-disciplinary endeavor of an
engineer, whose contribution is through fabrication and characterization of
optical media (Kevin Chen, University of Pittsburgh), a physicist (Mikael
Rechtsman, Penn State), who will perform optical experiments and modeling and an
applied mathematician (Michael Weinstein, Columbia), who will co-develop
mathematical PDE / discrete models and analyze these in collaboration with
Rechtsman and Chen. Each of their expertise will be essential for the project's
success.