* 1620384
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Modeling of Incompressible Fluid Dynamics at Moderate Reynolds Numbers by Deconvolution LES Filters - Analysis and Applications to Hemodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Annalisa Quaini, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 179,857.00

Computational fluid dynamics has emerged as a powerful tool to study the
physiopathology of the cardiovascular system and for patient-specific Surgical
Planning (SP) for cardiovascular diseases. Recently, clinical trials - the
standard procedure for understanding diseases and assessing the impact of
therapies and devices in the clinical practice - have been supported by a
massive use of numerical simulations to improve the knowledge extracted from
measured data, leading to Computer Aided Clinical Trials (CACT). For a large
variety of pathologies involving the aorta - the major artery of the circulation
- this requires to work with turbulent flows. While Direct Numerical Simulation
in this context can be appropriate for a proof of concept, for the large number
of patients involved in CACT and SP we need different numerical tools to provide
the appropriate trade-off between accuracy and reliability needed by clinical
applications and computational efficiency needed by tight deadlines. As CACT and
SP are new emerging concepts in cardiovascular mathematics, an appropriate
numerical modeling of turbulent physiological flows for clinical applications is
now an unmet need that we intend to solve in this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A possible way to limit the computational costs
associated with Direct Numerical Simulations without sacrificing accuracy is to
solve the flow average and model properly the effects of the small scales (not
directly solved) at the medium and large scales (solved). We intend to
investigate carefully new cutting-edge methods for disturbed flows based on
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) Deconvolution filtering techniques with the ultimate
goal of enabling practical use of numerical tools to improve knowledge
extraction and clinical practice through CACT and SP. The main objective of this
research is the development and the analysis of a robust and accurate LES based
approach requiring no or minimal user's set-up for realistic incompressible flow
problems with application to computational hemodynamics. We articulate the
project in the following points: (a) Sensitivity analysis of key parameters
involved in the method to understand their impact on the solution, leading to an
automated parameter set-up through physical and numerical arguments. (b)
Development and analysis of high-order in time methods, particularly for the
computation of the pressure, with consequent improvement of the mass
conservation properties. (c) Analysis of the impact of our LES approach on non-
Dirichlet boundary conditions and the possible backflow stabilizing effects. We
plan to test the method on both academic and real bioengineering problems.
Finally, we plan to deliver a finite element open source library incorporating
the findings of our research, available for CACT and SP.