* 1620655
* Collaborative Research: Investigating fault geometries and rupture processes in the Nepal Himalaya following the April 25, 2015 Gorkha earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Abhijit Ghosh, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 186,804.00

Following the April 25, 2015 Gorkha magnitude 7.8 and the May 12, 2015 magnitude
7.3 earthquakes, the largest earthquakes to occur in the central segment of the
Himalaya in 80 years, a collaborative team from Oregon State University, U.C.
Riverside, Stanford University, and the University of Texas at El Paso deployed
an NSF RAPID-funded aftershock array of 45 seismic stations (41 broadband and
short-period seismometers, 14 strong motion sensors) across the Main Himalayan
Thrust (MHT) fault where the large earthquakes occurred. The array, known as the
Nepal Array Measuring Aftershock Seismicity Trailing Earthquake (NAMASTE)
remained in place for 11 months, allowing for a unique data set right over the
active Himalayan thrust system. In this proposal, this same collaborative team
will analyze the newly collected data set specifically to study the geometry of
faults, including the MHT fault, the composition of the crust and upper mantle
in the region, the rupture process of this earthquake sequence, and the broader
geotectonic setting in the Himalaya and southern Tibet. Collaboration and
cooperation between U.S. and Nepalese seismologists is essential to this
project, thereby contributing to improvements of Nepalese scientific
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly collected, high quality NAMASTE
array data will allow for a better understanding of the tectonic setting and
rupture process of these large earthquakes and will both illuminate the
processes causing large Himalayan earthquakes as well as large subduction zone
earthquakes. Specifically, we will analyze the NAMASTE array data to address: 1)
The geometry of the MHT fault zone, 2) the crustal composition in the MHT
region, 3) the fault dynamics from aftershock characterization, and 4) the
broader geotectonic setting. To address the geometry of the MHT, we will perform
precise aftershock locations, develop a robust seismicity catalog from the
NAMASTE and other regional arrays, and perform source characterization of
aftershocks that will provide meaningful insights into the fault geometry, slip
dynamics, source properties, and evolving state of stress during the aftershock
sequence. To determine crustal composition, we will use local earthquake
tomography and ambient noise tomography to derive crustal velocities and use
known relationships between velocity and crustal composition and assess the
presence and role of fluids in the crust, especially in the regions of active
faulting. For fault dynamics, we will examine the spatiotemporal distribution of
aftershocks and relation with rupture patches obtained by backprojection to
allow for a better understanding of the rupture process and stress changes that
occurred during the main shock and aftershocks. Finally, we will explore the
broader geotectonic setting of the region by combining NAMASTE array data with
other regional stations to derive tomographic velocity models, crustal and upper
mantle anisotropy, and Moho and possibly lithospheric depths from receiver
functions. We will further compare our seismology datasets with other
geophysical and geological datasets (e.g., magnetotellurics, gravity, surface
mapping, deformation) to derive the best possible understanding to date of the
tectonics of the Himalaya and southern Tibet in Nepal and the surrounding
countries.