* 1620898
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of longitudinal multiscale data in immunological bioinformatics --- Feature selection, graphical models, and structure identification
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Hua Liang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 146,190.00

This project aims to develop a system of statistical analysis tools to tackle
several important challenges in analysis of complex bioinformatics data, which
involves a variety of response variables and tens of thousands independent
variables. The interest often lies in identifying the key independent variables
associated with the response variables, and understanding such associations as
well as the interactions among the independent
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extreme magnitude and complexity of
bioinformatics data have posed serious challenges for data analysis. To overcome
these challenges, we propose (i) to systematically and properly integrate multi-
scale data before we can apply our novel modeling and analysis methods since the
data we explore are collected by numerous independent studies at phenotypic,
cellular, protein, and genetic levels with information from very different time
and dimension scales; (ii) to develop feature screening criteria for a mixed
type of longitudinal data using the combination of correlation tests in
bivariate longitudinal regression models and the Benjamini-Hochberg-Yekutieli
procedure, (iii) to develop graphical models that allow the variables being a
mix of continuous and discrete longitudinal variables, with the nodes
representing variables and each edge indicating the dependence of the two
relevant variables conditional on the other variables; and (iv) to investigate
the functioning form of each predictor by resorting to the data themselves under
the framework of a mixed effects regression model with a continuous or discrete
response and a high dimensional vector of predictors, with the resulting
procedure allowing a user to simultaneously determine the form of each predictor
effect to be zero, linear or nonlinear.