* 1620390
* RUI:  Efficient Algorithms for Compressed Sensing and Matrix Completion
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Jeffrey Blanchard, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2019
* USD 116,309.00

Traditionally, a signal is measured by acquiring every component in the signal
and then compressing the signal with an appropriate computational algorithm. For
example, digital cameras capture an image with a huge number of pixels and then
a compression scheme such as JPEG is used to reduce the size of the digital
image for storage or dissemination. In many applications, the costs and
challenges associated with acquiring measurements are considerable. In
compressed sensing and matrix completion, the measurement process is altered in
order to drastically reduce the number of measurements, but the signal
reconstruction process is necessarily more difficult. Compressed sensing and
matrix completion transfer the workload from the measurement process to
computational resources dedicated to the signal reconstruction. Typical
applications include compressive radar, geophysical data analysis, medical
imaging, and computer vision. This project will take a holistic approach to data
acquisition and algorithm development for compressed sensing and matrix
completion where theoretical guarantees often rely on computationally expensive
subroutines and apply to computationally burdensome measurement processes.
Increased efficiency can be achieved through sparse measurement operators,
relaxed subroutine requirements in iterative greedy algorithms, and the
implementation of these algorithms on computation accelerating
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compressed sensing combines the acts of signal
acquisition and compression into a single operation. Computationally efficient
algorithms then produce accurate approximations to sparse signals by exploiting
the underlying simplicity that the signal has relatively few important
components. Matrix completion similarly exploits the simplicity of the target
matrix having only a few independent columns; in other words, one recovers a low
rank matrix from a limited number of measurements. While leading greedy
algorithms for compressed sensing and matrix completion have theoretical
guarantees defining the number of measurements required for accurately
recovering the underlying low dimensional signal, these guarantees require many
more measurements than practical for applications. Furthermore, many of the
algorithms employ theoretically useful but computationally expensive
subroutines. Observed performance of more computationally efficient measurement
operators encourages the adoption of techniques in practice that lack worst
case, uniform guarantees for acquisition and reconstruction. This project seeks
to balance the competing desires for theoretical guarantees and fast, efficient
algorithms. The project will pursue theoretically viable algorithms which are
also practically useful and provide solutions to linear inverse problems in
reasonable amounts of computational effort including power, time, and affordable
hardware. At the same time, establishing empirical performance characteristics
for computationally efficient measurement operators and recovery algorithms
which lack precise guarantees will help guide practitioners and theorists in
future research. To provide near real time solutions to these computationally
intensive algorithms, the project will also further accelerate computation by
designing and disseminating algorithm implementations which exploit the
massively parallel computations available on high performance computing graphics
processing units.