* 1620613
* Collaborative Research: The Uplift and Seismic Structure of the Greater Caucasus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* John Nabelek, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 271,672.00

This project uses the Greater Caucasus Mountains in southern Asia as a natural
laboratory to study the early stages of mountain building. Using data from over
106 new seismic stations in Azerbaijan, Armenia, Russia, and Georgia, the
researchers gain a better understanding of the recent uplift of the Greater
Caucasus and the nature of earthquake related deformation in the region. This
research helps gain better understanding of the processes that lead to the
formation of mountain belts on Earth and the sub surface processes that lead to
large earthquakes and volcanoes in a continental collision. This project
includes improving seismic hazard assessment in continental deformation belts
where thousands of lives and billions of dollars are at risk from recurrent
devastating earthquakes including some of the world's largest energy producers.
The aim is to improve the scientific community's understanding of earthquake
hazards and the forces that are actively deforming the earth in a very young
mountain belt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Caucasus region is a logistically and
politically challenging region to collect seismic data; however, we have managed
to establish collaborative agreement with all of the countries involved in this
project to share the data with one another. Due to a lack of quality data, the
region has largely been unexplored in terms of the detailed uppermost mantle and
crustal seismic structure thus this work is nearly guaranteed to find first
order information concerning deep structure beneath the Greater Caucasus. This
seismic experiment has two components: (1) a grid of stations spanning the
Greater Caucasus and (2) a seismic transect consisting of passive stations
spaced at distances of less 5 km that crosses the Greater Caucasus. In addition
to the temporary stations, this research integrates data from the national
networks to produce high resolution images of the seismic structure. The primary
scientific question that this project intends to resolve with the images of the
deep subsurface structure is the uplift mechanisms for the Greater Caucasus and
how these relate to the uplift mechanisms for mountain belts in general.