* 1620548
* Collaborative Research: Density and structure of s
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Yanbin Wang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 336,000.00

Silicates, the major constituents of Earth's outer crust and rocky mantle
layers, melt at very high temperatures, especially at deeper depths. Liquid
forms of silicates played a pivotal role in the early evolution history of
planet Earth and continue to influence dynamic processes in present day. The
early Earth was most likely molten after the formation process. As the Earth
cooled off, liquid silicates solidified and crystals of particular compositions
formed at various stages of the cooling process, defining the composition
structure of the Earth as we have today. Giant amounts of magmas are ascending
from present-day mid-ocean ridges, a process closely related to plate tectonics.
The cooling products of these magmas form the ocean floors. Volcanic activities
over the globe change the environment and endangering human lives. Understanding
the dynamics and thermodynamics of these processes requires knowledge of
density, viscosity, and structure of silicate liquids over a wide range of
pressure conditions corresponding to the Earth's interior. Efforts for obtaining
such knowledge have been impeded by technical challenges in the past. To
overcome the technical challenges, the investigators have developed a series of
synchrotron-based techniques for studying density, compressibility, and
structure of silicate liquids under high pressure and temperature conditions.
This research will support the training and mentoring of a graduate student and
post doc, and will provide support to early career scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to study structure-density
relations of liquids with selected compositions in the system Na2O-CaO-MgO-FeO-
Al2O3-SiO2 to cover major components of mafic to ultramafic liquids relevant to
deep mantle melting, by combining advanced techniques using large-volume presses
and synchrotron radiation. Structure data will be collected in the Paris-
Edinburgh press to 20 GPa and 2500 K. Density will be determined using both in-
situ X-ray absorption and ex-situ sink/float techniques. To complement density
measurements, sound velocities of selected low-viscosity liquid compositions
will be measured using ultrasonic interferometry in a double-stage multianvil
press. With these data the team will examine the link between structure and
density/compressibility across the pressure range where tetrahedral-to-
octahedral coordination change of network formers (Si and Al) occurs. This work
will provide vital experimental constraints on modeling liquid compression at
deep mantle conditions, by (1) gaining insights into structural evolution of
silicate liquids through coordination changes over the pressure range covering
the upper mantle, transition zone, and the top of the lower mantle (2) obtaining
data on density and acoustic velocity through the coordination transition in
liquids, and (3) establishing new equations of state for silicate liquids
incorporating structural information, to enable better prediction of liquid
density under deep mantle conditions.