* 1620476
* CAREER:  Soil organic carbon dynamics in response to long-term ecological changes in drylands: an integrated program for carbon cycle research and enhancing climate change literacy
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Heather Throop, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 259,426.00

Understanding the consequences and controls of changes in the global carbon
cycle is critical to both science and society. Equally crucial to society is an
informed public that is able to respond to the societal challenges of climate
change with sound scientific knowledge. This project is an integrated research
and teaching program that will enhance understanding of the controls over the
storage of carbon in dryland soils, and implement educational initiatives to
enhance ecological and climate literacy in rural southern New Mexico. Drylands
are extremely important in the global carbon cycle: they account for a large
proportion of global land area, and widespread changes in land cover and
disturbances in these areas may strongly affect soil carbon pools. Soil carbon
dynamics are particularly poorly understood in drylands, where controls may be
distinctly different from those in better-studied, less dry systems due to
differences in plant inputs, vegetation cover, disturbance regimes, and climate.
A suite of new analytical techniques will be used to assess the sources and
stability of soil carbon pools in drylands. These techniques will be used to
address three questions: 1) How do changes in above- and belowground plant
inputs affect dryland soil carbon content and stability? 2) How do differences
in historical land management and vegetation affect soil carbon? 3) How do soil
disturbances and vegetation change caused by desert rodents affect soil carbon
content and stability? Together, these studies will provide important
information about current and future soil carbon dynamics and their feedback to
the climate system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational outreach is a central
focus of this project. Early exposure to scientific ideas in children is vital
for stimulating interest in science and laying the foundation for scientific
literacy. As such, educational initiatives in this project will focus on
enhancing ecological and climate literacy in elementary-level students and
teachers. An inquiry based elementary curriculum focused on desert ecology and
climate change will be developed, field-tested, and disseminated. To further
enhance elementary education, courses will be developed for teachers on the use
of innovative technological tools to engage students in ecosystem science.
Elementary curriculum development and field testing will provide support to an
after-school program in a high-poverty school district with high minority
enrollment. Climate change literacy in the local community will be enhanced
through curriculum dissemination and teacher education courses and workshops.