* 1620386
* Constraining depth dependent anisotropy in Australia through Ps Receiver function analysis, frequency-dependent shear wave splitting and forward modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Heather Ford, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2021
* USD 158,348.00

The continental lithosphere has witnessed much of the Earth's geologic and
biologic evolution, giving us an unprecedented view into our planet's history.
While our understanding of many aspects of the physical evolution of the Earth
has flourished in recent years, fundamental gaps in our knowledge of some
processes persist. One particular deficiency is in our understanding of the
structure and geologic evolution of continents. While oceanic lithosphere has a
life cycle that begins at mid-ocean ridges and ends at subduction zones, we
still do not have a clear understanding of how the continental lithosphere first
formed, or why the lithosphere has remained stable over billions of years,
despite undergoing significant deformation in later tectonic events. In
Australia, the oldest parts of the continental lithosphere are dated to about
3.2 billion years old, making it an excellent location for testing out
hypotheses related to continental formation and evolution. Detailed geologic
studies over decades have placed constraints on the timing of many of
Australia's major tectonic events. However, observations of seismic anisotropy,
which are used to infer information about tectonic deformation, tell a story
about the Australian lithosphere that is significantly more complicated than
what is inferred from the surface geology. The goal of this project is to use
newly developed seismological methods to provide a more detailed and accurate
picture of seismic anisotropy to help infer the tectonic evolution within the
Australian continent, in order to better understand the processes of continental
formation, assembly and evolution more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
character of the anisotropic structure in the mantle lithosphere and
asthenosphere beneath Australia represents a long-standing puzzle, largely
because inferences gleaned from different data analysis methods (SKS splitting
vs. surface wave tomography) often conflict. This proposal will apply frequency-
dependent SKS splitting analysis and anisotropic Ps receiver function analysis
to place more precise constraints on the lateral and depth variability of
anisotropy beneath the Australian continent. The proposed work has three
specific goals: 1) Use data from 26 permanent broadband stations to measure
frequency-dependent SKS splitting and apply Ps receiver function analysis, and
for a subset of stations, carry out detailed forward modeling of the structure
and compare results across methods for a subset of these stations. 2)
Investigate the origin of depth-dependent anisotropy beneath Australia by
analyzing models for anisotropic structure in terms of tectonic history and
setting. 3) Understand the origin of the discrepancies between azimuthally
anisotropic surface wave models and SKS splitting observations beneath Australia
via comparisons with the independent depth-dependent models. Some specific
science questions addressed by this work include: How does anisotropy vary with
depth beneath the Australian continent? Do variations in anisotropic structure
correspond to geologic and/or tectonic structures? Does the anisotropic
structure of the mantle lithosphere shed light on past episodes of deformation?
Why have previous studies identified discrepancies between surface wave
tomography models and SKS splitting observations?