* 1620082
* Accurate Preconditioing for Computing Eigenvalues of Large and Extremely Ill-conditioned Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Computations of eigenvalues of large matrices arise in a wide range of
scientific and engineering applications, including, for example, page ranking of
the Google Search Engine. Large scale eigenvalue problems are often inherently
ill-conditioned which implies that their eigenvalues differ vastly in magnitude.
This poses a significant challenge to the existing eigenvalue algorithms in the
sense that smaller eigenvalues computed may have a poor accuracy, caused by
roundoff errors in computer arithmetic. This project will develop new algorithms
to address this numerical difficulty. The research results will have
applications in a variety of problems where extreme ill-conditioning arises. In
particular, a notable ill-conditioning problem is the biharmonic differential
operator, which has been used in modeling and design of rigid elastic structures
such as beams, plates, or solids, in constructions of multivariate splines, as
well as in geometric modeling and computer graphics. A discrete version of the
biharmonic operator has also found applications in circuits, image processing,
mesh deformation, and manifold learning. With the discretized biharmonic
operators easily becoming extremely ill-conditioned, this research will resolve
the numerical accuracy issues of the existing algorithms for these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing smaller eigenvalues of large and
extremely ill-conditioned matrices is an important and intellectually
challenging task. Indeed, the effect of ill-conditioning on accuracy is often
regarded as an unsolvable problem that is attributable to the formulation of the
eigenvalue problem itself. While recent research results have shown that this
may be mitigated by exploring structures of matrices, the main objective of this
project is to propose an innovative use of preconditioning as a new general
methodology to solve the accuracy issue caused by ill-conditioning. We will
develop new methods that combine preconditioning with accurate structured
inversion methods to accurately compute smaller eigenvalues of an extremely ill-
conditioned matrix. As an application, we will also study various discretization
schemes and derive suitable structured preconditioners for biharmonic
differential operators.