* 1620251
* Seismological Investigations of Earthquakes and Deep Earth Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 603,993.00

Networks of global seismic stations now record vast amounts of data, which have
a wealth of information about both earthquakes and deep Earth structure.
However, analysis of these data has lagged because traditional methods are time-
intensive and do not fully exploit the capabilities of modern computers. By
applying automated methods to hundreds or thousands of seismograms, it is often
possible to resolve new features in the data, or to perform more comprehensive
analyses of problems that were previously addressed on smaller scales. This U.C.
San Diego project develops and applies these new methods to examine a variety of
topics. These include: (1) Using scattered seismic waves to understand the
frequency and strength of small-scale structures in the deep Earth, (2)
Comparing and testing different methods to image large earthquake ruptures, (3)
Examining the frequency content of seismic waves to test whether large
earthquakes differ in fundamental ways from smaller earthquakes, and (4)
Studying sharp interfaces in the Earth's upper mantle using reflections of
seismic waves off these boundaries. This research is likely to lead to improved
models of Earth structure and earthquake rupture
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing availability of large numbers of
high-quality digital records from the global seismic networks has made possible
a variety of new ways to study earthquakes and deep Earth structure. By
analyzing hundreds or thousands of seismograms, it is often possible to resolve
new features in the data, or to perform more comprehensive analyses of problems
that were previously addressed on smaller scales. This project will continue
analyses of global seismic data at U.C. San Diego to examine a variety of
geophysical issues. These include: (1) Observation and modeling of scattered
energy between major body-wave seismic phases to constrain the statistical
properties of mantle heterogeneity at scale lengths shorter than can be resolved
using seismic tomography, (2) Exploration of the resolution limits of back-
projection compared to finite-fault and multiple-CMT approaches for resolving
complex ruptures, and systematic application of back-projection to study recent
large earthquakes, (3) Analysis of teleseismic P-wave spectra to estimate stress
drops and radiated energy from large earthquakes and address earthquake scaling
issues, (4) Stacking global and USArray seismograms to resolve upper-mantle
discontinuities using topside reflections. This project supports the educational
program at U.C. San Diego by providing funds for graduate and postdoctoral
students. This research is likely to lead to improved models of Earth structure
and earthquake rupture processes, which will be of interest to the tectonics,
geodynamics and mineral physics communities. Some of the results may help inform
and contribute to future estimates of seismic risk from large earthquakes.
Results will be widely disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, and material provided to SIO?s education and outreach programs.