* 1620541
* Weaving Stability from Dissipation: Fixed-Point Engineering for Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Lorenza Viola, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Understanding how physical systems approach equilibrium is a central question in
statistical physics, and this topic is all the more profound when systems behave
according to the laws of quantum mechanics. As a familiar example, consider how
a hot cup of tea or a cold glass of water equilibrate to room temperature. One
cools down while the other warms up; but in each case individual molecular
interactions affect the rate and the fluctuations with which these systems
approach equilibrium. A more nuanced example comes from the field of quantum
computing, where information can be encoded in the quantum mechanical spin
states of individual molecules. One compelling motivation for this is to produce
more powerful computers with memory and information processing capabilities far
superior to today's classical computers. However, since relaxation towards
equilibrium can disorganize the quantum information stored in molecules,
equilibration is normally considered an obstacle or a hindrance for quantum
computing. The goal of this project is to find ways to utilize the stability of
states near equilibrium in order to improve quantum computing protocols. Methods
to characterize and influence the stability of multi-particle quantum states
will be developed. Techniques to "attract" or nudge any given initial state
towards a set of stable equilibrium states that contain genuinely non-classical
multi-particle correlations ("entanglement") needed for quantum computing will
be explored. This research will address fundamental questions about the
conditions under which stabilization to a desired quantum state may be achieved,
and it will expand the toolkit and of methods to characterize and control
dissipative quantum systems. This project also provides education and training
for students working on subjects at the cross-disciplinary boundaries between
quantum information science, quantum control theory, applied mathematics, and
many-body and statistical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last few
years, the principal investigator has established rigorous conditions for a
general quantum state of interest to be the unique fixed point of a class of
continuous-time "frustration-free" Markovian dynamics, subject to realistic
locality constraints. Building on these results, this project aims to explore
quantum stabilization problems in physical settings that remain largely
uncharted as yet -- for instance: (i) Continuous-time Markovian dynamics under
more general constraints than imposed by locality, including sensitivity to
perturbations and periodically time-varying Floquet-Markov generators; (ii)
Constrained discrete-time Markovian dynamics, for which the intriguing
possibilities of exact dissipative state preparation and dissipative encoding in
finite time arise; (iii) Randomized open-system dynamics, which may shed light
on the stabilizability properties of generic (random) target states or
subspaces. The methods to be employed will be both analytical and numerical, and
will draw on a diverse range of tools from applied mathematics and quantum
control theory (including operator algebras, Lyapunov stability techniques, and
semi-definite programming), to quantum information theory and many-body physics
(notably, entanglement theory, information-preserving structures, and tensor-
network techniques). Theoretically, a central theme will be to clarify the
extent to which core features from many-body and statistical mechanics -- in
particular, the complexity of quantum correlations in the equilibrium state, the
lack of frustration, the gapped nature or the commutativity of the underlying
"parent" Hamiltonians -- may be brought to bear on the feasibility and
efficiency of stabilization tasks for quantum information processing. From a
practical standpoint, the goal of these investigations is to improve protocols
for dissipative quantum state preparation and quantum information encoding.