* 1620846
* Constraints on Multiparticle Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* David Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

Systems that are composed of quantum particles, such as electrons, can have a
property called "entanglement". A fundamental consequence of entanglement is
that the measurements on distinct particles can be correlated in ways that would
be impossible for classical particles. Technological consequences of
entanglement include the possibility of building secure quantum communication
systems, and quantum computers which will solve certain problems more
efficiently than classical computers. But entanglement has some limitations. For
example, if two particles are completely entangled with each other, neither can
be entangled at all with any other particle. This phenomenon is called "monogamy
of entanglement" and has implications for the ground (lowest energy) state of
some solids. This fundamental point about entanglement helps explain the
technologically valuable behavior of some materials, such as antiferromagnets,
which are useful as magnetic field sensors. The goal of this project is to more
fully understand the limitations on entanglements between multiple particles in
quantum systems. In addition to implications for ground states of quantum
solids, the results may reveal fundamental limits on the capacity of quantum
communication networks, or the computational power of quantum computers. The
project will involve training of research scientists and graduate students, and
will be coordinated with a graduate course on quantum information and
computation taught at UC San Diego by the PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monogamy in
three particle systems is a consequence of a linear monogamy inequality stating
that the entanglement between particles A and B, plus the entanglement between
particles A and C is no greater than the entanglement between A and the pair of
particles BC. This inequality is satisfied by several measures of entanglement
between qubits (particles with a 2 dimensional internal degree of freedom, like
spin 1/2 particles): the squared concurrence and the squared negativity, for
example. This is not the complete story in the latter case, however: a more
restrictive nonlinear inequality is satisfied by the squared negativity. This
project will develop methods (some from computational algebraic geometry and
linear matrix inequalities) to determine such new, nonlinear constraints on
entanglement. These will also include constraints on symmetrical sets of
entanglements, e.g., between A and B, B and C, C and A, which will be new, and
distinct from the original monogamy constraints. Related methods will be
developed to derive nonlinear constraints on higher dimensional particles (e.g.,
"qutrits" rather than qubits), more than three particles, and also measures of
entanglement among more than two particles, like the 3-tangle.