* 1620542
* Non-Perturbative Aspects of Quantum Field Theory and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Simone Giombi, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Simone Giombi at Princeton
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past several years, research in
theoretical physics has uncovered a surprising and far-reaching correspondence
between gravity and the other fundamental forces of nature. One of the main
underlying themes of this research program will be the exploration of this
correspondence and its implications. Research in this area has the potential to
answer deep questions about the behavior of strongly interacting matter and may
also shed light on the problem of reconciling gravity with quantum mechanics,
the framework that lies at the basis of our understanding of all other
fundamental forces. As a result, this research program serves the national
interest by improving our understanding of the fundamental laws of nature, hence
promoting the progress of basic science. This project is also envisioned to have
a number of educational and broader impacts. While working on specific research
problems, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will receive extensive
mentoring and training. Undergraduate students will also be supervised and
actively involved in research topics related to this program. Professor Giombi
plans to develop special courses for graduate students and advanced
undergraduates on recent trends in theoretical physics. He is also active in
giving lectures at various international schools, as well as organizing
workshops and conferences, with a focus on those with interdisciplinary aspects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Giombi's research program is
centered on fundamental aspects of quantum field theory and quantum gravity in
various space-time dimensions, with a focus on the interplay between these
subjects via the so-called gauge/gravity duality. The PI's research consists of
several interrelated key areas. A substantial effort will be devoted to a deep
study of gravitational theories of massless higher-spin fields and their role in
the gauge/gravity duality; in particular, this may lead to a direct derivation
of the duality in a simplified setting, but it may also offer novel insights on
non-perturbative aspects of quantum field theories such as 2+1 dimensional gauge
theories coupled to fundamental matter fields. A closely related direction will
involve studying the space of Conformal Field Theories (CFT) in various
dimensions, using non-perturbative tools such as the conformal bootstrap, and
investigating in particular the general constraints on Renormalization Group
Flows between CFT's. Many CFT's find application in concrete physical problems,
such as in various condensed matter systems. Hence the research carried out in
this program will be of intellectual value across various fields of physics.