* 1620319
* IBSS-L: Developing, Testing, and Designing from a Computational Theory of Online Communities
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 919,979.00

This interdisciplinary research project will build and test a computational
theory describing the factors and processes that influence the success of online
communities. The investigators will develop and test new theories during the
course of this project in order to better predict community success at multiple
levels of analysis, including members' support, community maintenance,
production, and key stakeholder benefits. The computational theory produced in
this research will provide new scientific insights to explain variations in
success in existing online communities and new engineering insights that can be
applied to improve design choices. The project will advance knowledge of how
these design factors interact to affect community success and member experiences
in online communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the popularity of Wikipedia,
Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs), peer funding and lending sites, and
online health support groups demonstrates, online communities have become
commercially and societally important platforms for peer content production,
information exchange, education, and social interaction. Although some
communities succeed, the majority of newly created ones fail to survive or to
achieve their goals to involve members or produce valuable artifacts. Even
within a successful community like Wikipedia or the peer lending site Kiva, some
subgroups are more successful than others. One reason for failure is the lack of
evidence-based guidance for building and managing online communities as well as
the paucity of techniques to predict the effects of design and management
decisions before implementation. Prior research on online community success
consists of empirical studies and specialized theories to explain single facets
of community success, such as membership commitment or contribution. Commercial
firms routinely use A/B testing to make specific design choices in their
communities. There have been few attempts, however, to build a comprehensive,
evidence-based theory to explain how online communities' attributes and
processes interplay to determine their success. This investigators will use
agent-based modeling, a computer simulation technique that models the decisions
individual community members make in joining, contributing to, or leaving the
community. They will draw on and integrate component theories from social
psychology, economics, organizational behavior, and communications to model
these decisions. They will use empirical data from three distinct communities --
crowd-lending teams, health support groups, and peer support forums within STEM
classes -- to ground and test the model. Once empirical research has verified
that the model can account for behavior in the communities as they currently
exist, the model will be used to explore how to improve communities by
instituting changes with respect to the size and diversity of subgroups, content
and connections recommendations, and leaderboard design. The investigators will
use virtual and field experiments to test predictions from the model. This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.