* 1620095
* Support for ILCC 2016: International Liquid Crystal Conference; Kent State University
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Peter Palffy-Muhoray, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 04/30/2017
* USD 40,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research, together with the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, and the Office for Multidisciplinary Activities contribute funds to
this award that provides support for the International Liquid Crystal
Conference, which will be held at Kent State University from July 31st to August
5th 2016. This is a highly interdisciplinary meeting that brings together a
diverse group of leading researchers, including scientists and engineers from
academia and industry, whose work covers the range from basic science to device
manufacturing. In this instance of the conference, applied mathematics is
included as a session topic for the first time. The general aim of the
conference will be to facilitate the exchange of ideas about current and
interesting problems related to liquid crystals, to discuss recent findings and
developments in the field, to determine future research directions, and to
enable future collaborations among the participants. NSF support will enable the
participation of 12 early-career scientists and 21 students, who might not
otherwise be able to attend. Students and postdoctoral researchers will also
benefit from mentorship activities during the conference.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research, together with the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, and the Office for Multidisciplinary Activities contribute funds to
this award that provides support for the International Liquid Crystal
Conference, which will be held at Kent State University from July 31st to August
5th 2016. This is a highly interdisciplinary meeting that brings together a
diverse group of leading researchers, including scientists and engineers from
academia and industry, whose work covers the range from basic science to device
manufacturing. In this instance of the conference, applied mathematics is
included as a session topic for the first time. The general aim of the
conference will be to facilitate the exchange of ideas about current and
interesting problems related to liquid crystals, to discuss recent findings and
developments in the field, to determine future research directions, and to
enable future collaborations among the participants. NSF support will enable the
participation of 12 early-career scientists and 21 students, who might not
otherwise be able to attend. Students and postdoctoral researchers will also
benefit from mentorship activities during the conference.