* 1620059
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Igor Klebanov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 840,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Igor Klebanov and Herman
Verlinde at Princeton University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the deepest
outstanding problems in fundamental physics is the merger of Einstein's theory
of gravity with the known fact that the microscopic world is described by
quantum mechanics. Einstein's theory predicts that the most compact possible
objects are black holes, whose gravity is so strong that even light cannot
escape; remarkably, such black holes appear to be abundantly present in the
universe. Another salient prediction of Einstein's theory, gravitational waves
(small "ripples" in the fabric of space-time), were observationally confirmed
over the past year. However, a reconciliation between Einstein's theory of
gravity and quantum mechanics has evaded a complete solution for many years.
Recently it has been shown that certain quantum theories of gravity may be
described by more conventional quantum-mechanical systems. This identification
can teach us a great deal about the quantum behavior of black holes and about
the evolution of the universe as a whole, thereby extending scientific knowledge
at its most fundamental level. As a result, research in this area advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most
fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical laws.
One of the goals of the research funded under this grant is to gain more
thorough insight into the remarkable relation between Einstein's gravity and
quantum-mechanical systems, and to use it to describe black holes and cosmology.
Another goal is to better understand the behavior of matter when certain
parameters such as the temperature and pressure are varied. This project also
has an important educational and mentoring component which includes engaging
students and postdocs in research and thereby preparing them for successful
scientific careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, this
research will explore cutting-edge topics concerning gauge/gravity dualities,
including their quantum-informational aspects and the emergence of an
approximate locality in the gravitational description of quantum systems as well
as the description of gravitational theories that contain fields of arbitrarily
high intrinsic spin. A significant component of this research will explore
quantum field theories which have conformal symmetry. Such theories describe
certain second-order phase transitions. Via the gauge/gravity duality, conformal
field theories are related to quantum gravity in negatively curved anti-de
Sitter space. Conformal field theories in more than two dimensions will be
studied using the methods of dimensional continuation and 1/N expansion. New
information concerning quantum entanglement entropy in conformal field theories
will be extracted. Studies of conformal field theory in two space-time
dimensions and nearly-conformal quantum mechanics can teach us a great deal
about low-dimensional models of quantum gravity and the properties of black
holes.