* 1620507
* Collaborative Research:  Probing the frictional behavior of the Tohoku megathrust using GPS, seismicity, and physics-based models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2019
* USD 161,455.00

The largest earthquakes in the world occur in subduction zones, such as the
Cascadia Subduction Zone in the northwestern US, where oceanic plates dive into
Earth's mantle. The devastating magnitude 9, 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake in
northern Japan is a notable example, and by far the best instrumented giant
earthquake in history. The data from this quake presents a unique opportunity to
understand what controls the frequency and size of subduction zone earthquakes.
Prior to 2011 it was known that the northern Japan subduction zone exhibited
both slow sliding (fault creep without earthquakes) which relaxes stress, as
well as rapid slip in earthquakes. It had been, erroneously, thought that the
creeping zones would limit the area that could slip in large earthquakes such
that magnitude 9 events were not possible. The researchers past work has shown
that, contrary to expectation, the same part of the fault can exhibit both creep
and earthquakes. This new project develops a rigorous physics-based
understanding of the mechanical properties that control how and when fault creep
occurs. Models will be tested against precise GPS measurements, which quantify
how rapidly stress builds up, as well as small earthquakes which track fault
creep. Previous analysis of GPS data recorded in Japan showed that fault creep
accelerated in the decades leading up to the magnitude 9; remarkably this was
confirmed by independent data from small repeating earthquakes. We will test the
hypothesis that creeping areas expand with time as stress builds up on the plate
boundary. P.I. Segall will participate in the Geoscape Bay Area Professional
Development program for middle and high school science teachers. He will develop
a module to translate science from the Tohoku earthquake in Japan to earthquake
hazards in the U.S., which has particular relevance to the Cascade subduction
zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores models to explain unique
interseismic and post-seismic observations from northeast Japan, constrained by
repeating earthquakes and GPS data, both before and after the 2011 Mw 9
earthquake. Our hypothesis for accelerating interseismic creep as well as
afterslip overlapping historical ruptures is that while earthquakes nucleate in
velocity weakening regions, they rupture into velocity strengthening regions due
to strong dynamic weakening. In the interseismic period, creep penetrates into
velocity strengthening zones, eroding locked asperities with time. The
simulations include rate-state friction and thermal pressurization, and test
predictions against GPS and repeating-earthquake data. Time dependent asperity
erosion appears to be a promising mechanism to explain the long-duration strain
transient. Elastic models with locked asperities restricted to seismogenic
depths cannot explain coastal subsidence documented over the last century; these
data require either deep coupling (60? 100 km) or mantle relaxation. GPS and
seafloor geodetic measurements, post-Mw 9, require some combination of afterslip
and deep mantle flow. The Tohoku coast underwent Holocene uplift, yet at present
it is unknown whether postseismic processes alone will even recover the observed
inter- and co-seismic subsidence. We will use coupled viscoelastic and physics-
based afterslip models to examine relative contributions of mantle flow and
interface coupling to interseismic deformation and further test the eroding
asperity hypothesis. These physics-based models of fault friction and
earthquake-cycle deformation are able to integrate diverse datasets and provide
a comprehensive model of the mechanical behavior of this unique plate boundary.
This project mentors a SURGE (Summer Undergraduate Research in Geoscience and
Engineering) student to analyze GPS vertical time series from Tohoku and use
these results to constrain interseismic slip rate on the plate boundary. The
student will participate in workshops on preparing for the GRE, applying to
graduate school, and understanding geoscience careers.