* 1620391
* IBSS-L: Inequity Aversion, Individual Decision Making, and the Emergence of Collective Behavior
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Charles Janson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 900,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how large-scale cooperation
is maintained de-spite the negative impacts that inequitable outcomes have on
cooperation. This project will bring together researchers with experience in
behavioral and experimental economics and psychology, biological anthropology,
collective animal behavior, and evolutionary biology and ecology to enhance
understanding of the interplay between inequity and cooperation in large-scale
cooperation in human and closely related societies. The project will bridge the
traditional boundaries of these disciplines by bringing a stronger focus on
behavioral mechanisms to questions traditionally asked by biological
anthropologists and by calling the attention of behavioral economists to the
importance of ecological and evolutionary context in studies of decision making.
The project will provide an exciting education and training opportunity for a
post-doctoral researcher and for a number of undergraduate students. The
investigators also will work with Untamed Science, a scientist-run company that
makes online media content for teachers and students, to develop materials that
can share information about the project with a broad range of K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans routinely participate in interactions in
which one individual receives more than another, such as when one individual is
paid more than another for completing the same job. People tend to react
negatively in such situations, with detrimental consequences for their
relationship with their partner. How are high levels of cooperation maintained
in human societies, given that our aversion to "unfair" outcomes can impede
joint action? On the one hand, responding negatively to inequity likely provides
an individual advantage. Over the long term, people who respond to such
disparities by finding new cooperation partners do relatively better than those
that do not. But being too sensitive to such disparities may impede large-scale
cooperation at the group level. Given the foundational role of cooperation in
human society, understanding how responses to inequity shape decision-making in
the context of cooperation is particularly important. Prior research on this
topic usually has focused on the interactions between two individuals divorced
from their larger social context, so it has not been possible to investigate how
these pair-wise interactions shape patterns of group-level behavior. Ethical
considerations, privacy concerns, and logistical limitations also have made it
difficult to envision conducting the necessary experiments in human social
groups. To overcome these obstacles, this project will consist of experiments
that study capuchin monkeys (Cebus paella) as a model system for investigating
how social context shapes the expression of inequity aversion and the
achievement of collective goals in both captive and naturally occurring social
groups. Capuchin monkeys provide valuable and appropriate insights because they
have extraordinarily large brain-to-body and neocortex-to-body ratios, they are
highly cooperative in a variety of different contexts, and they share humans'
aversion to inequitable outcomes. The experiments conducted as part of this
project investigate how social context shapes the expression of inequity
aversion in both socially and ecologically relevant contexts, and they will test
how a predisposition to respond negatively to "unfair" outcomes impacts
collective behavior. The experiments will employ novel experimental feeders that
remove any influence from human experimenters in order to study individual and
group behavior in the complex environment of intact social groups. This project
is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.