* 1620896
* Scientific Software Days Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Damon McDougall, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 01/31/2020
* USD 36,000.00

Technology and science have a wide influence on our lives. From the discovery of
new medical treatments to the simulation of weather and climate systems, novel
scientific research directly impacts the health, well-being and security of the
nation. Computer systems, and the software that runs on them, serve as a vessel
to execute this research. As a result, software is now a fundamental research
tool that advances science. Software must be developed sustainably with adequate
maintenance, testing and growth for the purposes of ensuring the reproducibility
of scientific results and to promote the growth of science. This conference
brings together experts across varying scientific disciplines to share best
practices for the development of scientific software. Furthermore, this
conference aims to reach the next generation of scientists and researchers that
develop software, serving not only as an educational experience but also as an
opportunity to see how to leverage open source contributions for the purposes of
career development. Since the practice of developing software sustainably is
applicable to all scientific domains, this conference will have a broader impact
on science as a whole. Moreover, reaching an audience of earlier-career
researchers has the twofold benefit of a) being an educational experience; and
b) helping solidify and promote sustainable software development for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;21st century research increasingly relies on the
development of ever more sophisticated scientific software. Projects such as R,
Trilinos, PETSc, and IPython have been adopted in a manifold number of
disciplines and now are indispensable tool sets. The goals of the Scientific
Software Days (SSD) conference are twofold: (1) To bring together scientific
software communities to share best practices; (2) Share information on the
latest technologies of interest to communities. For both graduate students and
early career academics interested in scientific software, SSD provides a natural
venue to interact with scientific software leaders from three core areas:
universities, research labs, and industry. In all three areas, the combination
of deep domain expertise and advanced software development skills is in high
demand. This conference will be held in the Peter O'Donnell Jr. Building (POB)
at the University of Texas at Austin, February 25-26, 2016. The meeting will
include invited talks from both young and established developers and scientists,
a poster session to showcase the work of junior researchers, as well as a panel
discussion on the challenges and opportunities for developing and supporting
scientific software in each of the three main career paths. Funding is included
in the budget for travel and accommodations for poster session participants to
support those who may not have another source of funding, and an effort will
also be made to advertise to and promote the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups in these participants.