* 1620465
* Numerical and Analytical Investigations on Nonlocal Dispersive Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Yanzhi Zhang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,000.00

Nonlocal dispersive wave equations have been recently applied in many areas such
as electromagnetism, acoustics, cosmology, elasticity, biology, hydrodynamics,
viscoelasticity, seismics, water wave, plasma, quantum mechanics, brain and
consciousness, and so on. However, their nonlocality introduces considerable
challenges in both mathematical analysis and numerical simulations. This project
seeks to address fundamental issues related to mathematical modeling and
numerical simulations of nonlocal dispersive wave equations as well as their
solution properties. The proposed project will bridge the gap between different
areas, enhance interdisciplinary research, and advance the application of
fractional differential equations in practice. Since nonlocal wave equations
have broad applications in physics, chemistry, biology and engineering, the
research in this project has great potentials to advance the research and
technology in relevant areas.

The main objectives of this research are to build mathematical and numerical
treatments for the nonlocal Schroedinger wave equations, and to provide a deeper
understanding of the modeling with long-range interactions, so as to advance
their application to problems with nonlocality. In this project, both the
discrete nonlinear Schroedinger (DNLS) equation with long-range interactions and
the fractional nonlinear Schroedinger (fNLS) equation with the fractional
Laplacian will be investigated. Integrating the discrete and continuous models
offers a new opportunity for a deeper understanding of the nonlocality of the
Schroedinger wave equations. On the one hand, accurate algorithms will be
developed to improve the efficiency and reduce the computational costs in
simulating the DNLS with large lattice sites, especially in two- or three-
dimensional lattices. On the other hand, efficient and accurate numerical
methods for discretizing the fractional Laplacian will be designed and applied
to study the properties of the stationary states and dynamics of fNLS. The study
on the DNLS and fNLS will provide a deeper understanding on modeling and
properties of long-range interactions, as well as is benefitting the development
of numerical algorithms for fractional differential equations.