* 1620874
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Middle Grades Students' Capacity to Develop and Communicate Their Mathematical Understanding of Big Ideas Using Digital Inscriptional Resources
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chad Dorsey, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,499,293.00

The primary goal of this project is to help middle school students deepen and
communicate their understanding of mathematics. The project will develop and
test a digital platform for middle school mathematics classrooms. The digital
platform will allow students to collaboratively create representations of their
mathematics thinking, incorporate ideas from other students, and share their
work with the class. The digital learning environment makes use of a problem-
centered mathematics curriculum that evolved from extensive development, field-
testing and evaluation, and is widely used in middle schools. The research will
also contribute to understanding about the design and innovative use of digital
resources and collaboration in classrooms as an increasing number of schools are
drawing on these kinds of tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support students to
collaboratively construct, manipulate, and interpret shared representations of
mathematics using digital inscriptional resources. The research activities will
significantly enhance our understanding of student learning in mathematics in
three important ways. The project will report on how (1) evidence of student
thinking is made visible through the use of digital inscriptional resources, (2)
student inscriptions are documented, discussed, and manipulated in collaborative
settings, and (3) students' conceptual growth of big mathematical ideas grows
over time. An iterative design research process will incorporate four phases of
development, testing and revision, and will be conducted to study student use of
the digital learning space and related inscriptional resources. Data sources
will include: classroom observations and artifacts, student and teacher
interviews and surveys, student assessment data, and analytics from the digital
platform. The process will include close collaboration with teachers to
understand the implementation and create revisions to the resources.