* 1620595
* Anisotropic structure of Earth's inner core from noise correlations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xiaodong Song, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2020
* USD 240,000.00

The Earth's solid inner core is formed from the crystallization of the liquid
outer core as the Earth cools. The inner core possesses axisymmetric anisotropy
with its fast axis aligned nearly North-South due to the preferred alignment of
the inner core iron crystals in this direction. Previous studies of the inner
core structure have shown great complexities. Thus, understanding the origin of
this prominent anisotropy is one of the fundamental questions of earth science
today; and imaging the complex three-dimensional anisotropic structure of the
inner core is crucial in this endeavor. Unfortunately, seismic imaging of the
deep Earth has been limited by the distribution of earthquake and station
locations. This project seeks to explore a new technique that extracts a vastly
different set of observations for the deep Earth based on correlations of
seismic noise (from ambient environment and from earthquake coda). We expect
that this improved inner core seismic model will benefit the mineralogical and
the geodynamical communities, as it provides constraints on their models. The
project has implications for understanding the origin of the anisotropy,
composition, dynamics, and evolution of Earth?s core and the inner core in
particular. The retrieval of the deep penetrating waves overcomes some of
disadvantages of traditional earthquake-based methods, which will have a
fundamental impact on revealing the structure of the Earth?s deep
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on recent successes in
extracting body waves from correlations of either ambient noise or earthquake
coda. During the last decade, ambient noise correlation technique has been
widely used to study the structure of our planet, in particular surface wave
tomography of lithosphere structure. More recent studies have shown feasibility
to extract body waves from correlations of ambient noise or earthquake coda. We
have recently succeeded in retrieving clear triplicated PKP phases and inner-
core arrivals PKIKP2 and PKIIKP2 simultaneously using stacks of empirical
Green?s functions from autocorrelations of single station or cross-correlations
between data recorded at different stations. These observations allow us to use
differential travel times between different phases to eliminate or reduce the
influence of mantle heterogeneity and source errors. The new PKIKP2 and PKIIKP2
data suggest a seismic anisotropy in the inner-inner core of the Earth that has
a fast axis aligned near the equator and a different form of anisotropy from the
North-South aligned anisotropy observed in the outer inner core. In this
project, we seek to explore these new types of data to constrain the 3D
anisotropic structure of the inner core. The differential PKP travel times
between different branches from noise cross-correlations provide vastly
different data coverage from existing earthquake data. The differential PKIIKP2-
PKIKP2 travel times provide brand new samples of the deepest part of the inner
core. Specifically, we will systematically retrieve PKIKP2 and PKIIKP2
simultaneously applying autocorrelations and cross-correlations to all available
arrays around the world and systematically retrieve triplicated PKP branches by
applying cross-correlations to pairs of station arrays at distances greater than
145 degrees. We will then combine the new noise-based data with earthquake data
to model and invert for 3D inner-core anisotropic structure.