* 1620403
* MULTISCALE STOCHASTIC REACTION-DIFFUSION ALGORITHMS
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Hye Won Kang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,993.00

Stochastic reaction-diffusion processes are widely used in the modeling of
cancer, immune systems, and developmental biology. These processes describe the
concentration changes of the chemically reacting species that diffuse through
space. Numerical simulation of stochastic reaction-diffusion processes is
challenging since the underlying biochemical systems are large in general and
naturally involve various scales in the speed of chemical reaction and diffusion
and their quantities in different locations. The multiscale nature can slow down
the speed of the numerical simulation. Moreover, stochastic simulation requires
a set of repeated performance of the simulations to obtain averaged behavior of
chemical species. The goal of this project is to develop efficient numerical
algorithms for stochastic reaction-diffusion processes by coupling different
numerical schemes based on scales and by applying optimal strategies to increase
accuracy and efficiency. The ability to simulate large stochastic systems will
provide an efficient tool for modeling and understanding of complex biochemical
systems. A graduate-level course in the field related to this project will be
redesigned. The undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the
project and will receive mentorships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the development and the analysis of multiscale numerical algorithms for
stochastic reaction-diffusion processes combining different numerical schemes.
Markov chain models are widely used to model chemically reacting species with
diffusion, but the exact simulation of Markov chain models for large systems are
computationally expensive when the systems involve multiscale phenomena. There
are many studies to develop and to understand multiscale methods for stochastic
reaction-diffusion processes using Markov chain models, but the major drawback
in the existing methodologies is that they do not fully account for significant
changes in the abundances of chemical species in time and space, which reduce
the accuracy of the approximations. In this project, a spatial domain of
interest will be divided into several subsets based on the abundance of chemical
species and Markov chain models and stochastic partial differential equations
will be respectively applied to the different regions. Then, the method will be
extended to incorporate moving interfaces between the numerical schemes, which
change in time, and to use optimal strategies to find a location of the next
reaction. The fast simulation skills of large stochastic reaction-diffusion
systems will increase efficiency in the study of experimental science and
engineering. Moreover, the results of the proposal will be applied to explore
the impact on human development or disease, for example, to find key signaling
pathways in cancer or immune systems and to find how the tissues and organs
develop to have different functions in the embryo.