* 1620083
* Robust Stability of Linear Dynamical Systems: Algorithms, Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Michael Overton, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 350,135.00

Dynamical systems are ubiquitous in our modern world, with embedded control
systems in everything imaginable, from cars and airplanes to medical devices.
Designing controllers for these systems based on feedback is a paradigm of
increasingly great importance. Stability is the most important property of a
dynamical system, so it is essential that controllers be designed so that
systems are stable even in the presence of uncertain feedback. This research
project aims to extend the theory and develop new computational algorithms in
this important area. The project will bring the tools of algorithms for
stability analysis and controller synthesis to a wide community of scientists
and engineers, most effectively through the provision of freely available
software. The open-source software toolbox HIFOO, developed by the principal
investigator, was designed for this purpose, stabilizing a given system with a
fixed-order controller that locally optimizes appropriate objectives, such as
the stability radius, over the controller variables. HIFOO has been used
successfully in a wide variety of applications, including synchronization of
heterogeneous multi-agent systems and networks, design of motorized gimbals that
stabilize an angular motion of an optical payload around an axis, controllers
for aircraft flight systems, and minimally invasive surgery.

We consider linear dynamical systems with uncertain feedback depending linearly
on the output. This paradigm leads to an ordinary differential equation whose
system matrix is a linear fractional map. The associated stability radius
measures the size of perturbations that can be tolerated while still
guaranteeing system stability, i.e., so that the eigenvalues of the system
matrix are in the left half of the complex plane for all perturbations that are
norm-bounded by a given quantity. A key goal of the project is to develop an
efficient, scalable, accurate algorithm for computing the stability radius that
is applicable to the case where the system matrix is large and sparse. Without
loss of generality, the perturbations under consideration can be assumed to be
matrices with rank one, so the algorithm under development depends on
efficiently iterating with rank-one perturbations, exploiting the rank-one
structure efficiently with existing eigensolvers. An important aspect of the
algorithm will be to ensure that the stability radius is computed accurately by
making use of a theorem about the relationship between imaginary eigenvalues of
a Hamiltonian matrix and singular values of the associated transfer matrix,
using a novel approach that is specifically designed to be robust with respect
to errors in the computation of these eigenvalues. The new algorithm under
development in this project will allow the design of low-order controllers for
much larger systems than was previously possible, including control of
discretized systems of partial differential equations.