* 1620687
* Development of Next-Generation Relativistic Program for All-Order Treatment of Many-Electron Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,001.00

The quantitative understanding of atomic and molecular structure and collisions
represents one of the main areas of research in theoretical atomic and molecular
physics. Results from this area of research form key input to fundamental
theoretical and experimental studies in a broad range of basic and applied
scientific fields, including astrophysics, plasma science, and quantum
information. In addition, this research is relevant for important practical
applications with important societal implications, such as the development of
better clocks for GPS systems. To date success in this area has been primarily
restricted to studies of the simpler atomic systems; comparable levels of
understanding have not been achieved for more complex atoms in the Periodic
Table. This project focuses on developing a high-precision theoretical and
computational approach that seeks to bring the theoretical understanding of
complicated atoms of transition metals to the same level of sophistication
afforded presently only to much simpler atomic systems. If successful, the
results could open up much of the Periodic Table to applications that heretofore
could only be pursued with the simplest atoms. As such, this project provides
ample opportunities for the training of students and post-doctoral fellows on
topics at the leading edge of scientific research in physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a next-generation fully
relativistic broadly applicable atomic code, based on the combination of large-
scale configuration interaction and all-order linearized coupled-cluster method
capable of predicting properties of open-shell atoms with precision of a few
percent. The main feature of the code is to be able to treat systems where no
accurate description of atomic properties is presently possible. While
tremendous progress has been made recently in high-precision atomic
calculations, treatment of correlation in d- and f-shell open systems present
frontier challenges to AMO theory. This project will address the following short
comings of current approaches needed for the treatment of correlations in d- and
f-shell atomic open systems: omission of three-body interactions, limited choice
of the starting potential, and the need for efficient selection of most
important configurations for the construction of very large configuration
spaces. The resulting code will be able to calculate a wide range of atomic
properties including energies, g-factors, hyperfine constants, various
transition matrix elements, electric-dipole and electric-quadrupole static and
dynamic polarizabilities, long-range interaction potential parameters, various
P(parity)-odd and T(time)-odd effects, sensitivity factors for tests of
variation of the fine-structure constant and atomic tests of local Lorentz
invariance. The performance of the new-generation code will be tested for
systems with several valence electrons.