* 1620618
* Integrating the LPO Constraint into 3D Subduction Dynamics Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,947.00

Subduction is the process by which one tectonic plate sinks beneath another
tectonic plate into the Earth's mantle. Subduction zones are some of the most
tectonically and seismically active areas on the planet. They have large
destructive earthquakes and abundant volcanic activity. This geologic activity
is driven by the sinking tectonic plate, which causes deformation (build up of
stresses) and melting in the surrounding mantle. These subsurface processes are
observed indirectly using geophysical and geochemical methods. Of these
observations, only seismic anisotropy can be directly linked to the spatial
pattern of deformation caused by sinking of the subducted plate. To make the
link from observations of seismic anisotropy to deformation in the mantle
scientists need to calculate a fabric that develops in the deformed rocks called
lattice-preferred orientation (LPO). The proposed research will simulate
subduction to predict the LPO structure. This is the first time LPO calculations
will be fully incorporated into large-scale 3-D simulations. By analyzing these
results the investigators will provide better interpretations of seismic
anisotropy observation in terms of the 3-D deformation in the shallow mantle. A
better understanding of the mantle deformation (stresses) is important for
addressing natural hazards due to earthquakes and volcanic activity in
subduction zones. All of the computational modules developed for the project
will be made publicly available to advance similar studies beyond this project.
The project will train a PhD student in computational modeling, analysis of
complex systems and how to communicate scientific results to a broad audience.
The project will also provide research opportunities for undergraduates to
develop their skills in critical-thinking, project development, leadership, and
the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will create,
run and analyze approximately 16, 3-D, time-dependent simulations of subduction
using the mantle simulation code ASPECT, with fully-integrated calculations of
the evolution of LPO structure throughout the model domain using tracer
particles and a kinematic (D-Rex) LPO calculation. The models will be analyzed
to identify features in the LPO structure that are related to different
parameters (physical properties, geometry) defining the subduction system. They
will also be analyzed to identify patterns in the LPO structure related to the
phase of subduction and state of deformation in the slab. Predictions of seismic
anisotropy observed at the surface will be made for a subset of models designed
to match the general characteristics of the Cascadia, S. America and Middle
America subduction zones. The investigators will then compare the predicted and
observed seismic anisotropy to determine how the observations are related to
flow in the mantle and deformation of the slab. The graduate student researcher,
will be primarily responsible for creating, running, and processing simulations,
as well as the analysis of the results in terms of subduction system parameters
and phase/state of subduction. The PI will be primarily responsible for writing
the post-processing codes that takes the LPO structure from ASPECT, calculates
the elastic tensor and resulting seismic anisotropy, and for the comparison of
these predictions to observations from three locations. They anticipate
publication of at least six manuscripts with the major findings of the project.