* 1620096
* I-Corps:  Afthon - Pressure Gain Combustion Power Generator
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Frank Lu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Pressure gain combustion (PGC, commonly called detonation) is a highly efficient
process for power generation because the process burns fuels over 30 times
faster than conventional, constant pressure combustion which is currently
present in all commercial internal combustion engines. In addition to higher
efficiency, a PGC power generator is inexpensive to build and to maintain, and
it can use a wide variety of fuels, including sustainable biogas. A large,
potential market exists for the PGC power generator, either operating as a
standalone unit or as part of a grid. The use of sustainable biogas addresses
the important issue of greenhouse gas emissions. This PGC generator fits into
the solution strategies of advanced countries striving to meet environmental
targets, by producing power with lower emissions through efficient combustion.
Additionally, the PGC generator can increase availability of low-cost energy
with the potential of improving human welfare in large areas of the globe.
Further technological spinoffs of the PGC process include developing efficient
heat sources, as well as other novel industrial processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to observing fundamental combustion physics,
various enabling technologies have been demonstrated by the team over the past
two decades. The PGC technology is protected by six patents with further
disclosures in the pipeline. The PGC generator is simple to manufacture and
operate, thereby accruing a cost advantage over existing generators in the
10-100 kW range. The technology is scalable and the proposed team has
competitive designs ranging from 1 kW to 2 MW, targeting various niche markets
that are not necessarily well served at present. The goal of this project is to
bring PGC technology to the marketplace. The scope of the project is to explore
the power generation and industrial applications market through discovering the
customer base and to develop a prototype PGC generator. This team will engage
with potential partners and investors through online and telephone contacts, and
tradeshows, as well as visiting promising parties. The team will continue to
develop a prototype PGC generator to exhibit to potential partners and
investors.