* 1620497
* RUI: Development of Fast Scalable Adaptive High Order Methods for Solving the Boltzmann Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Alexander Alekseenko, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 299,947.00

This project's goal is to advance one's ability to use computer simulations to
address scientific and technological challenges by employing modeling at
microscopic scales using the kinetic Boltzmann equation. Applications of this
proposal span the dynamics of gas, plasma, self-organizing systems, networks,
and bacterial dynamics. The project will focus on a bottleneck issue in kinetic
modeling --- the development of fast methods for high fidelity simulations of
particle interactions in rarefied gases. The project's most immediate impact is
in the development of novel aerospace technologies and in important U.S.
initiatives in the development of clean energy, biotechnology, and new
materials. This will be through its applications to computer simulation of
devices that either operate in rarefied gas or are manufactured in vacuum. The
project will provide training for the STEM workforce by engaging students in
research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite of being studied intensely in the last
decades, deterministic numerical solutions of the Boltzmann equation continue to
be evasive. To achieve a full three-dimensional solution suitable for use in
applications, fast scalable adaptive numerical approaches for evaluating the
five-fold Boltzmann collision integral need to be devised. This proposal will
address these shortcomings by developing convolution formulations of the
Boltzmann collision integral based on nodal discontinuous Galerkin (nodal-DG)
discretizations in the velocity variable, by developing adaptable nodal-DG
wavelet discretizations of the collision operator on octree meshes, and by
developing fast algorithms for evaluating the convolution form of the collision
integral based on an application of the Fourier transform. The new methods will
require at most O(n^6) operations for a fully deterministic evaluation of the
Boltzmann collision integral, and will require O(n^5) memory units to store the
pre-computed collision kernels, where n is the number of discretization points
in one dimension in the velocity space. The new methods will be implemented on
parallel architectures and will be scalable. Implementation of this proposal
will result in the development of capabilities for producing high-fidelity
solutions to the Boltzmann equation, capabilities for producing benchmark
solutions and methods for validation of kinetic models. The research activities
will result in a new application of nodal-DG wavelets to the approximation of
the Boltzmann collision integral.