* 1620888
* Developing Formative Assessment Tools and Routines for Additive Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Caroline Ebby, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 02/29/2020
* USD 449,983.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This design and development project is an expansion of the Ongoing Assessment
Project (OGAP), an established model for research-based formative assessment in
grades 3-8, to the early elementary grades. OGAP brings together two powerful
ideas in mathematics education - formative assessment and research based
learning trajectories - to enhance teacher knowledge, instructional practices,
and student learning. Building on a proven track record of success with this
model, the current project will translate findings from research on student
learning of early number, addition, and subtraction into tools and routines that
teachers can use to formatively assess their students' understanding on a
regular basis and develop targeted instructional responses. The project involves
a development component focused on producing and field testing new resources
(including frameworks, item banks, pre-assessments and professional development
materials) and a research component designed to improve the implementation of
these resources in school settings. The materials that are developed from this
project will help teachers be able to more precisely assess student
understanding in the major mathematical work of grades K-2 in order to better
meet the needs of diverse learners. With the addition of these new early
elementary materials, OGAP formative assessment resources will be available for
use from kindergarten through grade 8.

Although much attention has been paid to the improvement of early literacy,
building strong mathematical foundations and early computational fluency is
equally critical for later success in school and preparation for STEM careers.
This project will develop and field test tools, resources, and routines that
teachers can employ to help young students develop deeper conceptual
understandings and more powerful and efficient strategies in the early grades.
The project emerged from the needs of school-based practitioners looking for
instructional support in the primary grades and uses design-based research
methodology. The new materials will be developed, tested, and revised through
multiple iterations of implementation in schools. Research-based learning
trajectories will be consolidated into simplified frameworks that illustrate the
overall progression of major levels of student thinking in the domains of
counting, addition, and subtraction. A bank of formative assessment items will
be developed, field tested, and refined through a three-phase validation
process. Professional development modules will be designed and field tested to
support teacher knowledge and effective use of the formative assessment tools
and routines. Data collected on key activities in the formative assessment
process (including teacher selection of items, analysis of student work,
instructional implications, and enacted instructional response) will be used to
continually inform development as well as illuminate the conditions under which
formative assessment leads to productive changes in instruction and student
learning in the classroom. The project will yield a set of field tested tools
and resources ready for both broader dissemination and further research on the
promise of the intervention, as well as an understanding of how to support
effective implementation.