* 1620039
* Particle and Quantum Field Theory Investigations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Alberto Sirlin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors G. Gabadadze, M. Porrati,
and A. Sirlin at New York University.

Members of this research group work towards solving fundamental questions in
elementary particle physics, cosmology, and gravitation. The research interests
of these faculty members are complementary to one another. To discover new
physics it is essential to master the theory that describes all known elementary
interactions excluding gravity, namely the so-called Standard Model. This is the
aim of Prof. Sirlin's research. Quantum gravity and supergravity are the focus
of Prof. Porrati's research. These are the theories most relevant in the study
of the universe as a whole, i.e. at very large distances, or for understanding
the very early universe. The study of quantum gravity also connects with
attempts to understand the nature of dark matter and dark energy --- mysterious
forms of matter and energy which are critical for understanding the way in which
the universe evolves. These problems are investigated by Profs. Porrati and
Gabadadze. Thus, research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical laws. Broader impacts are also
expected from the project. All senior investigators carry out their research in
close collaboration with graduate students and postdocs, who are thus trained in
advanced theoretical research. Dissemination of research results will occur
through review articles to be published in specialized and popular-science
journals as well as through the organization of workshops, video- and Internet-
based courses, and popular lectures.

More specifically, Porrati plans to study topology-changing transition
amplitudes in pure AdS3 gravity as well as the torus partition function and
certain indices for pure 3D gravity and supergravity in various formulations. He
also plans to study a generalization of matter couplings in certain supergravity
models of inflation containing higher powers of the scalar curvature. Properties
of high-spin particles in interaction in AdS and Minkowski backgrounds will be
studied by Porrati continuing work done in the last years. Porrati also plans to
study holographic renormalization flows of 2D conformal field theories with
different left and right central charges, using a recently discovered new theory
of AdS3 massive gravity called "minimal massive gravity." Gabadadze is proposing
research in several different directions --- on the cosmological constant
problem and modified gravity, on the AdS/CFT correspondence for massive gravity,
on quantum liquids in dwarf stars, and on solitons in cold atom systems --- all
using the method of effective quantum field theory as a unifying theme. Finally,
in view of the increased precision of a 2013 measurement reported by the MuCap
Collaboration, Sirlin plans to update and improve his 2007 analysis. In
particular, he plans to study the possibility that further improvement in the
experimental precision may lead to an independent, accurate value for the axial-
vector coupling $g_{A}$, a result that may have important implications for
neutron beta decay. Sirlin also plans to study the radiative corrections to
antineutrino capture by protons, a process that is currently important for
reactor studies of neutrino oscillations.