* 1620526
* Extended and Novel Particle Sectors in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Halverson, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor James Halverson at
Northeastern University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory attempts to describe
physical laws, such as those governing electromagnetism, nuclear physics, and
gravity, in a common unified framework. One central aspect of string theory is
that it predicts the existence of extra dimensions of space, and the properties
of these extra dimensions play a large role in determining how particles
interact in the theory. However, it turns out that there are many self-
consistent possibilities for these extra dimensions in string theory. The
central goal of Professor Halverson's research is to determine a set of very
common possibilities and to analyze their corresponding predictions for
potential additional laws of particle physics. Research in this area serves the
national interest by promoting the progress of science at its most fundamental
level, in this case by providing motivation for new physical laws from unified
theories such as string theory. This project will also have substantial broader
impacts. Professor Halverson will involve a postdoc and students in his
research, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists as they
begin their research careers. He will also communicate his research results and
related developments in the field to Boston-area high-school students through
the NSF-funded Physics TheoryNet program, and also to his undergraduate students
at Northeastern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Halverson will
study the string landscape, using regions away from weak coupling and also
string consistency conditions to motivate extended particle sectors (EPS) that
are novel from the point of view of quantum field theory. One major aspect of
this project will be the formal study of non-Higgsable clusters in F-theory,
including their physical origin in four dimensions and associated implications
for visible and dark EPS. He will develop new mathematics to understand the
connection between matter and knots in the context of F-theory geometries, and
will also study singular limits in G2 compactifications of M-theory and how
string consistency conditions may require the existence of exotic matter. One
potential contribution of this work is to develop a notion of typicality of
certain EPS in the landscape, thereby providing motivation for models that are
either novel or ad hoc in other physical frameworks.