* 1620434
* A Framework for Multiscale/Multiphysics Mathematical Modeling of Cerebral Aneurysm Rupture
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yue Yu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 235,000.00

Cerebral aneurysm (CA) is a diseased dilatation of an intracranial artery, and
its rupture is the leading cause of subarachnoid bleeding. However, the
mechanisms behind aneurysm formation, growth and rupture remain an enigma. While
the current clinical technology cannot yet provide a lot of mechanistic details
of these processes in vivo, many efforts have been devoted in modeling the
biomechanics of the cerebral aneurysms. Specifically, numerical simulations have
elucidated some of the physics associated with the arterial wall damage and
aneurysm rupture. The proposed work aims to provide a multiphysics/multiscale
mathematical model along with a numerical framework to understand the mechanism
of cerebral aneurysm rupture. The new knowledge will be introduced into both
graduate and undergraduate level courses. The resultant software will be ready
for classroom use as friendly and free opensource routines for instructors and
students.

This project aims to develop a new methodology for addressing fundamental open
questions in multiscale and multiphysics modeling of brain aneurysms, and to
study the interactions between the arterial wall and the blood flow with an
emphasis on simulating the rupture phenomena. To be specific, the computational
domain is composed of three regions: the fluid (blood) simulated as
incompressible Newtonian flow, the fracture solid (aneurysm fundus wall) modeled
by the nonlocal peridynamic theory, and the solid (arterial wall) described by a
viscoelastic model. These three subregions will be numerically coupled to each
other with proper interface boundary conditions. In preliminary work, the PI
has: (1) developed new schemes for fluid-structure interaction (FSI) to
stabilize and accelerate the coupling between the fluid solver and the classical
solid solver; (2) designed an efficient long-term integration method for
fractional-order PDEs (FPDEs) and found that the fractional order might serve as
an indicator for the aneurysm wall strength; (3) investigated the Dirichlet-
Dirichlet boundary condition for the peridynamic-classical theory coupling. In
the next three years, the PI will work on both theoretical and numerical
aspects. For the theoretical part, new models will be addressed to describe the
viscoelastic behavior of the arterial walls and to capture the material failure
near the aneurysm fundus. Regarding the numerical effort, high-performance
computational tools based on high-order continuous/discontinuous Galerkin
methods will be developed, which could accurately simulate the new models as
well as provide a coupling framework for problems composed of heterogeneous
domains with multiscale/multiphysics dynamics. Technically, the PI will: (1)
further validate the fractional-order PDE models that better describe the
viscoelastic behavior of cerebral aneurysm walls; (2) for the first time develop
two-component peridynamic theory for modeling the aneurysm rupture, and develop
high-order numerical solvers for this model based on the discontinuous Galerkin
method; (3) design partitioned approaches for coupling the 3D continuum
formulations of peridynamics and classical theory, by investigating proper
mathematical interface conditions directly derived from conservation laws. The
coupling techniques the PI has investigated in preliminary work (FSI coupling)
would also be adopted into the multiscale coupling problem here. This project is
co-funded by the Computational Mathematics Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, the BioMAPS Initiative and the Biomedical Engineering
program of the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems Division (CBET).