* 1620920
* Supporting Instructional Growth in Mathematics: Enhancing Urban Secondary Teachers' Professional Learning through Formative Feedback
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Ilana Horn, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,905,831.00

Research continues to show the benefits of ambitious instruction for student
learning of mathematics, yet ambitious instruction continues to be rare in U.S.
schools, particularly in schools that serve historically marginalized students.
Secondary teachers' learning and enactment of ambitious instruction in
mathematics requires conceptual change, and their development could benefit from
adequate and timely feedback close to classroom instruction. For this reason,
the project will explore the potential of video-based formative feedback to
enhance professional development. The focus of the partnership between
university researchers and a well-regarded professional development
organization, Math for America Los Angeles (MfA LA) will be on career-long
learning of secondary mathematics teachers in urban schools. Results from this
project will provide a theory of mathematics teachers' learning that can inform
other instructional improvement efforts, with ecological validity in the
critical site of urban schools. The framework and theory will be detailed at the
level of specific tools and concrete practices that are learnable by teachers,
school leaders, or instructional coaches. This project is funded by the
Discovery Research Pre-K-12 Program, which funds research and development of
STEM innovations and approaches in assessment, teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question the project will address is: How can
the project use formative feedback to enhance mathematics teachers' professional
learning environments that support their development of ambitious instruction in
urban schools? Formative feedback refers to tools and processes that ascertain
teachers' current understandings and responsively adapt learning activities to
better guide them toward their learning goals. Professional learning
environments refer to the multiple sites of teachers' learning, from formal
professional development activities to their school workplace. Ambitious
instruction is defined as teaching approaches that aim to provide all students
with ample opportunities to develop conceptual understanding of key mathematical
ideas, participate in mathematical argumentation, connect multiple mathematical
representations, as well as become fluent with mathematical procedures and
processes. The persistence of typical mathematics instruction is framed as, in
large part, an issue of teacher learning. Using design-based implementation
research and interpretive methods, the project team will co-develop video-based
formative assessment processes to guide teachers' evolving classroom practice.