* 1620043
* SBIR Phase I:  Designing High Efficiency Small Scale Motors using Switched Reluctance Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Mark Johnston, Software Motor Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,827.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are that 1 to 5 hp
motors represent 58% of the total number of installed motors in the United
States due to the prevalence of heating and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. A
10-15% improvement in efficiency in these systems is expected to save more than
$1000 in electricity over the 10-year lifetime of each motor. As such,
installing this motor in just 1% of applications would translate to $500M / year
in electricity savings and result in a reduction of more than 1 million tons /
year of carbon dioxide emissions in the U.S. alone. In addition, since the
device uses ?internet of things? microprocessors it can potentially be connected
to a broader network, allowing monitoring and tuning to efficiency to be done in
a manner not possible with traditional motor designs. This means that changes
can be made in motor software, or learning algorithms can be applied in
industry-specific settings to further improve performance over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will aim to address a number of unsolved research problems with switched
reluctance (SR) electric motors at small scale (1 to 5 hp). Specifically, the
proposed research will develop optimization and control algorithms for a novel
high pole ?HR-SR? motor utilizing low-cost microprocessors of the type used in
?internet of things? applications. These algorithms will address control issues
that remain unsolved for such motors including torque ripple, high speed real-
time control, and non-linear performance. This is an unsolved issue since 1 ? 5
hp motors have low angular momentum and require high speed sensing and
adjustment as well as real-time optimization to achieve high efficiency. (There
are no such designs commercially manufactured today.) This research will also
perform analysis of the physical design of HR-SR motors using finite element
analysis to optimize the mechanical design of the motor, reduce noise and heat
levels and increase efficiency. The proposed approach will produce a low-cost
design that has better efficiency than high-cost ECM motors, but at the price
point of low-cost low-efficiency induction motor designs.