* 1620038
* Computing Spectral Distributions for Graph Analysis and Classification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* David Bindel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 149,953.00

Modern network science analyzes and interprets relationships such as friendships
between people in a social network, interactions between proteins in a
biological network, or connections between machines in a computer network. A key
challenge in large-scale network analysis is understanding how the network is
composed of basic building blocks or motifs, such as communities in social
networks or groups of proteins that function together in a biological network.
Once such building blocks have been identified, one would like to identify what
things in the network play key roles in them. This project will create novel
methods for decomposing networks into basic building blocks using the
mathematical tool of graph spectra. Just as physical scientists use the spectrum
of light frequencies absorbed or emitted by an object to determine the atomic
composition of the material, graph spectra let network scientists determine how
networks are composed from basic atomic building blocks. The project will
produce fast software tools to compute graph spectra for networks involving
relations between millions of entities, along with new analysis techniques to
extract network building blocks from these spectral signals.

The main objective of this research is to extend spectral density analysis
methods common in spectral geometry and physics to gain new insights into the
structure and composition of complex networks. The research extends prior work
in computational material science, introducing novel stochastic and
deterministic estimators of local and global spectral densities with different
tradeoffs with respect to cost and accuracy. These methods will take advantage
of the structure of localized eigenvectors associated with interior eigenvalues
in the spectra of complex networks and to find network motifs. New graph
decomposition techniques based on these local spectral density estimates will
enable new and practical tools for graph analysis, and spectral node
classification techniques based on this approach will generalize current
centrality-based measures of node importance to provide more detailed insights
into the role nodes play in a network. In addition to providing new mathematical
insights, the project will result in new software tools for use by a broad
audience of network scientists, and will expose undergraduate researchers to
spectral theory in network science.