* 1620457
* IBSS-L: General Intelligence, Social Intelligence, and Robust Cooperation In Social-Ecological Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Jacopo Baggio, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2021
* USD 465,892.00

This interdisciplinary research project will analyze how a diversity of
cognitive abilities affects the ability of groups to resolve conflicts of
interest that arise in changing environments between what is best for an
individual and what is best for a group as a whole. The project will provide new
insights that help address a broad range of problems, such as managing access to
scarce water, which require balancing individual and group interests in a manner
that results in cooperation rather than social dissolution. Project findings
will contribute to understanding why some groups are more effective than others
at acting in concert to manage resources by resolving the tension between
individual and group interests in changing environments. The intellectual
contributions of the project will include a better understanding of the
cognitive-social-environmental interactions that promote the sustained
collective governance of resources in dynamic environments and a better
understanding of the evolution of prosocial behavior and intelligence in humans
as a species. The project will expand knowledge about the optimal level of
diversity in terms of general and social intelligence to solve complex problems,
and it will provide insights into the ability of social groups to sustain the
goods and services provided by ecosystems. Project results will have strong and
direct implications for situations in which teams must cooperate to solve
complex problems in changing environments. Such teams can function in settings
as diverse as platoons or boardrooms. The project will provide education and
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new insights regarding
the so-called Functional Intelligence Proposition, which holds that two
cognitive abilities -- general intelligence and social intelligence -- are
critical for groups to resolve the tension between individual vs. group
interests and achieve a mutually beneficial outcome. General intelligence is
critical for understanding how a social or ecological system works and how to
find the best strategy to manage resources under conditions of change. Social
intelligence is critical for maintaining social cohesion in spite of the
interpersonal disagreements that inevitably arise in social groups. A functional
diversity of intelligence capacities is expected to result in more robust
collective action in dynamic environments than either an abundance of
individuals with high general intelligence or social intelligence alone. The
Functional Intelligence Proposition synthesizes theory developed in
anthropology, psychology, and resource economics, with the synthesis
contributing to enhancement of a general theory of human behavior that explains
why some individuals are self-regarding and others more cooperative. To evaluate
the Functional Intelligence Proposition, the investigators will seek answers to
three questions: (1) Are groups with higher levels of social intelligence better
able to maintain cooperation to manage resources in spite of a social change
than groups with lower social intelligence? (2) Are groups with higher general
intelligence better able to maintain cooperation to manage resources in spite of
changes to a resource system than groups with lower general intelligence? (3)
Does a model that explicitly describes the effects of social and general
intelligence better predict the performance of groups than models that assume
actors are best described by ideal behavioral types? To answer these questions,
the investigators will use controlled behavioral experiments and computational
modeling. The experiments and modeling will be used to evaluate the effects of
general and social intelligence on the ability of groups to sustainably harvest
common pool resources. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.