* 1620058
* Advanced numerical methods for multiphysics Magnetohydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Jean-Luc Guermond, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop innovative numerical methods capable
of solving energy-related problems in the context of renewable and alternative
energies. The numerical techniques developed in this project will help design
grid-scale liquid metal batteries capable of storing large quantities of
renewable energies. This research will also help improve the performance of
large power electric transformers cooled by environment-friendly vegetable-based
oils containing ferromagnetic particles. Finally, by facilitating the
understanding of magneto-hydrodynamic instabilities in liquid metals, this
project will help to ascertain the integrity and the efficiency of the
electromagnetic pumps that will be used to extract energy from the next
generation of Liquid-Metal Fast-Breeder Reactors and Tokamaks. This project will
be done in collaboration with an European team; the project will foster
diversity, international exchanges, and multidisciplinarity. The educational
component of the project will contribute to increase the competitiveness of the
STEM workforce in the US in computational magnetohydrodynamics.

The research program will be organized into four areas: (1) Development of new
efficient semi-implicit algorithms to solve partial differential equations with
variable material properties (density, electric conductivity, magnetic
permeability) using spectral or very high-order methods; (2) Modeling of
ferromagnetic fluids and development of new numerical techniques to solve the
magneto-static equations in the context of liquid metals and ferromagnetic
fluids; (3) Development of level set techniques to account for more than two
phases, and development of new high-order level set techniques to guarantee mass
conservation and maximum principle; (4) Integration of the mathematical models
and numerical techniques developed in (1)-(2)-(3) into a massively parallel open
source code to test the proposed methods on realistic applications (liquid metal
batteries, thermo-convection of ferromagnetic oil in high-voltage transformers,
liquid metal dynamos). This project will involve the Principal Investigator, one
post-doctoral collaborator, one graduate student, and European collaborators.