* 1620977
* RAPID: Geochemical and Geophysical Observations of the 2015 Eruption of Volcan Momotombo, Nicaragua
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Charles Connor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 40,432.00

Volcan Momotombo, Nicaragua is a basaltic to basaltic-andesite stratovolcano
located along the active Central American Volcanic Arc. It last erupted in 1905.
Seismic swarms have been occurring beneath Momotombo for the past year. A major
seismic swarm, which included an M4.7 earthquake, began on November 24, 2015,
and culminated in gas and ash eruptions beginning at 7:49 am (local time) on
December 1, 2015. By the evening of December 1, Momotombo was in strombolian
eruption with columns to ~1 km and lava flows flowing down the northern flank of
the volcano. At this stage the Momotombo eruption appears to be characterized by
both small-volume lava and small-volume tephra emissions.

This RAPID funding will support a multi-disciplinary team that will travel to
Nicaragua to collaborate with our INETER colleagues to: 1) install GPS
instruments around the volcano and analyze existing GPS data; 2) install four
broadband seismic instruments to study magma storage and migration beneath
Momotombo; 3) make observations of the ongoing eruption to study the style of
eruptive activity and collect tephra samples to investigate plume dynamics; 4)
collect samples of tephra and lava flows for geochemical analyses; and 5)
investigate precursory volcano and crustal deformation at Momomtombo using
InSAR. This project leverages support from the NSF-funded COCONet project, the
CEOS initiative, and existing infrastructure from previous NSF-funded projects
led by members of this team.

