* 1620576
* Investigating the seismic signatures of volcanic unrest and eruption: Spatiotemporal distribution and source origin of tiny long-period seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Robin Matoza, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 316,448.00

Volcano observatories worldwide use seismicity to monitor volcanoes and set
alert levels to protect life and property, but do not fully understand how the
seismic signals are generated. This research will better elucidate seismic
source processes during volcanic unrest and eruption, potentially improving
capability in volcanic hazard monitoring and mitigation. Long-period (LP)
seismicity, a particular type of volcanic seismicity, is used routinely by
volcano monitoring scientists to forecast and assess eruptions and mitigate
hazards, but its source origin remains controversial. Sequences of LP events and
more continuous volcanic tremor signals (collectively called LP seismicity)
commonly appear on seismograms before eruptions, providing a warning, but not a
guarantee, of impending eruption. This project will perform detailed
investigations into the origin of an intriguing and largely overlooked
additional type of volcanic seismicity: numerous tiny-amplitude LP subevents
that accompany the regular LP events. LP subevents could be a useful new signal
for monitoring volcanoes. This research will lead to improved descriptions and
catalogs of seismicity for multiple volcanoes, generating a public database of
information suitable for other researchers in their studies of volcanoes and
seismicity. These products will be of interest to the geophysics, geology,
seismology, and volcanology communities. This project initiates collaboration
between UC Santa Barbara, UC San Diego, and the USGS. It supports the
educational program at UC Santa Barbara by providing funds for graduate student
support. The volcano-seismic event cataloging code will be made publicly
available and will be useful to volcano seismologists for research and
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize novel computationally
intensive processing methods adapted from studying regional seismicity in
Southern California and Hawaii. Tiny LP subevents have apparently been recorded
at multiple volcanoes worldwide, but their origin remains mysterious. Millions
of tiny LP subevents were exceptionally well recorded by a dense seismic network
during the 2004-2008 eruption of Mount St. Helens (MSH), but were not cataloged
or analyzed. These LP subevents contain rich, unexploited information that has
the potential to better elucidate the processes generating volcanic seismicity.
This research will map the spatiotemporal distribution and source mechanisms of
millions of tiny LP subevents to high precision and determine their relation to
other volcanic seismicity and eruptive activity. The primary dataset is from
MSH, but additional datasets from Mammoth Mountain, CA, Kilauea Volcano, HI, and
other volcanoes will be exploited for comparative analyses and hypothesis
testing across multiple volcanic systems. This project will systematically
detect and locate tiny LP subevents using a match-and-locate template matching
approach, perform high-precision relocation and cluster analysis, stack groups
of similar events (multiplets), and perform full-waveform inversion to reveal
the moment-tensor and single-force equivalent point-sources. Integrating these
results will help to resolve the relationships between seismicity and magmatic,
hydrothermal, and solid extrusion conduit processes. The results will address
the following questions: (1) Relocated seismicity will likely cluster into
compact volumes, or align along fault, magma conduit, or hydrothermal
structures: what do these structures reveal about the underlying volcano-seismic
processes? (2) Do source mechanisms and locations of subevents reveal a
dendritic plexus of cracks in the volcano groundwater system, or solid extrusion
processes at the conduit margin? (3) What is the relationship between LPs and
subevents? (4) Do LPs and subevents trigger each other? (5) Are these phenomena
at MSH unique or is similar behavior observed at other volcanoes? (6) What is
the underlying physical process causing this seismicity? (7) Can subevents be
used to improve eruption forecasting?