* 1620239
* IBSS-L: Epigenomic Effects of Colonization on Indigenous Populations
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Derek Wildman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 860,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will analyze how changes in the social
environment as a result of European colonization have contributed to
psychological stress and to possible changes in the genomes and the expression
of genes of indigenous peoples when assimilating to Westernized lifestyles.
These biological changes (also known as epigenomics) may be similar to other
communities whose people have also experienced trauma. The project also will
investigate whether a return to ancestrally-informed social traditions modifies
the biological changes of indigenous peoples when adjusting to a Westernized
environment. The project will enhance understanding of how global historic
events, such as European colonization, produce persistent biological effects
that may still be seen today. Project results will provide insight into the
impact of social stress on biology among indigenous peoples and will clarify
potential points of intervention to reduce health disparities in this
population. This project also will support a program for the training of
indigenous students and community members in genomics theory and analyses, in
conjunction with the Summer Internship for Native Americans in Genomics program,
which will conduct a specialized workshop at Kenai Peninsula College in Alaska
to provide hands-on experience in molecular biology, bioinformatics, and other
genomics related fields. These activities will help bolster program goals to
increase the number of Native Americans serving as leaders in careers involving
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine how well theories
developed in psychology and related fields regarding the biological
underpinnings of trauma manifested in psychological disorders applies in an
anthropological context to Native Americans who have experienced social stress
as a result of European colonization and assimilation to a Westernized life. The
investigators will use multiple approaches in the study. Comparative genomic
approaches will be used to assess points of convergence and divergence between
the data regarding indigenous peoples gathered as part of this study and similar
data about others who have experienced trauma. A comparison will be made with a
non-indigenous control group from the same geographic location as the indigenous
groups. Culturally informed surveys dealing with social lifestyles and stress
will be conducted and analyzed using relevant statistical models, and DNA and
genomes from skeletal remains of ancestral indigenous peoples who lived during
the time of European contact will be isolated and analyzed. This project is
supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.