* 1620049
* I-Corps:  Development of a Biosensor Microchip for the Detection of Cancer Cells at the Point-of-Care
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Carlos Cabrera, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team is geared towards the development of a simple portable
microchip device that will be able to detect cancer cells from blood and/or
tissue samples. This microchip might be used in remote places, low-income
households, and at point-of-care such as doctors' offices, medical centers,
laboratories, pharmacies, or at home. The low cost and simple USB device works
on detecting telomerase, an enzyme over expressed in a variety of cancer cells.
Since cancer is one of the most common causes of death, the availability of a
simple and low cost portable microchip device will help on the accessibility of
preventive care and cancer detection at early stages for its proper treatment.
The goal of this project is to have this innovative technology available at
pharmacies for its use at point-of-care and households. This microchip will be
developed with carbon electrodes and polymer substrates to lower its costs and
make it more cost effective to the community. This development includes
flexibility, robustness, and response time.

The customers who will benefit the most from the proposed innovation are those
who live far from a hospital, do not travel well due to health related issues,
and do not have a strong healthcare plan or want/need to know quickly about the
possibility of having cancer. During the I-Corps program, the team intends to
conduct customer discovery to assess the commercial viability of the proposed
device. If commercially viable, the proposed cancer biosensor will contribute to
new scientific findings and engineering aspects in bio-sensing technology. The
resultant device will also provide a non-invasive, fast, and accurate method to
detect cancer for preclinical diagnosis. In addition, the research based on the
microchip biosensors will improve a range of equivalent studies that use similar
systems and biomarkers.