* 1620023
* I-Corps:  Scalable Knowledge Management for Risk Analysis in Finance
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Praveen Rao, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed project aims to explore the commercialization potential of an
innovative software, which was developed through NSF-funded research, for risk
analysis in finance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A financial institution, such as a
bank makes investments in different (possibly risky) financial markets, which
can either yield a huge profit or lead to a major loss. Thus, effective
financial risk analysis underpins the stability of a financial institution. The
credit crisis of 2008 exposed the huge risk undertaken by banks in the mortgage-
backed securities market with the assumption that the housing prices will not
drop. Subsequently, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act was signed into federal law in 2010. Since then, there has been a pressing
need in the financial industry for a solution to seamlessly integrate data
repositories of financial instruments such as deposits, loans, securities, and
derivatives. Through such a seamless integration, a financial institution will
be able to conduct a more rigorous analysis of the financial risks than ever
before. Towards this end, the Enterprise Data Management (EDM) Council in
collaboration with financial industry partners is developing a new standard for
knowledge representation and data integration. This standard is being designed
to enable easy integration of multiple data repositories of financial
instruments. This project's software, which is designed for scalable knowledge
management, can operate on very large knowledge repositories and provide answers
to end-users very quickly. As a result, it can potentially enable rapid risk
analysis in a fast-paced, volatile financial market. Therefore, its commercial
viability can be potentially transformative in the niche market of financial
knowledge management and risk analysis. The anticipated customers of the
proposed software are financial risk analysts hired by financial institutions
(e.g., banks, trading companies) to assess credit, market, operational, and
regulatory risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of the project is to
investigate how this project's software, called RIQ, can advance the state-of-
the-art in financial knowledge management and risk analysis. RIQ's capability
will be extended and its commercialization potential will be explored through
the I-Corps Teams program. RIQ has the potential to enable rapid risk analysis
through its fast query processing capability. This in turn can enable the
customers/end-users to make fast and effective decisions in a dynamic financial
market. Through this project, RIQ will be extended to showcase the processing of
risk analysis use cases on financial datasets for the final demonstration. RIQ
will be offered to potential customers via the Software-as-a-Service model,
which is attractive for financial institutions as there is no upfront
investment. The I-Corps team will connect with potential customers and
stakeholders such as risk analysts, application developers, IT managers, and
C-level executives in financial institutions. This project has the potential to
advance our understanding of how deep analysis via semantic data representation
and integration can unravel risks in the financial markets, which would not have
been discovered through conventional risk management software. If RIQ is
commercially viable, this project will lead to the creation of a tech startup,
which will lead to new jobs and foster economic development in Missouri. RIQ
will be provided at no cost to academic users to enhance the infrastructure for
education and training, especially for those interested in knowledge management
and data analytics in finance.