* 1620252
* Aspects of Quantum Computational Universality in the Measurement-Based Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tzu-Chieh Wei, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

There are several approaches for building quantum computers that will
potentially solve problems faster than today's classical computers. One
approach, called measurement-based quantum computation, requires "resource
states" in order to work. Resource states can be made with quantum mechanical
systems such as ions, atoms, molecules, superconducting circuits, or elementary
quantum states of light called photons. Yet there are still several open
questions about how to characterize resource states. This project will explore
how different types of resource states are more or less resilient in the
presence of noise. The project will also study how newly discovered phases in
solids can be used as a resource states. The outcomes of this research project
will promote progress by developing methods to characterize resources for
quantum computation, and establishing intellectual connections between materials
science and quantum information science. This project will also train students
to develop new resources and designs for quantum computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers boast exponential speedup for certain
tasks compared to classical computers. To realize this, designs studied here
such as measurement-based models of quantum computation use local measurements
on highly entangled states. Entanglement is thus a resource. However there are
still several fundamental questions about this type of resource. For example, in
addition to the cluster state and its generalization, it is not known what other
states or other types of entanglement can support universal quantum computation.
It is also important to quantify the extent to which some resource states
provide more resistance to noise than others. This project will address those
questions. It will also investigate if resource states can emerge from certain
phases of matter. For example some states of matter recently found in condensed-
matter physics possess topological order, either intrinsic or that protected by
symmetry, that may serve as a resource for quantum computing. More specifically,
various symmetry-protected topologically ordered states in one, two, and three
spatial dimensions (and intrinsic topological order states in two dimensions)
will be studied to see whether they enable quantum computation via construction
of new quantum gates, or reduction by local measurement to known types of
resource states. Physical properties that enable computation using these states
will be characterized. Furthermore, the question of whether these resource
states with certain topological properties can lead to new fault-tolerant
schemes will be investigated. The outcomes of the project will establish further
connections between ideas in quantum information science and condensed-matter
physics, and will contribute to the challenge of completely characterizing
universal resources for quantum computations. This will contribute to progress
designing quantum information processing systems that can be reliably
experimental realized.