* 1620580
* Developing A Discourse Observation Tool and Online Professional Development to Promote Science, Oral Language and Literacy Development from the Start of School
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Tanya Wright, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,204,290.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The goal of this project is to develop resources and a professional
development model to help early-elementary teachers improve science instruction
among young learners by cultivating scientific discourse. A central component of
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) is engaging students in discourse
with a focus on formulating and communicating scientific explanations. This
project will develop a classroom observation tool that will help teachers
examine changes in the quantity and quality of science discourse in K-2
classrooms over time. The project will also develop an online professional
development (PD) model that uses the new observation tool to help teachers
analyze their own classroom practices and the practice of others to improve
classroom efforts to foster improved scientific discourse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This early stage design and development study will employ
a Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) approach to develop the new
classroom observation tool and online professional development model, and then
seek answers to the following research questions: 1) How can a classroom
observation measure be developed to effectively capture the range in quality of
science discourse in early elementary classrooms?; 2) How can an online PD model
be developed based on the new observation tool?; 3) How do teachers' knowledge
and instructional practice change over the course of participation in the
yearlong PD?; and 4) How does the quantity and quality of science discourse
change in K-2 classrooms over the course of teachers' participation in a
yearlong online PD experience that is built around the new observation tool? The
project will engage 36 teachers and their 36 different classrooms in Michigan
and use multiple data sources to understand whether and how teacher knowledge
and instructional practices change during participation in the new PD model.
Multiple iterations of design, data collection, and refinement will be used to
understand how, when, and why features of the PD and observation tool might
combine to transform science discourse in early elementary classrooms. In years
3 and 4, the project team will conduct two year-long implementation trials with
cohorts of 15 teachers and 5 instructional coaches (experienced science
teachers) who will use the PD and tool in order study their implementation and
make iterative improvements. The project will also gather data to understand
changes in teacher knowledge and practice as well as video data to document
changes in classroom discourse.