* 1620638
* Particle Physics and Cosmology in the LHC Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,920,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Kevork Abazajian, Mu-Chun
Chen, Jonathan Feng, Manoj Kaplinghat, Arvind Rajaraman, Yuri Shirman, and
Timothy Tait at the University of California, Irvine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is an exciting time in particle physics and cosmology. Data from a variety of
particle-physics experiments are deepening our understanding of the fundamental
interactions and probing the physics of higher and higher energies with
unprecedented detail. At the same time, outstanding questions in astrophysics
and cosmology also guide theoretical work, and the interaction between cosmology
and particle physics has been very fruitful. This grant will support research
across a wide spectrum of frontiers, with an eye towards exploiting innovative
ideas in particle physics, cosmology, and at their interface to address
outstanding problems in a wide variety of fields. Particular directions to be
studied include searches for new elementary particles at underground colliders,
studies of the properties of neutrinos, and work that aims to shed light on the
mysterious dark matter that makes up most of the matter in the universe. This
research will also study new ideas at the interface between particle physics and
cosmology. The research supported by this award thus advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in its most fundamental
directions: deepening our understanding of the physical Universe at both the
smallest and largest length scales, and furthering our knowledge of the basic
building blocks and forces that make up and shape our
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the group's activities are
directed toward increasing public interest in and improving public understanding
of the exciting results of physics and astronomy. The group's activities include
developing and teaching a COSMOS summer course on particle physics and cosmology
to high-achieving high school students from diverse socio-economic backgrounds,
programs to strengthen the representation of underrepresented minorities in
physics and other STEM fields, a wide array of public talks and outreach
activities through print and web-based media, the training of postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students both at UC Irvine and around the world, and
significant contributions in the area of professional service.