* 1620271
* Logic, Topology and Genomics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of the project is to apply methods of logic and topology to several
important problems in genomics and medicine. The first application is mining
large scale clinical databases for information that would be usable for
clinicians and/or biological researchers. The PI plans to design and implement a
method applying ideas from persistent homology theory in a logic-based
framework. The starting point of this approach is the notion of "redescriptions"
introduced by Parida (senior consultant for the project) and Ramakrishnan in the
context of knowledge discovery. A mathematical reformulation leads to certain
filtered complexes arising from set systems, which are then amenable to analysis
using tools from topology. A second application will be in the area of
phylogenetics. Studying population admixtures is a very active area of research
in population genomics. The PI will use topological methods to not only detect
but also discriminate ancient from recent admixture, and validate the approach
by testing it on large simulated populations where the admixtures are known in
advance. Generating such populations pose unique challenges that have been
tackled by Parida and her group recently.

A common practical difficulty encountered in many applications of topological
data analysis is computing persistent homology groups of filtrations of very
large simplicial complexes. The sizes of these complexes makes the computations
of their persistent homology bar-codes using current generation publicly
available software impossible. The second part of the project will address this
shortcoming. The PI will investigate a new approach towards improving efficiency
of computing persistent homology groups over existing algorithms. This approach
will be useful in a wide variety of applications where topological data analysis
is currently being used. The PI plans to implement this algorithm and develop it
into a general purpose software-package for computing approximations of
persistent homology invariants of filtrations of large complexes. The project
will bring together tools from two different areas of mathematics -- logic and
topology -- in a novel way, as a method towards analyzing large data-sets. In
addition, the PI will also study the underlying mathematical problems that come
up -- on the interface of logic and topology which are fundamentally interesting
in their own rights, and should have other applications as well. The PI also
intends to work with a graduate student and involve them in all aspects of the
proposed research.