* 1620651
* Harnessing Symmetry-Protected Topological Orders for Quantum Computation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Akimasa Miyake, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 194,993.00

Computers have become ubiquitous and indispensable in modern society, and the
search for new and more powerful computers is constant. One avenue of
exploration is to develop computation based on using quantum information
processing (QIP). QIP takes advantage of quantum states, for instance spins of
electrons, to encode information. Quantum effects such as "superposition" and
"entanglement" enable QIP devices to process information with shades of gray
beyond the conventional black-or-white (so-called 0-or-1) logic, and to attain
drastic improvements over conventional devices. However, there are two major
challenges to achieving the goal of a QIP-based system. One is to find ways to
scale up QIP devices, building on recent experiments with small numbers of
quantum bits. The other challenge is to discover more examples, and whole
categories, of informational tasks for which QIP devices surpass conventional
devices. The goal of this project is to address these key issues using ideas
from the study of many-body quantum physics phenomena such as superconductivity
and magnetism, as, for example, how frustrated quantum spin systems that exhibit
exotic magnetism also possess intrinsic capability as a quantum computer. In
more general terms, the project will explore ways to use macroscopic quantum
order to obtain some quantum advantage in computation and simulation. This
research will contribute to the knowledge base of quantum information science
and to the training of future scientists in this highly interdisciplinary and
rapidly expanding field.

The framework of measurement-based quantum computation (MQC) is a convenient way
to study the origin of quantum advantages such as quantum speed-up in
computation. MQC needs entangled states as a resource. This project will examine
how certain types of macroscopic entanglement which are naturally found in
quantum spin liquid phases of frustrated quantum spin systems called symmetry-
protected topological orders (SPTO) can be used as a resource for MQC. This
project will explore how a higher level of entanglement with more intrinsic
quantum-gate complexity (Clifford hierarchy) is available by using higher-
dimensional SPTO. The new entanglement by 2D SPTO has several features which are
not available by conventional universal entanglement (like the cluster state
whose SPTO is of a 1D nature), and is in contrast capable of universal quantum
computation even by simplest single-spin X, Y, and Z measurements. This project
takes advantage of this concrete connection between macroscopic quantum orders
and quantum complexity to approach the key issues about scalability and non-
classical complexity in quantum computation and simulation. Thus it builds
connections between two research fields: quantum information science and quantum
many-body physics.