* 1620911
* Synchronous Online Professional Learning Experiences for Middle Grades Mathematics Teachers in Rural Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Julie Amador, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,822,085.00

All teachers need access to high quality professional development in order to
meet the needs of students and teach mathematics as outlined in college and
career-ready standards. Online professional development has the potential to
expand access to under-resourced areas, including urban districts, and teachers
who wish to participate in communities of inquiry but do not have local access
to such communities. Building on research on effective face-to-face professional
development, including research from the emerging fields of content-focused
coaching and video coaching, this project will design and study professional
development for middle grades mathematics teachers in rural communities. As
schools turn to digital learning contexts, it is inevitable that professional
development will follow a similar trend. It is imperative to have research-based
models that demonstrate how the features of high-quality face-to-face
professional development can be matched or augmented in online contexts. The
study has the potential to contribute to research on professional development,
especially in the growing areas of online professional development and coaching,
and will build from and contribute to the literature on the impact of multiple
modalities and synchronicities in online contexts. The project will address the
critical need for models of professional development for teachers in rural
areas, which has a limited research base. This project is funded by the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) Program. The DRK-12 program supports
research and development on STEM education innovations and approaches to
teaching, learning, and assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop and implement an innovative online mathematics professional development
model designed to provide growth opportunities for teachers in rural districts
who normally lack access to such opportunities. The study will take place in two
geographically disparate locations in order to research the effectiveness of the
model across contexts and to explore the resources and constraints involved in
scaling up the model. The project will focus on developing teacher capacity to
enact ambitious, responsive instruction aligned with the Common Core State
Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM), and thus will be sustained, interactive, and
of sufficient duration to help teachers transform their practices. In the design
of the professional development, the project will leverage features of emerging
technologies that are multimodal and involve a mix of synchronous/ asynchronous
communication. The most innovative feature is the online video coaching in which
a teacher and coach separately will view and notate video of the teacher's
enactment of a collaboratively planned lesson as a precursor to the online post-
lesson debriefing. Building from design-based research principles, the project
will incorporate iterative cycles of data collection, analysis, reflection, and
revision that will explore the effectiveness of the model and inform revisions.