* 1620035
* SCH: Student Travel Support for IEEE Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Honggang Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 15,000.00

The proposal is for student travel support and participation in the IEEE
Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2016) in Washington, DC supportive
scientific forum for students to engage in scholarship focusing on the multiple
computing and engineering issues associated with the multidisciplinary field of
connected health. The consortium provide a forum for expert and peer critique of
students' doctoral work with the goal of improving their research. Student
participants will also have the opportunity to receive networking support and
career advice from internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the travel
support brings together people who might not otherwise engage with one another
and engage in multidisciplinary research in fields involving connected health.
The CHASE conference also exposes participant to different scientific
disciplinary approaches and develops the next generation of scholars in
connected health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal for student travel support
and participation in the IEEE Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2016) in
Washington, DC is to support doctoral students through constructive remarks and
feedback on their interdisciplinary research from prominent researchers and
through interaction with other students. Student participants explore a broad
range of digital heath information technology, such as body sensor networks and
intelligent techniques, while at the same time connecting patient and caregivers
seamlessly in the loop of the healthcare ecosystem. Students will give short
presentations of their work and receive constructive feedback from
internationally respected experts in connected health. The experts will also
provide student participants with career guidance and mentoring through
presentations and small group advising throughout the day. In addition, student
participants will have the opportunity to see the conference and network with
conference attendees.