* 1620853
* 2016 Summer Program at Center for Theoretical Underground Physics and Related Areas (CETUP*)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Akif Baha Balantekin, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2016
* USD 12,110.00

This award will provide support for the sixth CETUP* (Center for Theoretical
Underground Physics and Related Areas) summer program that is planned to take
place on June 6 - July 16, 2016 in Lead/Deadwood, SD. The main goal of CETUP* is
to bring together people with different expertise to address the most exciting
questions in particle and nuclear physics, astrophysics, cosmology and
geosciences. This year's program will focus on Dark Matter, Neutrino Physics and
Unification, bringing together experts in dark matter, neutrino physics,
particle physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics and cosmology.

Basic research impacts many areas of science and technology. In particular,
understanding neutrino properties better could have significant implications in
astrophysics and cosmology, and may offer solutions to the current puzzles such
as the abundance of matter over antimatter, and better knowledge of the
potential connections between new fundamental particles will allow the
determination of their impact on the early universe. The CETUP* program will
offer a stimulating environment for research collaborations between scientists
of varying ages and nationalities and the training of young scientists,
including undergraduate and graduate students and under-represented groups. The
award will provide travel support for the early career scientists and students
to participate in this summer program.

Scientists invited to participate in the program will not only provide
theoretical support to the underground science, but they will also examine the
underlying universal questions including: What is the nature of dark matter?
What is the origin of neutrino masses? How have neutrinos shaped the evolution
of the universe? How were the elements from iron to uranium made in the early
universe? What is the origin and thermal history of the Earth? How do supernovae
explode? What is the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the Universe?
What are the fundamental underlying symmetries of the Universe? and Is there a
Grand Unified Theory of the Universe? The 2016 CETUP* will consist of a 6-week
long program. The two-week long session on Physics and Instrumentation of the
Near Detector for the Long-Baseline Neutrino Experiments will be followed by the
two-week long Neutrino Physics/Unification session: "From Grand Unification to
String Theory and Back" and the program will end with a two-week long session on
Dark Matter.