* 1620989
* I-Corps:  enPour - an Assistive Pouring Device for Enhanced Control and Minimized Effort
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Jeff Feng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

In the United States, an estimated 52.5 million adults have doctor-diagnosed
arthritis, and 22.7 million report limitations due to their arthritis. In
addition, the market landscape of assistive devices for seniors is growing.
According to the Transparency Market Research Group, this market is expected to
reach an estimated value of almost $20 billion by 2019. Seniors with Arthritis
suffer muscle deterioration over time, have pains, aches, stiffness, and
swelling in or around the joints, as well as many other afflictions that effect
motor skills and strength. For them the process of pouring out liquid from heavy
containers such as milk jugs, water pitchers or large bowls can cause fatigue,
pain and even physical harm by causing damage to joints in the fingers and
hands. The proposed project 'enPour' will target individuals who suffer from
disabilities which hinder their daily activities, independence, or quality of
life. enPour is a superior solution that is intuitive, easy to use, and
adaptable for a wide range of container sizes and shapes which sets it greatly
apart from anything that is currently on the market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;enPour has been developed, and validated through rounds of
prototype testing. An evidence of market interest for this product has been
established and recognized through focus group studies conducted with the
Houston local office of Arthritis Foundation. Through NSF I-Corps program, this
team will conduct a nation-wide consumer research under the guidance of I-Corps
instructors. Through this training, the team's rimary goals can be summarized
as: 1) identify and expand the core customer segments and the key value
propositions of enPour, 2) attract third party investment and partners through
product testing and demonstration, and 3) connect and establish a partnering
relationship with a number of specialized healthcare institutions through the
team's connections. The methods will primarily include onsite interviews,
survey, prototype testing and demonstration. The I-Corps program will be a
stepping stone for the team to gain an in-depth understanding of the targeted
consumers, market and the potential sales channels.