* 1620194
* Fractional Partial Differential Equations and Related Nonlocal Models:   Fast Numerical Methods, Analysis, and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Hong Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 249,999.00

The project proposes to develop a novel mathematical modeling of micro- and
nano-fluidics, which intersects engineering, biochemistry, nanotechnology, and
biotechnology. The study of micro-and nano-fluidics has great potential to
revolutionize the methods in biological and chemical applications, which has
wide applications to the design of systems in which low volumes of fluids are
processed to achieve multiplexing, automation, and high-throughput screening.
Micro- and nano-fluidics is used widely in the development of inkjet printheads,
DNA chips, lab-on-a-chip technology, micro-propulsion, and micro-thermal
technologies. The project will also provide advanced interdisciplinary training
to graduate and undergraduate students. All of these activities will have broad
and long-lasting impacts and contribute directly to the intellectual
infrastructure of the nation.

Nonlocal models such as fractional partial differential equations (FPDEs),
fractional Laplacian, and peridynamics are emerging as powerful tools for
modeling challenging phenomena including anomalous transport and long-range time
memory or spatial interactions in a wide range of fields such as biology,
physics, chemistry, finance, engineering, and solute transport in groundwater.
These models provide more appropriate description of many important problems in
applications than integer-order PDE models do. Two of the main reasons that
nonlocal models have not been used extensively so far are as follows: (1) They
generate numerical schemes with dense matrices and solutions with strongly local
behavior, which are significantly more expensive to solve numerically than
traditional integer-order PDE models. A naive simulation of a three-dimensional
linear problem with a moderate number of grid points may take state of the art
supercomputers hundreds of years to finish and so deemed unrealistic. (2)
Nonlocal models introduce mathematical difficulties, which were not encountered
in the context of integer-order PDEs. It is proposed to effectively address both
points at this juncture. The fast numerical methods proposed herein will provide
significant computational benefits for nonlocal models, and will facilitate
their applications. Preliminary numerical experiments of a simple three-
dimensional fractional PDE showed that the proposed method reduced the CPU time
from 2 months and 25 days by a traditional method to 5.74 seconds and reduced
storage significantly. The proposed mathematical and numerical analysis will
provide a solid theoretical foundation for nonlocal models and related numerical
approximations. The fast and accurate numerical methods and rigorous
mathematical analysis results will be applied in the development of a novel
mathematical modeling of micro- and nano-fluidics. The resulting mathematical
model will be utilized in the study of micro- and nano-fluidics.