* 1620462
* IBSS-L: Information Networks and the Evolution of Social Organizations
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Luis Bettencourt, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 770,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will explain why different social group
exhibits particular forms of organization by providing a rigorous way to
determine the extent to which a social group's structure is shaped by external
pressures, such as demands and opportunities afforded by the environment, rather
than internal pressures, such as competition and misaligned incentives among
group members. The project will constitute a new research thrust for the social
and behavioral sciences regarding the ways that the structure of organizations
constrains their ability to process environmental information, and it will
provide new insights as to how organizations internally route information
subject to restrictions on actors' capabilities. This project can help unite
social and behavioral scientists ranging from those focusing on primate groups
and forager societies to those studying the structure of multinational
corporations. It will also provide tangible returns by suggesting how to best
organize modern firms and governmental bureaucracies. The project will develop
and make available databases on a variety of past and present social
organizations which will be of broad scholarly
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social groups ranging from prehistoric societies to
business firms to military organizations are organized in dramatically different
ways, from egalitarian "horizontal" societies to deep "vertical" hierarchies and
from sets of decentralized, modular teams to centralized command-and-control
assemblies. Do social groups exhibit the organizations they do because these
structures optimize information exchange, or are groups simply channeled by
local historical precedent? This project will address this question by using
recently developed mathematical techniques to formalize the notions of
"collective problem solving" and "cognitive constraints." These formalizations
will be employed to investigate which organizations perform best under different
constraints and group sizes as well as which are most "robust" in continuing to
function when members or inter-member connections are removed or the pressures
on the group change. The investigators will then determine whether such optimal
organizations reflect the way real groups are (or have been) organized. The
problem of optimal internal organization has received attention in various
fields, from anthropology to economics. However, there has not been a unifying
mathematical framework for studying the relationship between different kinds of
organizations and the pressures and constraints on organizations. This project
will develop such a framework by combining techniques from graph theory and
information theory. Graph theory studies the organization of social networks and
provides a rich vocabulary for quantifying organizational properties like
hierarchy, centralization, and modularity. Methods from information theory can
quantify the bits of information processed or communicated between group
members, conceptualizing a social group as a telecommunication network where
network nodes correspond to group members and "bandwidth limits" on the network
channels and nodes correspond to cognitive constraints. The researchers will
identify network structures that best process information under different sets
of bandwidth limits and compare the results to empirical data on past and
present human organizations. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.