* 1620282
* EAGER: Opto-Radiometric Powered Untethered MEMS Microfliers
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Igor Paprotny, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2020
* USD 319,153.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project builds upon
preliminary demonstrations of untethered microfliers, that is, free-flying
microscale structures. A temperature gradient across the microflier chassis
drives a net flow of air from hot to cold side, and lift is generated by
momentum transfer from this flow to the microflier body. Known as "radiometric
force," this effect has been an object of study by physicists and fluid
dynamicists for over a century, but only recently has a comprehensive
understanding begun to emerge. Though too weak to affect larger objects at
atmospheric pressures, radiometric forces scale advantageously for
characteristic lengths less than a millimeter. Together with advances in
fabrication of micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS), laser-driven opto-
radiometric microfliers have the potential to push the envelope of human
controlled flight to unprecedented levels of miniaturization. This project will
advance towards that goal, with complementary theoretical and experimental
components. The results will pave the way for a new class of aerial microrobots
with applications such as surveillance, microassembly, airborne pollution
monitoring and airborne threat detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
existence of microscale flying insects, aerial microrobots have not been
previously investigated. Thermal (radiometric) forces have been shown to move
micron-sized particles in air, and radiometric forces caused by optical heating
of light-absorbing structures have been studied since the invention of the
Crookes Radiometer in 1873. This project will validate the feasibility of
achieving untethered, controlled opto-radiometric microscale flight, i.e. flight
propelled by forces generated via a thermal gradient from a focused optical beam
illuminating untethered microfabricated structures. The research team will
develop new theory of opto-radiometric microscale flight at atmospheric
pressures, investigate novel materials and microfabrication processes that
increase the opto-radiometric power transfer without increasing the microflier
mass, fabricate and test prototypes of untethered microscale flying robots using
a combination of microfabrication technologies and 2-photon stereolithography,
and investigate biologically-inspired mechanism for attaining in-flight
stability and control.