* 1620216
* Three dimensional deep wavelet scattering for quantum energy interpolation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Hirn, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 191,775.00

Physical quantities are often computed as solutions to a system of complex
mathematical equations, which may require huge computations for intricate
physical states. Quantum chemistry calculations of molecular energies is such an
example. Indeed, computing the energy of a molecule, given the charges and
positions of its nuclei, is a central issue in computational chemistry with
important applications in molecular dynamics, materials science, and drug
discovery. Machine learning algorithms do not simulate the physical system but
estimate solutions by learning from a training set of known examples. However,
such learning algorithms may require a number of examples that is exponential in
the system dimension, and are thus intractable; this phenomena is referred to as
the "curse of dimensionality." This proposal will develop a novel approach for
the estimation of molecular energies based on the "scattering transform." The
scattering transform estimates molecular energies, and circumvents the curse of
dimensionality, by utilizing a multiscale, multilevel architecture that takes
advantage of physical invariants. The resulting algorithms have the potential to
significantly speed up the computation of highly accurate molecular energy
estimates, leading to large scale atomistic simulations with greatly improved
accuracy, speed, and adaptability, thus shifting the paradigm of multiscale
modeling. The PI will additionally mentor an undergraduate student and train a
graduate student in this field, thus setting up the potential for dissemination
of the core ideas to a broader audience.

The scattering transform has the structure of a deep convolutional network, but
is composed of iterated wavelet transforms and complex modulus operators. Such
networks have been used in computer vision for the analysis and classification
of two dimensional images and audio tasks involving one dimensional signals. A
multiscale three dimensional scattering transform network is novel both in
practice (multiscale 3D) and design (for quantum chemistry), and has the chance
to influence these types of architectures moving forward. A systematic approach
will attack the primary object on several fronts: (1) development of efficient
3D filters with the appropriate symmetry and stability properties; (2) rigorous
error analysis of the scattering regression algorithm for various components of
the molecular energy functional; (3) deeper understanding of the scattering
network via provable relations with fast multipole methods. The methods used to
carry out these objectives will include: (i) wavelet filter design and efficient
signal processing algorithms; (ii) utilization of Littlewood-Paley Theory in
conjunction with polynomial (Taylor) approximation theory; (iii) multiscale
analysis; (iv) numerical experiments to validate methods. By rigorously linking
deep learning architectures with physical chemistry, the research in this
proposal will take place at the interface of data science and scientific
computation, for the mutual gain of both.