* 1620822
* Temporal-Spectral Multimode Photonics for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Brian Smith, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Visible light is one of the primary ways we get information about the world and
the universe, for example using microscopes and telescopes. Light pulses are
also used to convey information across the globe at unprecedented rates using
the world-wide fiber-optical network that supports the Internet, e-commerce, and
even the international financial markets. Furthermore, light can be used to
control material systems with applications ranging from laser eye surgery to
optical "tweezers" that can trap and manipulate individual molecules. Many of
these developments have been enabled by new methods to generate, manipulate and
detect light. Today, researchers are developing means to generate, control, and
measure the fundamental constituents of light, single photons (individual light
"particles"), which obey the laws of quantum physics. This project will explore
methods to produce, manipulate and measure individual photons with well-defined
pulse characteristics (color and temporal pulse shape) and examine the potential
of such single-photon pulses for applications such as secure communications,
enhanced precision measurements, and high-capacity computation. The project
supports education through training of a diverse group of undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral researchers in the field of quantum information
science, and provides outreach to local high schools and colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to harness the potential advances in
quantum technologies offered by encoding information in the wavelength and
temporal shape of individual photons. By exploring methods to produce,
manipulate and measure single photons with well-defined pulse characteristics
(wavelength and temporal shape), this research program will examine the impact
of spectral-temporal single-photon encoding for improved performance in
applications such as sensing and quantum communication. To address these goals,
the project explores wave-guided optical sources of controllable spectral-
temporal entangled photon pairs based upon spontaneous nonlinear optical
processes. It examines methods for manipulating single-photon pulses by
application of well-defined temporal and spectral phase implemented using
electro-optic phase modulators and engineered spectral dispersion in optical
fibers. It also investigates methods to characterize the pulse-mode structure of
one and two photons by temporal- and spectral-shearing interferometry. This
platform for information encoding in the single-photon spectral-temporal shape
offers increased information capacity for single photons in integrated-optical
systems.