* 1620630
* An Innovative Bridge Program for Mentoring BS-MS Fast-Track Students towards PhDs in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 585,001.00

The Mathematics Department at the University of Texas Arlington will run a
three-year bridge project involving 30 students to transition them to doctoral
programs in the mathematical sciences. The targeted students are those,
especially from underrepresented or underserved groups, who are not yet as
competitive for doctoral programs as those who already had strong preparation in
analysis and advanced linear algebra. The project is intended to be a
comprehensive support system that benefits from the existing mathematics
learning community in the mathematics doctoral program at the University of
Texas Arlington and faculty mentoring and peer mentoring. This project will
provide participating students with the opportunity to develop their full
intellectual and academic potential in the mathematical sciences, by providing
them with a comprehensive preparation and an innovative curricular and training
program that emphasizes transition from an undergraduate program to a
comprehensive PhD program. By addressing critical issues related to transition
to doctoral studies in the mathematical sciences, particularly for those from
underrepresented or underserved groups, the project has the potential to
contribute to a significant increase in the quantity, quality, and diversity of
the future leaders in the mathematical sciences, by serving as a model program
for other institutions or other Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) fields. This project has also the potential to impact curriculum
improvements in the undergraduate mathematical training in underserved
institutions in the nation through collaboration with institutions offering
doctoral programs, benefiting both parties. By addressing critical issues
related to transition to doctoral studies in the mathematical sciences,
particularly for those from underrepresented or underserved groups, the project
also has the potential to contribute to a significant increase in the quantity,
quality, and diversity of the future leaders in the mathematical sciences. This
project has also the potential to impact curriculum improvements in the
undergraduate mathematical training in underserved institutions in the nation
through collaboration with institutions offering doctoral programs, benefiting
both parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project aims at increasing
the quality and quantity of US doctoral students in the mathematical sciences,
particularly those among underrepresented or underserved groups, through strong
mentoring and a bridge-to-doctorate program with a BS-MS fast-track component.
It targets those talented students among underrepresented groups or from small
colleges or minority serving institutions, who are not yet considered
competitive for rigorous national doctoral programs due to deficiency especially
in analysis and advanced linear algebra. The project aims to train and mentor
the participating students to make them well prepared in analysis and advanced
linear algebra and to become competitive for a comprehensive PhD program in
Mathematical Sciences. The project builds on two cornerstones: (1) a bridge-to-
doctorate program with a BS-MS fast track that focuses on students in transition
from undergraduate to graduate programs to strengthen their background in
analysis and advanced linear algebra, and (2) a comprehensive system for such
students providing strong mentoring and aggressive recruitment in the Gulf
States Math Alliance, a regional branch of the National Alliance for Doctoral
Studies in the Mathematical Sciences covering the states of Texas, Louisiana,
and Mississippi.