* 1620449
* Theoretical and Numerical Studies of Nonlocal Equations Derived from Stochastic Differential Equations with Levy Noises
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jinqiao Duan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,578.00

Stochastic effects are ubiquitous in complex systems in science and engineering.
Although random mechanisms may appear to be very small or very fast, their long
time impact on the system evolution may be delicate or even profound, which has
been observed in, for example, stochastic bifurcation, stochastic resonance and
noise-induced pattern formation. The research team will study the complex
systems under uncertainty by developing numerical methods to be simulated on
computers and answer fundamental questions about the average quantities of the
systems. The investigators will deliver the following broader impact outcomes:
(1) Two graduate students (including one female underrepresented minority) will
receive education and training and (2) they will continue to recruit and nurture
underrepresented students in STEM. Additionally, the resulting computational
tools have broad applications in areas ranging from biology to geophysics. The
software resulting from the proposed project will be made publicly available.

Mathematical modeling of complex systems under uncertainty often leads to
stochastic differential equations (SDEs). Fluctuations appeared in the SDEs are
often non-Gaussian (e.g., Levy motions) rather than Gaussian (e.g., Brownian
motion). Compared with systems with Gaussian noises, quantifying the impacts of
non-Gaussian Levy fluctuations are much less understood. The researchers will
develop convergent and efficient numerical techniques for investigating the
deterministic macroscopic quantities that can help understand the dynamics of
SDEs with Levy noises, in particular the mean exit time, escape probability, and
probability density function. They will also answer theoretical questions with
regard to the well-posedness and the regularity of the solutions to these
nonlocal equations. Building upon previously developed methods in the one-
dimensional case, the team will focus its effort on two-dimensional systems. The
proposed project will provide not only broadly applicable computational
techniques to solve integro-differential equations with singular integrands, but
also theoretically address the central questions pertaining to the solutions.
The theory will help to provide insight into fundamental issues in quantifying
the impacts of non-Gaussian Levy fluctuations in dynamical systems.