* 1620330
* Investigating Earthquake Source Processes in the Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ze'ev Reches, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 331,996.00

Major efforts have been devoted to earthquake research to further our
understanding of this natural phenomenon and attempt to reduce its disastrous
damage. However, it is not possible to directly observe earthquake processes,
because they occur along faults at depths of a few to hundreds of kilometers.
The researchers from Oklahoma University have developed an experimental
laboratory with tools to duplicate earthquake speeds and offsets on samples of
natural rocks. They will partner with a laboratory at Hebrew University that
simulate high speed fracturing on acrylics, which are not the same as naturally
occurring rocks but can help researchers see aspects of what is happening that
could be related to the natural rock experiments. The combination of these sets
of complimentary lab experiments will help us to understand how fractures that
cause earthquakes and radiates seismic waves. This information is important to
improving how we understand seismic hazards because it will advance what we know
about strong ground shaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oklahoma University team
developed an apparatus that physically simulates the velocity and displacement
of large earthquakes on experimental rock faults. This team succeeded in
reproducing well-known earthquake features of rock weakening and energy
consumption. The Hebrew University team has developed unique, high-speed
experimental tools that quantitatively measure the extremely fast mechanical
evolution of the rupture of a "laboratory" earthquake. The project will combine
the unique capabilities of the two experimental systems for better understanding
of earthquake rupture, including detailed description of realistic processes of
rock fracturing, friction, and ground shaking. Experimental data on earthquake
processes at depth are essential for the derivation of useful models,
interpretation of seismic observations, and the evaluation of seismic hazard.
The advanced features of the two experimental systems will allow monitoring of
rupture along rock-faults at very high resolution, which cannot be achieved for
natural earthquakes. It is anticipated that this rupture monitoring will provide
the missing links between experiments, theory and seismic concepts, and
therefore will significantly advance the understanding of earthquake rupture
processes, earthquake energy balance, physics of fault weakening, and the
scaling of slip rate, slip magnitude, and seismic hazard.