* 1620904
* An Online STEM Career Exploration and Readiness Environment for Opportunity Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Martina Nieswandt, CAST, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,706,828.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAST, the University of Massachusetts-Amherst,
and YouthBuild USA aim to create a web-based STEM Career Exploration and
Readiness Environment (CEE-STEM). This will support opportunities for youth ages
16-24 who are neither in school nor are working, in rebuilding engagement in
STEM learning and developing STEM skills and capacities relevant to diverse
postsecondary education/training and employment pathways. The program will
provide opportunity youth with a personalized and portable tool to explore STEM
careers, demonstrate their STEM learning, reflect on STEM career interests, and
take actions to move ahead with STEM career pathways of interest.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program addresses two critical and interrelated aspects
of STEM learning for opportunity youth: the development of STEM foundational
knowledge; and STEM engagement, readiness and career pathways. These aspects of
STEM learning are addressed through an integrated program model that includes
classroom STEM instruction; hands-on job training in career pathways including
green construction, health care, and technology.