* 1620085
* Development of High-Purity NaI(T1) Crystals for the SABRE Dark Matter Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 09/30/2022
* USD 565,016.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. SABRE (Sodium-iodide with Active Background
REjection) is an experiment that will search for dark matter signals using an
array of Sodium Iodide (NaI) scintillating crystals. This award will provide
funds to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating ultra-low background NaI
crystals, with lower levels of Potassium-40 and other radioactive impurities, by
improving the methods to produce and purify NaI powder, and by developing
methods to grow crystals with very low contamination of radioactive elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SABRE project provides ample opportunities for
students and postdoctoral researchers to gain experience and training for
careers in basic research. SABRE has promoted strong relationships with
commercial companies and assisted in the development of special products
available to all customers. These collaborations have brought improved high
purity products and sensitive assay services to the market. The development of
high purity NaI crystals is also making possible other new experiments with
scintillating bolometers for dark matter research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sensitivity of the search for rare dark matter events depends critically on the
background in the detector, which in NaI(Tl) crystals is dominated by low levels
of K-40 radioactivity in the crystal. This award will support on-going
development of NaI(Tl) crystals with lower intrinsic radioactivity. In addition,
by coupling efficient low background photomultipliers to the crystals and
reducing dynode afterglow with lower PMT voltage, they will achieve a threshold
energy lower than that of the DAMA experiment. Their goal is a flat background
of ~ 0.10 cpd/kg/keV and a threshold energy less than 1 keVee. Measurements of K
at the level of 10 ppb have been possible for some time; an improvement to 2 ppb
is indicated in recent work. A preliminary measurement of U and Th at a level of
~Â­ 0.5 ppt is indicated in recent work. These measurements are much faster than
growing crystal and gamma counting and are thus guiding research in a timely way
toward production of crystals with low levels of these radioactive impurities.