* 1620027
* Collaborative Research:  Mathematical Methods for Optimal Polynomial Recovery of High-Dimensional Systems from Sparse and Noisy Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Yanzhao Cao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 38,913.00

Current problems in approximation that are driven by applications in science and
engineering, are typically formulated in very high dimensions. This project
involves the study of different problems related to high-dimensional
approximation, that arise in a large number of applications including neutron,
tomographic and magnetic resonance image reconstruction, uncertainty
quantification, optimal control and parameter identification, as well as in
important areas of energy and material science. The approaches used in this work
will result in substantially improved and mathematically well-founded
methodologies for computer simulations of solutions to real-world problems. The
project will be centered around the interdisciplinary training of graduate
students in computational data science and engineering. The results obtained
will be disseminated through journal articles, conference talks, and a
collaborative website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this effort we propose to
develop novel mathematical techniques for approximation of high-dimensional
systems from a limited amount of sparse and noisy data. The results of this
effort will enable scientists to understand what are the number realizations of
a nonlinear manifold that required to recover the entire high-dimensional
solution map, with optimal approximation guarantees and minimal computational
cost. Our rigorous mathematical approach includes: Novel weighted convex
optimization and iterative thresholding techniques for optimal polynomial
recovery, established via an improved estimate of the restricted isometry
property; and Advanced multi-index methods that alleviate complexity and
accelerate convergence of solutions by constructing model hierarchies with the
use of reduced-basis techniques.