* 1620601
* Detailed seismic imaging and monitoring of the subsurface material around the San Jacinto fault zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2019
* USD 252,159.00

This study develops and uses advanced seismological techniques and continuous
waveform data recorded by spatially-dense fault zone arrays around the San
Jacinto Fault Zone (SJFZ) in southern California. Analyses of these data provide
detailed characterization of (potentially time-dependent) seismic velocities and
attenuation coefficients of the shallow crust. To provide benchmarks for the new
techniques and understand how seismic properties change with location and depth,
the investigators use data recorded by shallow borehole seismometers installed
within and adjacent to the fault zone, as well as recordings from regional
seismic networks. These results complement models of tomographic studies that
typically do not resolve seismic properties in the shallow crust, and allow
development of seismic structural models around the SJFZ essentially up to the
surface. Knowledge of seismic properties of the shallow crust is particularly
relevant to observed ground motion and failure processes. These results may be
relevant to numerous other applications including crustal hydrology, geothermal
energy, subsurface reservoirs and storage, as well as seismic safety of
infrastructure facilities. The analysis methods develop by this research can be
used in studies of seismic properties of the subsurface material in other
locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses state-of-the-art data and
novel seismic imaging and monitoring techniques to close critical observational
gaps. The studies address the following key questions: (1) What are the seismic
velocities and attenuation coefficients in the top few hundred meters of the
crust at various sections of the SJFZ and at sites that are off the fault? (2)
At what stress/strain amplitudes do shallow rocks have nonlinear response and
temporal changes of properties in relation to different loading mechanisms and
periods (e.g., local and remote earthquakes, tides, and seasonal variations) and
location with respect to the fault zone, site condition parameters, and depth?
(3) How do amplitudes of temporal changes of seismic properties and recovery
timescales produced by various loadings vary in relation to the fault zone, site
conditions and depth? (4) Are there fault sections and/or off-fault sites with
higher susceptibly to failures (manifested by time-dependent seismic
properties), and if they are found, can anomalous properties in these regions be
identified that may explain the elevated susceptibility? The studies can augment
significantly the available in situ characterization of seismic velocity and
attenuation coefficients, nonlinear response and temporal changes of properties
in the top few hundred meters of the crust. The results are expected to provide
fundamental information that may lead to improved understanding of seismic
ground motion (and hence shaking hazard) as well as other applications.