* 1620010
* Support for 2016 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Julia Morgan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This project provides funding for travel and registration support to U.S. based
early-career professionals and students to attend the Gordon Research Conference
"From Slow to Fast Deformation and Back", held in Andover, NH from August 21-26,
2016. The Rock Deformation conference series highlights the cutting-edge
research on the various time and spatial scales involved in the deformation of
rocks in and on the Earth, and the program will showcase recent advances and
future trends in rock deformation and applications in structural geology,
seismology, geodynamics, planetary geology, and energy &amp; environmental
engineering. Central themes for the conference include: (1) architecture and
behavior of faults and shear zones; (2) dynamics of rock-rock interfaces: forces
and friction; (3) geoengineering and induced rock deformation; (4) slow and fast
earthquakes; (5) pore fluid and rock deformation; (6) plasticity of grains and
ductile rheology; (7) evolving microstructures and effect on rheology; and (8)
coupling time scales in rock deformation models. The project also supports the
Rock Deformation Gordon Research Seminar to be held August 20-21 in conjunction
with the Rock Deformation Gordon Research Conference. The seminar, designed for
graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and other scientists with comparable
levels of experience and education, focuses on combining observation, theory and
modeling to understand rock deformation processes with an emphasis on the use of
theory and experimentation to elucidate grain/aggregate-scale processes and
numerical efforts to upscale these processes to field conditions, and how
laboratory and field data inform and are informed by numerical models of
deformation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
participation of U.S. based early career scientists in the biannual Gordon
Research Conference on Rock Deformation and the associated Gordon Research
Seminar. The conference assembles national and international researchers who
study the behavior of rocks and minerals under various stress, pressure, and
temperature conditions in order to understand deformation of the Earth's crust
and mantle. The conference focuses on cutting-edge topics that include fault
zone structure, processes, and behavior with particular emphasis on earthquake
mechanisms. Other session focus on the detailed mechanisms of fracture and flow
of Earth materials. The associated seminar provides graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, and early career researchers opportunity for professional
development and focused discussions about their research. Through support of
early career scientists and students, the project contributes to the development
of STEM workforce and also supports full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM.