* 1620533
* 2016 Mitochondria and Chloroplasts;  Evolution, Biogenesis and Quality Control GRC
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Klaas van Wijk, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2017
* USD 7,000.00

This project will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Gordon Research Conference on Mitochondria and Chloroplasts;
Evolution, Biogenesis and Quality Control GRC to be held on June 19-24, 2016 in
Mount Snow, Vermont, USA. The meeting will consist of short talks, poster
sessions, communal dining, and conversations that will provide ample opportunity
for sharing latest research results and for exploring collaborative
possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria and chloroplasts are two
organelles that are responsible for energy conversions in the biosphere.
Chloroplasts play essential roles in in converting carbon dioxide into food and
mitochondria are involved in converting food into energy stores. The Broader
Impacts of this work involves both the importance of these organelles to the
biosphere as well as the training of new scientist to pursue research in these
important fields. Cutting-edge or late-breaking research will be highlighted in
several short talks chosen from the abstracts. The primary purposes of this
conference are to promote discussion between scientists with common professional
interests, including those from non-research-intensive colleges and
universities, to foster the exchange of ideas from advanced aspects of their
field, and to enable scientific collaborations to evolve in new directions.