* 1620610
* String Theory and Quantum Field Theory: From the Planck Scale to the Hubble Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Jacques Distler, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2019
* USD 825,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Jacques Distler, Willy
Fischler, Can Kilic, Sonia Paban and Steven Weinberg of the Theory Group at the
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its foundation, the
Theory Group has had a strong track record of conducting research on a broad
range of topics with the goal of exploring the fundamental laws of nature. These
topics include the dynamics of the very early universe, the relationship between
information and black holes (which may lead to crucial insights into the
fundamental theory of gravity), the possible extensions of the Standard Model of
particle physics (which describes all known particles and their interactions)
and the experimental signatures of such extensions, and the exploration of
string theory and formal aspects of quantum field theory. This diversified
effort to improve our understanding of nature at the deepest levels is well
aligned with the goal of advancing the national interest by maintaining and
further boosting the role of the United States as the global leader in
theoretical high-energy physics. The Theory Group is also actively committed to
making physics accessible to a wider audience and achieving a substantial impact
outside of academia. This is achieved through popular lectures given to live
audiences as well as over other media, through the publication of books at both
the public and technical levels, and through the development of web
technologies. In addition, the Theory Group takes pride in the training of
graduate students and postdocs who continue on to successful careers in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the avenues of research to be
conducted during the term of this project include, but are not limited to, the
following: Distler will extend the classification of N=2 four-dimensional
superconformal field theories and explore a generalization of important results
in topological string theory. Fischler will continue his exploration of the
physical effects of theta angles on black hole horizons and their experimental
signatures as seen by observers hovering at a fixed distance from black holes.
He will complete his research on the effects of shockwaves in de Sitter space
and the implications for holographic information. He will study the description
of mixmaster universes in the context of AdS/CFT. Fischler will also continue
his longstanding work on holographic space-time and revisit the initial
conditions for inflation. Kilic will explore aspects of collider physics as well
as models of dark matter and their experimental signatures. Paban will study
theories of inflation with many fields and the conditions under which they reach
the adiabatic limit at the end of inflation. Weinberg will continue the search
for a modified version of quantum mechanics that will avoid the usual
unsatisfactory aspects while retaining the successes of the existing theory.