* 1620695
* RCN: Advancing Research and Education Through a National Network of Campus Research Computing Infrastructures - The CaRC Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Nicholas Tsinoremas, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 748,490.00

As the role of computing in scientific discovery continues to increase, campuses
across the country are challenged with the task of providing effective
facilitation for computing capabilities so that researchers can harness these
capabilities in their investigations. Such facilitation requires novel
organizational approaches to the way that both human and physical resources that
constitute campus research computing capabilities are composed, structured, and
operated. The mission of the Campus Research Computing (CaRC) Infrastructures
Consortium is to provide a national forum for the exchange and dissemination of
best practices, expertise and technologies, enabling the advancement of campus-
based research computing activities. By bringing together a wide range of
campuses and community stakeholders, the CaRC Consortium provides a novel, yet
complementary, element of an evolving and expanding national cyberinfrastructure
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Governed by a council according to the
consortium bylaws, the CaRC Consortium acts as unique force in advancing the
impact of computing on the productivity of faculty and students. As an
organization that is driven by the campus perspective of research computing, the
CaRC offers several key outcomes at a national scale including the sharing of
knowledge, best practices, software and hardware technologies, expertise,
workforce development, and professional development. This fills a void within
the national research computing fabric; as more campuses recognize the value of
investments in research computing capacity and also in facilitators and like-
functioning positions, many of these campuses and their individual staff members
are isolated in a new field of practice without the necessary supporting
infrastructure from a practitioner community.