* 1620346
* Geometric and algebraic multigrid solvers for coupled systems of PDEs and PDE eigenvalue problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Brannick, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop a bootstrap multigrid algorithmic
framework that has the potential to make an appreciable and broad impact on
computational methods for numerically solving partial differential equations
(PDEs). The intellectual merit of the project derives from its potential to make
several distinct theoretical advances in the design and analysis of geometric
and algebraic multigrid methods and to integrate those advances into algorithms
and software for large-scale scientific applications that require solving
coupled PDE systems and PDE eigenvalue problems. The broader impact of the
project will be realized by applying these new algorithms to various problems in
science and engineering. The graduate student and post doc involved in the
project will engage in interdisciplinary research led by the PI and will have
opportunities to visit and work with colleagues from industry and DOE labs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds on recent advances by the PI
in the development of multigrid solvers for systems of and PDE eigenvalue
problems: (1) the successful development of adaptive and bootstrap algebraic
multigrid as fast solvers for the Wilson-Dirac and Wilson-clover discretizations
of the coupled Dirac PDE in lattice quantum chromodynamics (QCD); (2) the design
and analysis of a robust bootstrap MG solver for the Laplace-Beltrami eigenvalue
problem. Specifically, the project team will focus on two interrelated research
goals: (1) to extend the bootstrap algebraic MG methods currently being used to
solve various discretizations of the Dirac PDE to a general approach for solving
systems of coupled PDEs and generalized algebraic eigenvalue problems; (2) to
design and analyze new finite element bootstrap MG methods for solving PDE
eigenvalue problems on surfaces.