* 1620294
* IBSS-L: Continuous Measurement of Children's Behavior and the Development of Social Dynamics
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Daniel Messinger, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 869,999.00

This interdisciplinary research project will investigate the development of
children's social networks using real-time observations of classroom behavior.
Continuous measurement of children's movements in the classroom will be
complemented with automated analyses of audio recordings and human descriptions
of social contacts. Children will be followed from toddler through pre-school to
pre-kindergarten in order to conduct a longitudinal investigation of the origin
and development of their social networks. Interactions will be observed across
classroom activities and will include teachers, allowing for a comprehensive
model of classroom ecology and gender segregation patterns. The project will
enhance understanding about the micro-geography of educational practice to
determine how student location is distributed with respect to the pedagogic
structuring of classroom space, such as which children visit the book area
together. The findings will provide a knowledge base designed to address
deficits in school engagement that characterize the ethnically diverse and
economically disadvantaged students who will be participating in the project.
Project resources and de-identified data will be disseminated to the research
community to facilitate additional discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will unite network scientists from physics with developmental and school
psychologists to investigate the development and dynamic functioning of social
networks. Quantitative network models of social dynamics will be infused with
information about the role that child characteristics like gender and ethnicity
play in the formation of classroom social groups. Agent-based modeling will
synthesize movement and social contact dynamics. Network models will be
parameterized with fission-fusion equations to predict changes in children's
developing social networks such as the size and gender composition of groups of
interacting children. Multilevel models will capture within- and between- year
longitudinal changes in sociality for individual children and for the network
overall. These complementary models will specify the processes through which
children's social groups become progressively larger and more interconnected
over development. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary
Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.