* 1621773
* SBIR Phase I:  A Large-Area, High-Throughput Desktop Nanoprinter
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Andrey Ivankin, Tera-Print LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/28/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of a new nanolithography instrument that will be widely adopted by
researchers and analytical labs throughout academia and industry. The instrument
will give researchers the ability to rapidly and inexpensively prototype test
patterns and devices (e.g., lab-on-chip systems for synthesis and analysis of
biomolecules, microchips for drug screening and investigation of cultured cells,
combinatorial libraries of catalytically active materials, and functional
electronics/photonics). The underlying polymer pen lithography (PPL) and beam
pen lithography (BPL) technologies already have enabled a range of previously
impossible applications and attracted significant interest from academic
researchers, chemical and pharmaceutical companies, and government
organizations. This novel nanoprinting tool will have a broad and transformative
impact on many areas of research, spanning nanotechnology, physics, electronics,
chemistry, biology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project will be the translation of PPL and BPL into a new low-cost, point-
of-use nanoprinting instrument that is capable of patterning a broad variety of
soft and hard materials over centimeter scales with diffraction-unlimited,
sub-100 nm spatial resolution and registration accuracy. These techniques
overcome many limitations of existing nanofabrication approaches, however,
researchers are currently unable to take advantage of them due to the lack of
commercially available instruments. The company has already developed a
functional prototype of a PPL instrument. The proposed research will remove one
of the key hurdles to commercializing the instrument: the current manual,
tedious, and error-prone alignment step, which precedes all nanopatterning
experiments, by developing an auto-alignment solution that enables quick and
reliable leveling. The design of an inexpensive, integrated illumination module
with the PPL system is an essential step toward developing a commercial BPL
instrument. A system capable of rapidly generating arbitrary patterns with
diffraction unlimited feature sizes over large areas in a mask-free manner
represents another goal of the project. In addition to the hardware design and
development, a software user interface for the PPL instrument will be developed.