* 1621012
* SBIR Phase I:  Molecular Modeling as a Screening Tool to Separate Enantiomers of Chiral Compounds Using Polysaccharide-based Chiral Stationary Phases for Orphan Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Anil Oroskar, Orochem Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop an effective cost saving screening
technology based on molecular modeling for separating molecules that are
identical except for geometric differences, that are present in the development
of pure orphan drugs. The separation of these molecules from one another is both
important and challenging, since while one molecular form can have beneficial
therapeutic value, the other molecular form can at best be benign but often can
also be toxic. The implementation of this proposed strategy should have a
significant impact on the rapid development of new medicines especially those
being formulated by drug manufacturers with limited R&amp;D resources.
Ultimately, a successful outcome from this project will accelerate drug
discovery in pharmaceutical companies and allow for unique drug formulations to
be available in the market to consumers that are relying on them for treatment
and to extend their life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this
Phase I research project are to develop a predictive molecular model which can
guide experimentation in purifying chiral molecules for pharmaceutical companies
to use in drug formulations. Over the past decade, the efforts in the
pharmaceutical community have shifted to studying pure chiral drugs rather than
racemic mixtures due to the discovery that certain enantiomers may have negative
implications on the human body by causing toxicity or certain defects. Owed to
the possibility of harmful side effects from racemic mixtures, the commercial
focus has turned to purifying pharmaceutical drugs to create an enantio-pure
chiral product. The modeling tools to be built will take advantage of
significant proprietary data Orochem has developed in the past few years as part
of their R&amp;D activities in developing new and innovative methods for the
separation of racemic mixtures of enantiomers. The initial molecular model will
demonstrate interaction between a Chiral Stationary Phase, mobile phase, and
enantiomers known to be resolved by the particular system. The dynamic model
will allow examination of conformations of the enantiomer within the chiral
separation system in a more detailed fashion since molecular modeling input
parameters include detail on the bond, angle, and dihedral energies present in
molecules of the racemate. Overall, molecular simulations of chromatographic
separations will lessen the time of discovery of systems for separating these
chiral isomers by leading experimental investigation and aiding research
scientists at pharmaceutical companies to identify suitable chiral stationary
phases apriori. This will reduce both the cost and time of bringing new drugs to
market.