* 1621387
* Systemic Transformation of Inquiry Learning Environments for STEM (STILE 2.0)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ellen Meier, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,990,168.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at The Center for Technology and
School Change (CTSC) at Teachers College, Columbia University, is a four-year,
early-stage design and development project aimed to refine a state-of-the-art
professional development model to prepare K-8 teachers and instructional leaders
in urban schools to facilitate and support successful K-8 STEM Education. This
project will explore the most effective features for preparing teachers to
design and implement authentic STEM learning experiences in twelve high need
elementary and middle urban schools across New York City and Yorkers. The
project will specifically explore which components of the program promote
teacher change, which aspects of the program support structural changes for STEM
teaching in schools, and what holds promise for interdisciplinary STEM teacher
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this project will design and
implement transdisciplinary STEM projects and learn to develop and support STEM
learning environments for their schools. As part of this overall process,
researchers will refine a situated professional development curriculum,
including a suite of digital case studies that will assist schools. The project
will: 1) build a vision for trans-disciplinary STEM schooling; 2) design and
implement STEM learning experiences; and 3) take capacity-building steps to
sustain STEM practices. A mixed method design approach will be used to explore
both the implementation of the project and the effect of implementation on
participants.