* 1621560
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering biocatalysts for biomanufacturing of medicinal opioids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kristy Hawkins, Antheia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enhance the supply of complex pharmaceutical
molecules from nature. Over 60% of current drugs are natural products, or are
derived from natural products, and of these approximately half are from plants.
The therapeutic activity of a given plant molecule is encoded in its chemical
structure, which is biosynthesized by a specialized metabolic pathway. Despite
the efficiency of these biosyntheses, plants accumulate relatively small amounts
of the potent metabolites in specialized cells and tissue types, thereby
restricting the availability of essential medicines from plants. The opioids
exemplify this limitation of plant therapeutics; the structural complexity of
the opioids precludes chemical synthesis at commercial scale, and in the absence
of this synthetic source the only viable alternative is to extract natural
opiates from opium poppy. This project proposes to make the biosynthesis of
medicinal opioids possible in a microbial host. This synthetic biology approach
will move opioid production into fermentation facilities and free up the 100,000
hectares of arable land used each year for poppy crops. The disruptive
technology resulting from this research will for the first time provide for a
local, scalable, secure supply of medicinal opioids.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a microbial production system for
medicinal opioids that will displace the existing supply from opium poppies. A
complete opioid biosynthesis pathway was recently constructed in Baker's yeast,
demonstrating that this technology holds enormous potential for supplying the
$2B opioid active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) market. The key technical
hurdle addressed in this SBIR project is to enhance the activity of rate-
limiting enzymes that catalyze key steps in the construction of the five-ring
opioid scaffold. The target class of plant enzymes is poorly expressed in
heterologous hosts such as yeast and must be membrane localized. The proposed
research takes three approaches to support these enzymes: 1) tuning expression
to conserve the endomembrane environment and promote activity, 2) constructing
N-terminal chimeric proteins with enhanced stability, and 3) identifying partner
enzymes that support the catalytic function of these enzymes. The goal is to
remove the bottleneck steps in existing production strains to allow for
commercially-relevant titers of greater than 1 g/L. The outcome will be a new
production system that offers active pharmaceutical ingredients at lower cost,
with greater availability and variety of molecules, shorter lead times, and
acute responsiveness to the medical demand for opioid therapeutics.