* 1621290
* Proportions Playground: A Dynamic World to Support Teachers' Proportional Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Chandra Orrill, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 02/29/2020
* USD 738,337.00

Proportions are a critical topic in mathematics that is simultaneously
complicated and over-simplified in typical instruction. Current research
undertaken by the research team suggests that the over-simplification is related
to limitations in teachers' understandings of proportional relationships.
Presenting proportions in a dynamic environment offers teachers the opportunity
to create key developmental understandings related to this area of mathematics.
This project focuses on the creation of the initial functionality for a dynamic
microworld, Proportions Playground, designed to support teachers in developing a
coherent understanding of proportional reasoning. Proportions Playground is
conceptualized as a tool for supporting the development of coherent
understandings by allowing teachers to interact in concrete ways with otherwise
abstract ideas and by allowing teachers easy access to dynamic objects and other
representations. It is meant to address the significant limitations for
reasoning about the relationships between measurable aspects of two objects as
well as in manipulating those relationships. Building from work currently
underway, Proportions Playground will explore key areas in which there are
opportunities for engaging teachers in the development of a coherent and robust
understanding of proportional reasoning that extends beyond the typical "3
given, 1 unknown" proportion problem. This approach attempts to engage teachers
in an array of dynamic, visually-rich sets of tasks designed to challenge
teachers' preconceptions of proportions and to strengthen their connections
between proportions and related areas of mathematics. This project is funded by
the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) and EHR Core Research (ECR) Programs.
the DRK-12 program supports research and development on STEM education
innovations and approaches to teaching, learning, and assessment. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Proportions
Playground project seeks to both develop a unique pilot software application for
the iPad and explore how it supports teachers in developing a coherent, robust
definition of proportions. The software will be designed to support either
numeric manipulation (e.g., graphing software) or geometric constructions (e.g.,
dynamic geometry software). Specifically, for this project the mathematics of
interest will include the relationships between similarity and proportion and
the nature of covariation. The research will focus on how teachers are
developing a robust and coherent understanding of proportions and how the
dynamic environment promotes such understandings. Working with six teacher
advisors, the project will develop three task sets. Using teaching experiments
and individual interviews, results will be used to refine the task sets. The
revised task sets will be piloted with 40 teachers. Data will be collected on
participants' thinking and any changes seen in the knowledge resources they are
using. The researchers will be looking for factors that seem to impact teachers'
thinking as well as evidence to support or deny the assertion that the
Proportions Playground activities engage teachers in (a) different ways of
reasoning about proportions and (b) support them in drawing from a wide array of
resources so that coherence may be developed were the teachers to have a
prolonged engagement with the tools. The project will rely on Epistemic Network
Analysis to identify the connections between knowledge resources.