* 1621082
* SBIR Phase I:  Spiral Polynomial Division Multiplexing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Jerrold Prothero, Astrapi Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2017
* USD 224,878.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to support rapidly
growing wireless data usage with fixed available bandwidth through the provision
of more robust synchronization. Modern high-speed communication is heavily
dependent on precise synchronization between transmitters and receivers to
enable efficient data throughput. This project pioneers an entirely novel
technique based on ?Spiral Polynomial Division Multiplexing? (SPDM) to enable
precise and efficient synchronization. It offers a new set of approaches for
improving synchronization, with possible applications to any communication
systems that face extreme spectral efficiency demands, or which are challenged
by particularly difficult synchronization problems such as communication with
high-speed vehicles such as trains. This project could lead to commercialization
across a wide range of communication sectors including but not limited to
wireless, mobile internet, unmanned vehicles, automotive, aviation, and Internet
of Things. It has major potential applications in both civilian and defense
applications. SPDM shows promise in providing more robust communications that
are resistant to interference and jamming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the problem of
achieving very precise synchronization between a transmitter and receiver, while
expending minimal power and bandwidth to do so. The research objective is to
show that a new type of synchronization, based on SPDM, enables superior
synchronization performance than is possible with previous methods. SPDM
introduces a new way of combining, or multiplexing, signals based on
orthogonality in the polynomial coefficient space. This results in a very large
waveform design space, which can be bandlimited using polynomial convolution
with a ?shaping polynomial?. Synchronization can be achieved within SPDM by
checking for the time alignment which produces a ?reasonable result? when the
shaping polynomial is deconvolved in the receiver, which can be a very sensitive
test due to the special properties of SPDM polynomials. The research will
involve systematically testing SPDM synchronization under a variety of
conditions, examining performance data, and comparing against standard
synchronization methods. It is anticipated that this research will show
significant benefits for SPDM synchronization in at least some practically
important situations, forming the basis for further research leading to
deployment of SPDM-based systems.