* 1621727
* SBIR Phase I:  Telescopic Structural Flood Walls
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jorge Cueto, Smart Walls Construction LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed to develop,
test and validate a retractable telescopic structural wall for applications in
flood protection. This technology will enable more resilient infrastructure in
flood-prone areas. Climate change is creating a problem for coastal cities and
local communities in proximity to large bodies of water. Population centers tend
to be located near such bodies of water, and finding the space to accommodate
increasing populations, as well as hazard-resilient infrastructure, represents a
challenge for city officials and the engineering community in general. The
addressable market size for this technology is estimated at $2.6 billion. The
proposed concept, when validated, will provide a paradigm shift for the
prefabricated concrete industry. It will also develop and validate new methods
for telescopic interconnection of structural elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in a unique concept where structural
boxes, made out of fiber reinforced concrete, can be deployed telescopically to
withstand forces imposed from external sources, and then return to a retracted
position. The goals of the proposed research surround the detailed design of the
mechanisms, determination of a geometric configuration and material mix to
achieve a high strength-to-weight ratio, and the execution of laboratory
experimentation and field tests on physical working prototypes. The plan to
accomplish these goals starts with the development of numerical simulations and
an analytical framework. Results will be validated via laboratory tests where
lateral and vertical loads, as well as impact loads, will be applied. Field
tests of the specimens will also be conducted to determine the effects of soil
type on performance. These field tests will serve as well to simulate realistic
still flood water conditions. The anticipated technical result of Phase I is a
working prototype of the telescopic structural flood wall with extension and
retraction capabilities, and with the structural capability to withstand the
forces from flood events with minimal to no damage.