* 1621681
* SBIR Phase I:  Dose control of intravascular ultrasound guided and enhanced drug delivery with microbubbles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Joseph Kilroy, SoundPipe
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address the massive unmet need of
peripheral arterial disease (PAD) which affects over 12 million Americans and
results in over 65,000 amputations each year. This project will provide the
proof of concept for a novel drug delivery technique that will improve the
durability of procedures to restore blood flow in PAD patients. The result
technology will help reduce the burden of disease while reducing the significant
societal and health system costs caused by amputations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address the challenge of providing controlled drug dose to
arteries of varying diameter and length. Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)
patients have atherosclerotic lesions that are long and diffuse, requiring
treatment to multiple sites with different vessel diameters and lengths.
Existing drug delivery platforms require the use of multiple, expensive devices
to treat these patients. This project will demonstrate that a single ultrasound-
enhanced drug delivery catheter can provide drug delivery to different artery
diameters and lengths, providing significant potential cost and time savings
during endovascular procedures. In order apply the desired drug dose to arteries
of varying size, real time imaging feedback will be used to adjust the treatment
settings to compensate for changes in size. To achieve this goal, ex vivo swine
arteries of different sizes will be treated under physiological flow conditions
while varying the treatment parameters in order to determine the effect of
vessel size on delivered drug dose. From this project, algorithms that can
control drug dose to match varying artery diameter will be developed for future
in vivo animal model studies.