* 1621825
* SBIR Phase I:  Modernizing the diagnosis, monitoring, and treating of substance use disorders via an integrated technology platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Patrik Schmidle, Mentor on the Go LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to transform how substance use disorders
(SUDs) are diagnosed, monitored and treated by creating an integrated technology
platform for health care providers. One important application is the early
detection of risky substance use behavior that, if treated in the beginning
stages, will reduce the rate of fully developed SUDs. The research and
development performed on this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be key to creating a novel bio-sensor based approach to diagnosing,
monitoring and treating substance abuse patients. The collected bio-sensor data
can also inform treatment solutions to help address this tremendous problem,
which affects millions of people, costs the US economy billions of dollars
annually, and incurs a significant human cost in terms of lost lives, broken
families, and unfulfilled potential. There is also strong demand for a robust
solution in places where substance use detection and monitoring is mandated for
safety reasons, including the court system and the military services, as well as
occupations like air traffic controllers, pilots, train operators, truck
drivers, bus drivers, and operators of heavy machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will focus on integrating biosensors with smartphone technology
to detect, collect, transmit, store, and analyze relevant biodata and to push
resulting behavior change instructions to the user. By establishing a connection
between the sensors and a smartphone application we will report substance abuse
treatment outcome data much more accurately than is currently possible via self-
reporting. This system will address engineering, manufacturing, and calibration
challenges of a highly accurate diagnostic tool. This technology bypasses the
limitations of existing methods with a dramatically different approach. The
technology aims to greatly simplify the process of SUD diagnosis and treatment
by empowering health care providers to implement accurate data collection, early
detection, and custom-tailored intervention within the context of any routine
office visit. The proposed project will address the development of a substance
use measuring biosensor and assess the sensor lifetime, stability,
reproducibility, and sensitivity. It is intended to develop a biosensor that
patients can wear for a period of time, that we can establish a meaningful
connection between the sensor and the mobile application to replace self-
reporting, and that concept support can be gained from broader representation of
primary care physicians and major insurance companies