* 1621438
* Longitudinal Learning of Viable Argument in Mathematics for Adolescents
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Ely, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,999,640.00

The project will examine learning in eighth grade mathematics with a specific
focus on students' learning of reasoning and proof. The intervention builds on a
prior study in algebra that demonstrated increases in students' knowledge of
argumentation and their performance on mathematics assessments. This project
will extend the use of the argumentation intervention into all eighth grade
content areas. The investigators will also address support for teachers in the
form of teacher materials that link the argumentation content with mathematics
standards and state-wide assessments, and a learning progression to engage
students in proving tasks. The project will use assessments of mathematics
learning and additional data from teachers and students to understand the impact
of the argumentation intervention on teachers and students. The project
contributes to understanding how students can learn about mathematical
practices, such as proving, that can help them learn mathematics better. A
significant contribution will be the definition of aspects of proving and
descriptions of student outcomes that can be used to measure how well students
have achieved these components of proving. The Discovery Research PreK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. This project is
also supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project suggests twelve
conceptual pillars that are combined with classroom processes and assessable
outcomes to examine the use of argumentation practices in the teaching of eighth
grade mathematics content. The investigation of classroom support for
argumentation includes research questions that focus on improvement on state-
level assessments, students' ability to construct mathematical arguments, and
the conceptual progression that supports students' understanding of
argumentation and proof. In addition, the study will examine teachers' role in
argumentation in the classroom and their perception of potential challenges for
classroom implementation. The study will use an experimental design to examine
an intervention for mathematical reasoning and proof in eighth grade. The
project includes a treatment group of teachers that will participate in
professional development including a summer institute followed by instructional
coaching over a two year period.