* 1621093
* Collaborative Research: Using Cognitive Science Principles to Help Children Learn Place Value
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Linda Smith, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2020
* USD 713,619.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many children have trouble understanding what
multidigit numbers mean and this can lead to long-term problems in mathematics.
Poor place value understanding plagues children from all socioeconomic
backgrounds and is not limited to those with learning disabilities. This problem
is widespread and pervasive; indeed, perhaps more widespread than currently
understood because some tests may overestimate what children know. The critical
skill needed for long-term success, and one not always measured, is called
decomposition. It involves knowing how to break a multi-digit number down into
its components by place (ones, tens, hundreds) and interpret its meaning (e.g.,
642 = 6 hundreds, 4 tens, and 2 ones). This project will target that crucial
skill and test new ways of teaching place value based on principles of
analogical reasoning, gleaned from decades of cognitive science research. These
new approaches will make place value more transparent by highlighting and
aligning its structure across spoken number names, written numerals, and sets of
objects. By leveraging these powerful analogical learning mechanisms, it may be
possible to teach place value earlier than is typical, so the project will
target K-1 students. If successful, this approach could head off the
misconceptions that are currently common among older children. The project will
also track children over time, using tests that measure decomposition and other
place value concepts to see how they interrelate. The project's activities have
been designed to be inexpensive and fit into everyday educational practice, so
that the results may be easily implemented by teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will test new instructional approaches designed to help K-1 students
comprehend place value. The project is innovative in that it will emphasize the
underlying relational structure of place value symbols, and target this
structure with instructional materials and techniques drawn from the structure
mapping literature. Its theory of action is that instruction which scaffolds
structure mapping for place value will better prepare children to face the
challenges of advanced operations, such as multi-digit calculation. The project
specifically targets decomposition, as this has been identified as a particular
stumbling block for children. Also, decomposition skill has been linked to
better long-term mathematics outcomes. There will be three studies. Study 1 will
track the development of place value understanding from kindergarten to 2nd
grade, using some measures that clearly require decomposition, and others that
are in wide use but may not require decomposition, such as number line
estimation and magnitude judgments. The study will show how these measures are
related over developmental time, as well as testing whether a firm understanding
of decomposition predicts later mathematics learning. Studies 2 and 3 will use a
pretest-training-posttest design to test the efficacy of six structure mapping
activities for place value in K-1 students. The training in Study 2 will be
focused on one activity for three weeks, whereas the training in Study 3 will
include all six activities presented over an entire semester.