* 1621118
* SBIR Phase I:  Engaging Undergraduate Engineering Students in Authentic Inquiry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jared Jackson, IS3D LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will test the feasibility of a new product aimed at
helping students succeed in undergraduate engineering courses. The US is failing
to produce enough engineers required to compete in the global marketplace.
Research has shown that undergraduate students struggle when they encounter more
complex engineering concepts and are tasked with designing solutions to
engineering problems. This leads to a lack of engagement as they do not foresee
themselves as being successful engineers. The product will be software that
creates virtual worlds in which students are tasked with designing solutions for
real world engineering problems. It will be based on foundational theories of
learning and prior NSF-funded research, and will enable students to develop and
hone critical thinking and design skills. As students work through the problem,
student data will be sent to their teachers in real time to help teachers
immediately identify students that may be struggling with a particular concept
or design skill. This project supports the mission of the NSF to support
education in science and engineering and help students develop the skills
required to pursue well paid engineering careers and contribute to the US
economy. The innovation underpinning this project is the development of a
software platform in which the critical thinking skills required to design
effective engineering solutions can be delineation and refined. This platform
will include simulations based on the physics underpinning foundational
engineering concepts that will help students develop design skills through
authentic inquiry as they design solutions for real world problems. The software
will also include a real time data system that reports on the heuristic quality
of student design decisions and builds into a formative assessment tool that
will enable teachers to measure the development of design skills by their
students over time. The goals of this project will be to determine whether
engineering design skills can be effectively defined, refined and used as a new
pedagogical basis for a suite of products to address the needs of US engineering
colleges. The efficacy of the product in improving undergraduate student
learning of difficult engineering concepts and development of design skills will
be tested in a US college engineering course.