* 1621593
* SBIR Phase I:  Environmental water on site microbial contaminant sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* John Gerdes, Visugen Global LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 222,236.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is that the product developed will enable local and
remote environmental water microbe detection using internet-enabled smart
devices. Detection is on-site within 30 minutes to monitor water close to the
time it is sampled compared to current methods that require sending the sample
to lab that conducts a test that takes 24 hours. The innovation involves a
method to capture and concentrate genes from large volumes of water onto a
unique binding material where they are counted. Clean water is critical to major
economic sectors such as farm irrigation, livestock, food processing, and
recreation and water testing is estimated to be a 1.2 billion dollar global
market. The water test developed could be used in global settings and have a
significant societal impact through improved water quality management especially
in rural or developing country settings where is estimated that 780 million
people consume unsafe water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in
this Phase I research project are to advance a highly innovative technical
approach for direct in the field detection of E. coli or Enterococcus
contaminants in 100 milliliters of environmental water with results available in
30 minutes. These microbes are traditional indicator organisms that identify
water with fecal contamination that could be unsafe. The technical hurdle
addressed in this project which is finding low copies of bacteria present in a
glass of water is not unique to water testing but is also an issue broadly
anywhere pathogens or genes are a targets of detection. The research objectives
to be completed will confirm our innovative strategy to release nucleic acids
from cells, characterize fundamental properties of solid phase materials capable
of capture and concentration of nucleic acids, and produce a prototype flow
through cassette where specific gene sequences are detected. Achieving detection
of pathogens that frequently are present in low copy numbers in large volumes
(100 milliliters of environmental water, 10 milliliters of blood, food
processing wash water, etc.) is a common technical hurdle that limits assay
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;The innovative approach proposed provides a potential
solution to this issue and further permits testing directly on site with a low
cost, non-instrumented test that is easy to perform with result upload using a
cell phone. The integrated strategy is a novel approach that overcomes the
limitations of all current culture or current molecular methods for testing
environmental water.