* 1621926
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical Acoustic Tools for the Analysis of Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Andrew Hsieh, Feasible, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2018
* USD 224,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the ability of
this technology to impact how every battery is made, tested, managed, and re-
used in the near future. Batteries are ubiquitous, and their use is likely to
increase in the future. As such, there is a growing need for low-cost, accurate
methods for monitoring the state of charge (SOC) and the state of health (SOH)
in real time to optimize performance and maximize lifetime. The technology that
will be developed in this project will use ultrasound to noninvasively probe
batteries and provide physical insights into SOC and SOH, and will work on any
closed battery regardless of chemistry and form factor. Initial finding of this
hypothesis have already been demonstrated and published. This is an unexplored
area and presents a large commercial opportunity in each sector of the battery
industry, including diagnostics, quality assurance, active cycling control, and
the emerging second-life markets. Several advantages include sensitivity to
subtle physical changes within cells, the ability to probe lab and commercial
scale cells, and sub-millisecond readings. From battery R&amp;D, to
manufacturing, to management systems, ultrasound for batteries will help enable
the efficient generation, storage, and use of energy
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will support the development of this technology leading to the
first commercial ultrasonic battery analysis unit. The feasibility of 1)
miniaturized pulser-receivers with pulsing and switching speeds that are orders
of magnitude faster than commercial units, and 2) miniaturized transducers that
can transmit and receive high quality signals will be demonstrated. This would
enable the detection of high-rate phenomena and the use of multiplexed systems.
3) The use of fast data analysis algorithms for real-time SOC prediction using
acoustics as the main input will also be addressed. These objectives are
necessary for demonstrating the applicability of ultrasonic analysis to the
battery R&amp;D, manufacturing, and second life markets. The success of Phase I
of this project will lead to the development of micron-scale sensors for
incorporation in battery management systems. In Phase II, algorithms for SOH
prediction and cycling control based on acoustic data will be developed, as well
as investigation of the design and fabrication of microelectronic transducers
will be performed.