* 1621161
* Readiness through Integrative Science and Engineering: Refining and Testing a Co-Constructed Curriculum Approach with Head Start Partners
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Betty Zan, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,996,941.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) for preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Readiness through Integrative Science and
Engineering (RISE) is a late stage design and development project that will
build upon the results of an earlier NSF-funded design and development study in
which a co-construction process for curriculum development was designed by a
team of education researchers with a small group of Head Start educators and
parent leaders. In this phase, the design team will be expanded to include
Classroom Coaches and Community Experts to enable implementation and assessment
of the RISE model in a larger sample of Head Start classrooms. In this current
phase, an iterative design process will further develop the science, technology,
and engineering curricular materials as well continue to refine supports for
teachers to access families' funds of knowledge related to science, technology,
and engineering in order to build on children's prior knowledge as home-school
connections. The ultimate goal of the project is to improve school readiness for
culturally and linguistically diverse, urban-residing children from low-income
families who tend to be underrepresented in curriculum development studies even
though they are most at-risk for later school adjustment difficulties. The focus
on science, technology, and engineering will address a gap in early STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed group-randomized design, consisting
of 90 teachers/classrooms (45 RISE/45 Control), will allow for assessment of the
impact of a 2-year RISE intervention compared with a no-intervention control
group. Year 1 will consist of recruitment, induction, and training of Classroom
Coaches and Community Experts in the full RISE model, as well as preparation of
integrative curricular materials and resources. In Year 2, participating
teachers will implement the RISE curriculum approach supported by Classroom
Coaches and Community Experts; data on teacher practice, classroom quality, and
implementation fidelity will be collected, and these formative assessments will
inform redesign and any refinements for Year 3. During Year 2, project-specific
measures of learning for science, technology, and engineering concepts and
skills will also be tested and refined. In Year 3, pre-post data on teachers (as
in Year 2) as well as on 10 randomly selected children in each classroom (N =
900) will be collected. When child outcomes are assessed, multilevel modeling
will be used to account for nesting of children in classrooms. In addition,
several moderators will be examined in final summative analyses (e.g., teacher
education, part or full-day classroom, parent demographics, implementation
fidelity). At the end of this project, all materials will be finalized and the
RISE co-construction approach will be ready for scale-up and replication studies
in other communities.