* 1621439
* SBIR Phase I:  Tissue Engineered Human "Fat-on-a-Chip" - A Novel Tool for Metabolic Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jeffrey Gimble, LaCell LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project will be to provide the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
research community with improved models that will accelerate the discovery of
the next generation of drugs targeting fat metabolism. Currently, over one in
every three American adults are obese and the incidence of childhood obesity
continues to climb. Obesity is now recognized as a world-wide epidemic which
will impact many if not all nations. In the coming decades, it will be critical
to develop more effective therapies for obesity and its associated problems,
diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure and stroke. Obesity is caused by an
overgrowth of the body's fat cells. Unlike current models that rely heavily on
mouse fat cells, the proposed "humanized fat-on-a-chip" technology will provide
scientists with a research model that closely approximates the clinical
conditions that face doctors and their patients every day. By working with human
fat cells in a three dimensional structure resembling the actual human tissue,
the proposed platform has the potential to impact the pace of new drug discovery
and the cost of health care delivery for disease prevention and treatment.

This SBIR project proposes to develop a "humanized fat-on-a-chip" drug discovery
platform targeting drugs for fat metabolism. The pharmaceutical industry
currently lacks a robust human fat tissue model, and continues to use less
reliable mouse models. As a result, the obesity and diabetes drug discovery
pipeline remains blocked. To address this need, the proposed project will
combine human cells with protein scaffolds to pioneer a tissue engineered fat
pad. The objectives are to 1) evaluate the human cells and scaffolds separately
to confirm the identity and function; 2) combine the human cells with the
scaffold and perform assays in vitro to demonstrate that they can mimic the
function of actual human fat; and 3) transplant the human cell/scaffold
constructs into mice for 8 weeks to show that the tissue engineered fat pad will
work under "real life" conditions. It is anticipated that the human
cell/scaffold constructs will display the metabolic features associated with
human fat. With this proof-of-concept data, the next step will be to create
tissue engineered fat pads that display not only healthy but unhealthy
(diabetes, obesity) metabolic patterns for use in drug screening and discovery.