* 1621576
* SBIR Phase I:  A Physics Guided Statistical Model for Weather Extremes Under Climate Change
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Evan Kodra, RISQ INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project extends to academics and industry stakeholders
holding intellectual or financial interests that are impacted by climate change.
Given growing evidence for climate change-driven increases in extreme weather
events over recent years, it has become increasingly important for stakeholders
to factor climate change into their resilience plans. Engineering firms must
embed changes in risks into engineering design processes due to increased
urbanization, coastal inhabitancy, and climate change impacts. Insurance
companies need to base risk assessments, underwriting strategies, and
reinsurance purchasing decisions on quantitative methods that appropriately
consider credible, probabilistic projections of changes in extremes with
appropriate uncertainty bounds. Public agencies, municipalities, and private
organizations must implement resilience strategies for critical infrastructure
that will withstand climate extremes at decadal to multidecadal scales. This
project focuses on developing and translating patent-protected research to
analytics and products that address the emerging needs of these industry
stakeholders. The publications and software developed via this proposal will
significantly advance best practices in hazard risk assessment and climate
change adaptation, and a sample of the New England design storm curves will be
made freely available to support educational and outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to address the deep uncertainties in climate projections
rooting from intrinsic variability and longstanding gaps in physics
understanding. The project will consist of developing a Physics-Guided
Statistical Modeling (PGSM) framework for probabilistically quantifying
projected changes in regional precipitation extremes, and translating those
projections to actionable, climate change-informed local design storm curves.
The initial focus is on precipitation extremes given that theory and evidence
suggest climate change-driven increases in storm severity in many regions, that
these projections are needed to enhance design curves, and given they are
crucial inputs to flood models that will be pursued aggressively in subsequent
efforts. The project will culminate in multiple deliverables, including (1) peer
reviewed scientific publications, (2) a proprietary spatio-temporal
precipitation extremes database, and (3) design storm curves for a New England
testbed, the last of which will be disseminated via a software prototype.