* 1621299
* Sensing Science through Modeling: Developing Kindergarten Students' Understanding of Matter and Its Changes
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Carolyn Staudt, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,641,415.00

Despite recent research demonstrating the capacity of young children to engage
deeply with science concepts and practices, challenging science curriculum is
often lacking in the early grades. This project addresses this gap by developing
a technology-supported, physical science curriculum that will facilitate
kindergarten students' conceptual understanding of matter and how matter
changes. To accomplish these goals, the curriculum will include opportunities
for students to participate in model-based inquiry in conjunction with the use
of digital probeware and simulations that enable students to observe dynamic
visualizations and make sense of the phenomena. To support the capacity of
kindergarten teachers, a continuous model of teacher development will be
implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout development, the project team will
collaborate with kindergarten teachers and more than 300 demographically diverse
students across eight classrooms in Massachusetts and Indiana. A design based
research approach will be used to iteratively design and revise learning
activities, technological tools, and assessments that meet the needs and
abilities of kindergarten students and teachers. The project team will: 1) work
with kindergarten teachers to modify an existing Grade 2 curricular unit for use
with their students; 2) design a parallel curricular unit incorporating
technology; 3) evaluate both units for feasibility and maturation effects; and
4) iteratively revise and pilot an integrated unit and assess kindergarten
student conceptual understanding of matter and its changes. The results of this
investigation will contribute important data on the evolving structure and
content of children's physical science models as well as demonstrate children's
understanding of matter and its changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.