* 1621996
* SBIR Phase I:  User-Centered System for Improved Coordination across the Continuum of Care
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Thaddeus Fulford-Jones, Radial Analytics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on using analytics and technology to
benefit patients who require recovery care to get fully well after being
discharged from the hospital. Transitions of care from acute (hospital) to post-
acute (short-term rehabilitation and skilled nursing) settings impact millions
of Americans every year. Seniors overindex on utilization of post-acute care, as
a consequence of natural age-related degeneration and the need for longer
recovery periods. By improving post-hospital coordination of care across the
continuum, clinical outcomes and patient satisfaction stand to improve for
America?s aging population. If successful, this project will help reduce costs
of care for healthcare providers, payers, and
government/society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
incorporate and improve upon methods for user-centered data capture in
healthcare. Our proposed platform will combine advanced machine learning
techniques with a patient/family-centered business model. The innovation will
harness multiple streams of healthcare data, such as electronic health records
and claims data from both acute and post-acute care settings. If successful,
this research will impact the state-of-the-art in healthcare analytics and
outcomes measurement.