* 1621956
* SBIR Phase I:  Hydraulic System Design for a Low-cost Abrasive Waterjet Cutter
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Matthew Nowicki, WAZER INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,979.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to bring the industrial advanced manufacturing
method of abrasive waterjet cutting to individual consumers by fully redesigning
the core components of the machine to meet the budgetary needs of a consumer.
This project parallels the current movement of scaling down advance
manufacturing techniques such as laser cutting and 3D printing to the growing
desktop fabrication market. Unfortunately, the desktop digital fabrication tools
currently available to consumer market are restricted to producing goods in only
soft materials like plastics, and wood. The biggest advantage of abrasive
waterjet cutting is its cutting ability in a wide range of materials including
plastics, metals, stone, ceramics, glass, and composites. With this technology
finally accessible to a wider audience, everyone from the middle school
robotocist, to a creative entrepreneur, to the makerspaces, to artisans, to
small businesses will be able to digitally create physical designs in the full
gambit of sheet materials that are currently
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current commercial waterjet designs
operate in a high pressure region that makes components prohibitively expensive
for the consumer market. To make the technology viable for the masses it must be
adapted to a lower pressure space to leverage the necessary component cost
savings across the machine. This starts by creating a new performance model for
low-pressure abrasive waterjet cutting through the design and execution of a
test matrix that will determine how cutting performance is affected by various
waterjet parameters (water pressure, water flow rate, abrasive flow rate, etc.).
With this understanding, the heart of the system, the hydraulic pump, will be
adapted and customized from a pump construction that is not currently used for
waterjet cutting. Lastly, this effort concludes with a ground-up redesign of the
waterjet?s Cutting Head (the assembly that ejects the high velocity mixture of
water and abrasive) utilizing low-cost materials, manufacturing processes and a
unique geometry optimized for low-pressure cutting.