* 1621630
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable Microfluidics-based Educational Kits and Custom Instruments for Students and Biologists
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kirsten Pace, LabSmith, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to develop an affordable suite of modular devices and
software that makes it easy to design, assemble, and automate a custom
bioinstrument. The goal is to provide biologists with an effective method to
employ microfluidic tools and automation to accelerate scientific progress and
commercialize new technologies. Microfluidic technologies promise revolutionary
improvements in diagnostics and life sciences, but their market penetration is
hampered by high costs, a lack of available instruments, and ineffective
training curricula. The components of this suite will be designed to be
inexpensive and re-usable, so when the biologists' needs change, they can be
repurposed. The software will be designed to provide step-by-step assembly
instructions and automatically configure devices, so making an instrument will
be like putting together a Lego set. The technology may be used to train high
school and college students in real-world laboratory techniques.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop modular devices and software that
will enable biologists to produce custom bioinstrumentation to accelerate their
research. The Phase I effort will focus on new microfluidics tools and will
include prototyping and testing. This development proceeds on three fronts: 1)
Implementing the software to allow simultaneous and nested automation-script
execution. This allows virtualizing instruments into blocks and hiding
operational complexities from users. 2) Expanding device functionality to
include thermal control, e.g., for rapid PCR, incubation, sterilization, etc.,
and to perform accurate, pulse-free, high-temporal-response fluid dispensing for
droplet generation, HPLC, sample preparation, etc. 3) Prototyping and refining
user-interface and curriculum materials on biology and engineering students in
high school and college to find effective graphical interfaces for instrument
design and assembly. In Phase II, the plan is to incorporate these interfaces
into the software, so top-level design is intuitive, and instrument assembly
follows clear step-by-step visual instructions.