* 1621892
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of The Fuel Agnostic Swirl Hearth Gasifier
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Julia Hasty, ALL Power Labs INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project enables the research and development of a new hybrid
fixed-fluidized biomass gasifier design that allows for a higher carbon
conversion efficiency over a far wider range of feedstocks than what current
commercially available biomass-to-electricity technologies are able to offer.
This technological development serves the public interest by increasing the
economic viability of renewable waste-to-energy projects. Biomass waste
accumulation from forest thinning and agriculture generate approximately 166
million tons of biomass each year in the United States alone and is problematic
to dispose of due to air quality regulations, which restrict open burning, and
tipping fees from waste sites that have to mitigate methane production from
decomposition. Instead of open burning or uncontrolled decomposition, biomass
gasification enables these resources to be utilized locally to replace fossil
fuels and to sequester carbon to mitigate climate change. Biomass energy is
currently limited by feedstock requirements (typically restricted to
standardized wood pellets), which has constrained the implementation of biomass-
to-energy plants in the U.S. This project seeks to greatly expand the feedstock
characteristic options available for biomass energy to offer an off-the-shelf
commercial solution to sustainable energy project developers in the U.S. and
organizations responsible for biomass waste processing. Approximately 150 jobs
are expected to be generated in the US to support these two industries, through
manufacturing and project development, as well as associated sales and income
tax revenue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially available downdraft and
fluidized bed biomass gasifiers are hindered by three main root technical
problems that significantly constrain the economic viability of state-of-the-art
biomass-to-electricity projects: 1) each is limited by the small range of
feedstock particle sizes it can process; 2) maximum allowable reaction
temperatures are limited due to ash fusibility temperatures; and 3) the ash
fusibility temperature is too low to maximize tar cracking. The proposed
technical solution separates the vaporized tar and small feedstock particle
sizes from the larger particles and high ash solid charcoal. This separation
decouples the temperature requirements and allows for greater tar cracking
potential at higher temperatures while maintaining a lower oxidation temperature
for the char to increase carbon conversion efficiency??overcoming all three root
technical problems. The goal of the research is to identify and validate the
dimensions and parameters required to maintain stable biomass gasification with
improved tar cracking efficiency and reduced ash clinkering risk. The scope of
the project includes proving the proposed technology at a gas capacity of 20kW,
which will be scaled up to a 150kW to be able to provide the algorithm to
dimension the technology at any scale. The development of a fully fuel agnostic
gasifier is the so-called holy grail of gasification and the successful
completion of the project will be a significant step toward this goal, enabling
the technology to scale successfully and be disseminated in almost any market or
sector with a biomass waste stream.