* 1621759
* SBIR Phase I:  A Family of Sensor Dyes for Real-Time Optical Sensing of Metals in Aqueous Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Bruce Bathurst, Advanced Chemical Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to refine, broaden
and characterize a new family of optical chemosensor dyes designed for real-time
monitoring and control of heavy-metal concentrations in industrial wastewater
discharge. This will allow metal platers, metal finishers, circuit board
manufacturers, ink manufacturers, and a multitude of other businesses that
discharge heavy metal waste, the capability to reduce treatment costs by an
average of 25% to 40%. At the same time, this technology will assist in
improving compliance with discharge limits defined by the Environmental
Protection Agency's Clean Water Act and by local regulatory agencies. This would
in turn reduce toxic metal treatment costs at downstream municipal wastewater
treatment plants. It is estimated from market surveys that at least 15,000
businesses in the United States are potential customers for such a system. The
global market in this vertical is estimated to be at least $2 billion. In
addition, many other market segments, such as defense and homeland security,
could potentially use these chemosensor arrays to permit accurate detection of
heavy metals in real-world conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is that it further develops and evaluates a family of
chemosensor dyes that are inherently stable over time and can be used for
continuous, real-time, heavy-metal monitoring in wastewater treatment processes
with detection limits relevant to environmental regulations. Earlier work
demonstrated that sets of several of these dyes have significant promise to
accurately and continuously measure the concentration of specific metals in
wastewater effluent. To quantify each metal ion of interest, the output of
multiple dyes is analyzed to provide accurate identification of specific metals.
Rigid attachment to the sensing platform allows for longer-term deployment.
Specifically, this project intends to demonstrate and evaluate the response of a
sensor array to several heavy metals identified, based on customer surveys, as
the primary analytical needs of the wastewater industry. This effort will
include the quantification of relevant metal ions and an evaluation of the
stability of those measurements over time in several flow systems which will be
assembled. A viable sensing platform prototype is envisioned at the end of a
successful project. Moving forward, further dyes can be added to allow
quantification of other metals over the concentration ranges of interest, with
minimal interference.