* 1621324
* STAR Metrics Workshop on Software and Data Citation and Attribution
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Merce Crosas, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 40,694.00

The creation and dissemination of new and useful research tools and data is
critical to scientific progress. This workshop will bring together groups from
such diverse and varied science research domains as biomedicine, physical
sciences, computer science, linguistics, information science, and the social
sciences to collectively discuss areas of interest, share findings and methods,
and coordinate future goals and planning related to improving the norms and
practices for scientific software and data citation and attribution. This work
will contribute to properly recognizing and rewarding those who create and add
value to the data and software tools relied on in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Participants in this workshop hail from highly
diverse and scientifically distinct areas and fields of research, and as such,
have relatively few opportunities to interact face-to-face to share ideas,
exchange knowledge and coordinate efforts. This workshop will offer an
opportunity for cross-domain coordination, interaction and collaboration between
a diverse set of researchers committed to the common goal of improving the
systems and methods of citation and attribution of scientific software and data.
Workshop participants will engage in extensive attendee-wide discussions on
topics related to tools and resources, cross-domain convergence of efforts, and
previous and ongoing community efforts regarding software and data citation in
science research. Participants will also engage directly with external experts
invited to give their perspectives and facilitate community discussion. Written
reports suitable for publication from all sessions and panels will be prepared
by meeting participants at the culmination of the workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;