* 1621929
* SBIR Phase I:  Platform for Impedance Diagnostics and Power Management for Electric Vehicle Battery Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Eric Din, Hive Battery Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on furthering
scientific understanding of degradation in electrochemical energy storage. The
project will explore technology that will enable the large-scale transfer of a
key laboratory-proven diagnostic tool from the lab to the field. This tool,
called electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), is a noninvasive assessment
of the internal state of a battery. In contrast to current interest-group-
initiated, crowd-sourced qualitative research efforts, EIS would enable the
collection and analysis of an unprecedented amount of real-time quantitative
data to further scientific understanding of electrochemical lifetime and
degradation factors of in applications ranging from electric vehicles to grid
and building storage. Highly publicized battery pack failures have increased
skepticism of electrochemical energy storage in the public eye, and large-scale
scientific studies could aid in faster technological improvements to increase
widespread adoption of electrochemical energy storage as the U.S. seeks to
improve energy independence, efficiency, and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the need to
innovate on current battery management methods that force battery system
overdesign and power/energy underutilization by introducing a platform to enable
diagnosis and correction of inherent cell-to-cell imbalances in electric
vehicles to improve battery pack performance, reliability, and safety.
Specifically, this work deploys electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in a
distributed power electronics platform to provide a new toolset for real-time
diagnostics and the improved extraction of important information to aid in the
determination of battery cell state of charge and state of health. The goal of
Phase I Research is to demonstrate efficient and cost-effective scalability of
this power-electronics-based EIS. A proof-of-concept prototype has been verified
on small-capacity cells, but a commercial solution will need to manage large-
capacity cells with much lower impedance which presents control system and EIS
accuracy technical challenges. A power converter and accompanying control system
will first be developed to meet target specifications, followed by a
demonstration board to demonstrate EIS and power management for a number of
series-connected cells.