* 1621294
* Strengthening Mathematics Intervention Classes: Identifying and Addressing Challenges to Improve Instruction for Struggling Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Amy Brodesky, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,640,922.00

Given the adoption of more rigorous mathematics standards, U.S. school districts
face a pressing need to improve instruction for struggling learners who are not
reaching proficiency on standardized assessments. In response to low
performance, a common district solution is to add mathematics intervention
classes which aim to provide struggling students with time for more intensive
and targeted instruction. Researchers have begun to identify effective
mathematics intervention practices, but few studies have examined if
intervention teachers are actually implementing these approaches with students.
Very little is known about how intervention class time is spent, what
mathematics content is emphasized, which evidence-based instructional practices
are used, and what challenges are faced by teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this project is to improve mathematics instruction for struggling
learners by focusing on the quality of instruction occurring in mathematics
intervention classrooms. The investigators will conduct observations and
interviews with teachers and district leaders to understand current practices
and challenges. This will be followed by a national survey of 300 teachers to
document challenges across the country in terms of providing mathematics
intervention. The final aspect of the project involves the design of
professional development for mathematics intervention teachers based on the
needs identified in the earlier phases of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.