* 1621289
* Zoom In! Learning Science with Data
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2020
* William Tally, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,912,119.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. This
project will expand the DRK-12 portfolio by contributing to a limited program
portfolio on data science, and also by being responsive to a broader, national
discourse on data science, exemplified in the data-dependent scientific
practices emphasis in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). With the
impetus toward data literacy, an acute need has emerged for high quality
evidence-based models, practices, and tools to better prepare high school
teachers to teach data skills and for students to develop the problem solving
and analytical skills needed to interpret and understand data, particularly in
the sciences. This project will address these challenges by leveraging novel
research and design approaches, using digital tools and two well-established
online instructional platforms; Zoom In and Common Online Data Analysis
Platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a user base of over 27,000 teachers and
students, the existing Zoom In platform has proven successful in fostering
evidence-based inquiry among social studies teachers. This project will test the
feasibility of the platform to facilitate data-focused inquiry and skill
development among high school science teachers and their students. In Year 1,
two NGSS-aligned digital curriculum modules and supporting materials focused on
scientific phenomena and problems in biology and earth science will be developed
for high school science teachers and embedded in a modified iteration of Zoom
In. The Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP) will be integrated into the
modules to make hierarchical data structures, modeling, visualizations, and
dynamic linking possible within Zoom In. A pilot and usability test will be
conducted with 16 teachers and 100 students from diverse New York City public
high schools. Two teacher focus groups and think-aloud sessions with the
students will be held. In Year 2, the remaining four modules will be developed.
Guided by four research questions, field testing with teachers and students will
be done to assess the content, CODAP data tools, Zoom-in student supports,
teacher supports, and outcome measures. In Year 3, final revisions to the tools
will be completed. A small-scale efficacy test will be conducted to assess
aspects of the implementation process, practices, and overall impact of the
modules on student learning. For the efficacy study, a two-level cluster-
randomized design will be employed to randomly assign schools to the Zoom In
intervention. A comparison group will use another existing well-designed data
literacy digital instructional platform but without key aspects of Zoom In.
Outcome measures will be administered at the beginning and end of the school
year to the treatment and comparison groups. Back-end data, observational data,
and teacher log data will be collected and analyzed. Qualitative data will be
gathered from teacher and student observations and interviews and analyzed.
Researchers will analyze the impact on student learning using hierarchical
linear models with an effect treatment condition and student-and-class-level
covariates. The research findings will be broadly disseminated through the Zoom
In platform, conferences, publications, and social media.