* 1621952
* SBIR Phase I:  Powerhouse: An Integrated End-Use Tied Solar Thermal and Power System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Ginger Watkins, ORB Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to test the
feasibility of a residential-scale, integrated mechanical system that supplies
all energy needs of a low energy home, including heating, cooling, hot water,
and power with 100% site-generated, renewable energy. If proven feasible, the
system is expected to be cost-competitive with common existing HVAC (heating,
ventilation, and air-conditioning) systems on an installed cost basis. Phase I
of this project will focus on the supply of thermal end uses including cooking,
domestic hot water, and space heating through a combination of solar energy and
thermal storage. The broader impact of this Phase I research is to make carbon-
neutral living a practical, affordable, and widely available option. The
technology has the potential to leverage deep penetration of renewable energy
into the nation's electric power system, reduce carbon emissions of the power
sector, and support cost-effective, risk-aware infrastructure investments by
electric utilities in the long term. In addition, the commercialization of the
proposed integrated mechanical system could expand the number of sites deemed to
be appropriate for renewable energy, improve access to affordable housing in
general, and create job opportunities in green construction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the feasibility of an
integrated mechanical and power system to achieve a zero carbon home at zero
incremental cost. Two components have been identified as being critical to the
system-level cost efficiencies of the proposed system and will be investigated
in Phase I: (1) a novel, convenient, indoor solar cooker and (2) a low-cost,
roof-integrated, solar thermal collector with high-efficiency operation in space
heating mode. The research targets include demonstration of a new means of
cooking using stored thermal energy; construction of a solar thermal collector
prototype suitable for cold climates that costs less than half that of glazed
flat plate collectors, and development of control logic for thermal and
electrical loads to meet power access and comfort expectations of the U.S.
market. The project will test the cooking quality and cooking times of a new
solar cooking method and build a first prototype cooker; prototype and measure
the efficiency of the new solar thermal collector; develop a dynamic simulation
of the system as part of an ultra-low energy home to test scheduling of load
controls; and project the economics of the proposed system.