* 1621544
* SBIR Phase I:  A Programming Language-Driven Approach to Building IoT, Mobile and Web Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Raju Pandey, Thinking Books, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves Web, Mobile and IoT applications, which
generate significant economic value for society. IoT applications alone will add
about $2T in economic value over the next 10 years. However, in order to fully
realize the economic potential, high value applications will need to be created
and brought to the market at low cost and quickly. This project will develop
products that will significantly reduce development cost, improve quality, and
bring these applications to market faster. The proposed project will also have
significant impact on computer science education. Given the growing interest in
programming at high school and college levels, the project will produce software
tools and educational material that students can use to build novel applications
without needing to learn a wide variety of languages and tools to experiment
with different mobile and IoT devices. Further, interest in IoT has given rise
to the maker movement, where low cost software and hardware tools are being used
to build smart objects. Tools produced by this project will further lower the
barrier of entry for the maker community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the problem of developing
IoT, Mobile and Web applications. Developing these applications is extremely
challenging because of the differences in device capabilities, platform support
(iOS vs. Android vs. Windows), and resources (memory, CPU, power). Building such
applications often has meant rewriting a large percentage of the application
code using different programming languages, tools, libraries and platform
support. This has resulted in high development and management costs,
inconsistent and poor product experience across platforms, and low software
quality. This project addresses the problem by using a language-driven approach.
In this approach, a new language is designed specifically to provide
abstractions for the various forms of heterogeneity (including hardware,
capability, resource and abstraction heterogeneities). Compilers and code
generators use the semantic properties of the abstractions to generate code
customized for each device. The Phase 1 project will develop tools and libraries
for targeting the language for several mobile and IoT platforms. The outcome of
Phase 1 will be a set of tools, which when given a program and a description of
devices, will generate code for each device, distribute and install the binaries
on each device, and manage the binaries for the devices.