* 1621909
* CAREER:  Multi-Physics Transient Holography: A Non-Intrusive Imaging Approach for the Identification of Structural Damage in Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2015,08/31/2021
* Fabio Semperlotti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project aims at advancing
the state-of-the-art in non-destructive/non-intrusive imaging techniques for
structural health monitoring. Structural health monitoring is a highly
multidisciplinary area of engineering that investigates advanced sensing systems
and data analysis methodologies to assess the integrity of structures. These
monitoring systems have the potential to revolutionize the maintenance strategy
for transportation systems and infrastructure by allowing frequent or continuous
inspections thus ultimately increasing safety and reliability at reduced
operating costs. Specifically, enabling the transition to a condition-based
maintenance strategy is key to ensure the long-term sustainability of our nation
infrastructures. The research explores a new concept of imaging technology that
leverages and combines multiple physical principles, ranging from the mechanical
to the thermal to the electromagnetic fields, yielding a highly sensitive
approach able to achieve performance beyond current imaging techniques. The
project will investigate the fundamental principles of this advanced imaging
technology and will demonstrate its effectiveness through laboratory tests. The
outcome of this research will benefit the current and future US infrastructure
and transportation systems and will lay the foundations for the transition of
this technology to other fields, such as medical imaging and material
characterization, where highly sensitive and accurate imaging tools are enabling
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to be investigated is based on
the novel idea of multi-physics transient holography, whereby the coupled
electromagnetic-thermo-acoustic response is exploited to probe the structure and
detect damage. The tomographic problem, which consists in reconstructing images
of the interior properties of an object by using penetrating waves, is cast in a
holographic framework in order to achieve unprecedented image resolution and
detection performance. The multi-physics approach will provide increased damage
sensitivity while allowing a largely reduced sensing network, compared to
current technologies. In order to unlock the full potential of the holographic
approach, this research will also explore new technologies in areas that are
complementary to image reconstruction such as data processing, mathematical
modeling, and transducers development. Of particular relevance for the general
field of tomographic imaging is the formulation of a new generation of multi-
resolution computational models based on adaptive grids and of a novel concept
of flexible skin transducer for multi-mode actuation and sensing. Dedicated
software and hardware will also support the validation and performance
characterization of the imaging technique via laboratory experiments.