* 1621443
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-High Speed In-Memory Searchable Dynamic Random Access Memory
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Wolfgang Hokenmaier, Green Mountain Semiconductor, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is provided by a novel data processing
architecture, utilizing high-parallel in-memory computing for certain recurring
and data intensive functions. Traditional computer architecture funnels all data
through the CPU. Multiple CPU cores and very high clock frequencies are often
used to address the issue of ever increasing demands on data processing
capability. This is not sustainable from both an economical and an environmental
standpoint, due to the power consumption involved and the lack of performance
resulting from the limited parallelism of computation. Datacenters and cloud
computing have long lost the ?green label? originally associated with internet
technology and software. Their operators need to find more economical ways to
process large amounts of data. Linear searches and data indexing can be
performed economically within the memory itself, and at a several orders of
magnitude increase in performance, due to the inherent parallelism of memory
architecture. At the same time, this comes with significant power savings due to
the elimination of data transport and CPU clock cycles involved. Datacenters
will be able to serve more clients, with fever servers and less power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project investigates the feasibility of in-memory data search and
compare algorithms which utilize the inherent repetitive structures of high
density memory chips. Initial calculations suggest several orders of magnitude
improvement in data throughput by in-place computation and simultaneous
elimination of data transport. This addresses the industry's significant need
for lower power solutions for so called "Big Data" applications, which are
expected to continue their exponential rise through the Internet of Things
(IoT), where cloud-stored sensor data are expected to eclipse data uploaded by
humans in the near future. This Phase I project will perform a detailed
architecture study along with a commercially viable and backward compatible
communication protocol as well as behavioral models aimed at establishing the
commercial viability and at attracting potential clients and licensing partners.
Detailed simulations of the novel digital to analog sensing circuitry will
thoroughly investigate the key intellectual property, laying the groundwork for
the commercial realization of this innovation.