* 1621911
* SBIR Phase I:  Safely Practicing Clinical Decision Making in a Realistic Virtual Training Environment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Douglas Seifert, Syandus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will create a proof of concept prototype of a Virtual
Clinical Training Environment to emulate in-person clinical training. This
transformative initiative, built with game technology and clinical algorithms,
will enable students to safely practice clinical decision making as part of
their medical school curriculum without impacting actual patients. Schools can
improve clinical competency across all medical training (medical, nurse
practitioner, physician assistant, nurse, and allied healthcare students)
without adding IT infrastructure or more staff. Clinician trainees interact with
virtual clinicians and patients in lifelike scenarios where they make decisions
and receive expert mentoring feedback as they work to solve the scenario. These
virtual experiences will be developed with well-respected medical school
partners, and housed in an innovative Software as a Service (SaaS) platform for
medical schools to access via a cost-effective subscription model on mobile
devices and computers. This proposed project will demonstrate technical and
commercial feasibility by creating a proof of concept pilot with a prominent
medical school collaborator. This platform will ultimately serve medical schools
and teaching hospitals (over 400 in the United States alone), over 1900 nursing
programs, and eventually hospital systems nationwide to improve healthcare
outcomes and reduce errors - all without increasing their IT infrastructure or
simulation center staff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage
unique, advanced software technology and engineering to create computer-based
virtual clinical training environments that provide more authentic, complex,
lifelike clinical training experiences on any device at any time. Delivering
this level of functionality through a cost-effective SaaS model to mobile
devices is uncharted territory. Enabling conversational 3D virtual characters to
dynamically respond to a user?s decisions via underlying logic is complex, and
the feasibility of doing so within the constraints of web browsers running on
mobile devices is unknown. Syandus' unique approach combines the responsiveness
of game engine technology, the clinical decision making of systems engineering,
and the effectiveness of experience-driven learning methodologies. This project
will demonstrate technical and commercial feasibility in three objectives.
First, Syandus' simulation technology expertise will be leveraged to build a
technical proof of concept with acceptable performance on mobile devices.
Second, a collaboration with a prominent medical school will result in the first
virtual clinical training prototype using the technical proof of concept. Third,
the functional requirements to best integrate these virtual experiences into the
curriculum will be addressed with medical school advisors. The resulting
platform will allow future modules to be built with medical school collaborators
to create exceptional virtual experiences that fill the most significant
clinical reasoning gaps in training. Analytics will provide rich virtual
decision data to learn how to improve learning effectiveness and outcomes.