* 1621986
* SBIR Phase I:  An Innovative Treatment Process for Nitrate Removal from Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Mark Hopkinson, Aqua Vectors Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,500.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is the development of a low-cost
process to mitigating nitrate, a ubiquitous pollutant that is steadily eroding
the quality and availability of safe potable water all around the world. This
novel process combines and sequences electrochemistry, aqueous chemical
reactions, solid oxide formation and surface adsorption processes into a simple
continuous-flow unit to achieve high levels of nitrate removal; optimization
will be guided by computational techniques that lend themselves to discovery of
new materials that may also demonstrate breakthrough potential for other
critical fields such as fuel treatment and large scale energy storage. The
project offers an opportunity to apply interdisciplinary solutions to complex
societal problems and will yield a self-contained unit, inexpensive to build and
operate, scalable, modular and reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives in this Phase I research project are to develop an inexpensive water
treatment module for selective removal of nitrate from aqueous media. The module
employs a novel sequence of electrochemically controlled processes to promote in
situ formation and ripening of metal hydrous oxide crystals, with documented
adsorptive effectiveness, readily separating them from continuously flowing
water. The primary objectives of this project are refining and addressing the
high risk aspects of this methodology, merging field experience with concepts
from published papers, sequencing processes and regulating conditions in novel
ways, enhancing adsorption properties while mitigating interferences by
oxyanions. The technology will advance understanding of metal hydrous oxides and
the kinetics of their formation, which may well inform creation of other
inexpensive processes for simultaneous removal of multiple problematic
pollutants, potentially recovering them for commercial re-use.