* 1621938
* SBIR Phase I:  Evaluation of The Use of A Contactless, Three-Dimensional Scanner for the Collection of Various Fingerprint Impressions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Marzena Mulawka, FlashScan3D, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enhance the ability of forensic scientists
to capture, analyze, and search fingerprint impression evidence in the field.
Additionally, a contactless device will eliminate the potential for alteration,
loss of detail, or destruction of the fingerprint impression. This system will
also have a positive impact on law enforcement agencies by accelerating
fingerprint recovery, improving the quality of fingerprint impression evidence
collected at crime scenes, reducing training requirements, and accelerating
investigations. Furthermore, this project will address numerous concerns and
recommendations regarding fingerprints and forensics published in the National
Research Council's (NRC) 2009 Report, Strengthening Forensic Science in the
United States: A Path Forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a novel device capable
of digitally acquiring the various types of fingerprint impressions found at
crime scenes - latent, patent, and plastic. Fingerprints represent one of the
most important and fragile types of evidence. However, manually processing crime
scenes for fingerprint impressions requires trained technicians, a variety of
supplies, and a significant amount of time. Once visualized and processed,
fingerprint impressions must undergo a multitude of steps in order to be
digitized for searching against databases of exemplar fingerprint records. The
goal of Phase I is to determine the technical and commercial feasibility of
utilizing a contactless, three-dimensional (3D) scanning device to acquire
different types of fingerprint impressions deposited on a variety of surfaces
and convert them into two-dimensional (2D) fingerprints that are consistent and
compatible with existing fingerprint databases and matching algorithms. To
achieve these goals, the research team will build a prototype 3D scanner,
develop new unrolling and segmentation algorithms, and test the ability to match
recovered fingerprints against a database of exemplar fingerprint records.