* 1621101
* Workshop for Building a Network for Early Career Scholars of Games and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Crystle Martin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,982.00

The field of Games and Learning is relatively new and of rapidly growing in
impact and importance. The project will build a network of early career Games
and Learning scholars through in-person workshops supported and enhanced by on-
line networking. The workshops will consist of several events including panels
on publishing, small group mentor time with senior scholars, professional
development planning activities, and a project development group. Overall
participation at the workshops will be kept to 20 (10 scholars per cohort)
scholars maximum to make the activities as impactful as possible for the
participants and in order to be able to offer a travel stipend to participants.
After the workshop, the project Principal Investigators (PIs) of the project
will hold informal networking events at domain specific conferences throughout
the year open to any early career Games and Learning scholar who is interested
in participating. The PIs will also create an online network to bring early
scholars together for online professional development support, collaboration,
and networking. The online community will consists of a
listserv.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early career workshop will support the
development of research skills and help support the developing research of early
career scholars in order to grow and nurture the wider field, to bolster current
research and to promote further research and collaboration in the field. To
gauge the impact of this capacity building grant, the PIs will survey the
workshop participants as well as the larger community that we build to determine
what impact it has had on them. The project is supported by the Cyberlearning
and Future Learning Technologies Program, which funds efforts that will help
envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively.