* 1621777
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2015-16 Spectrum-Sharing Radio Challenge (Spectrum-ShaRC)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Vuk Marojevic, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 11/30/2019
* USD 11,985.00

The Spectrum Sharing Radio Challenge (Spectrum-ShaRC) is an international
student challenge aimed at stimulating and encouraging students to engage in
research and innovation in the field of cognitive radio and spectrum sharing.
The challenge runs from October through June 2016. This project will provide
travel grants to support student travel for the top eight US-based Spectrum-
ShaRC teams to participate in the final round of the challenge to be held at
Blacksburg, Virgnia. Radios developed by the student teams are scored and ranked
based on criteria that include the ability of the student-developed radios to
transfer data quickly and accurately, adapt to interference from other radios,
and avoid interfering with other radios in a dynamic radio environments.
Participants will also have the opportunity to attend the symposium and summer
school at a reduced registration rate. The symposium offers keynote speeches,
technical presentations and tutorials on a variety of topics including
mathematical methods and software for use in wireless research and research-to-
technology transfer from which the students will benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge encourages students to develop innovative
solutions that will enable safer and more reliable spectrum sharing. The
developed tools for running the challenge as well as the results produced by the
participants will be valuable for research and education. Results will be
published in the Spectrum-ShaRC challenge report and it is expected that
portions of the challenge, tools and outcomes will be published in scholarly
articles and used in tutorials and university lectures.