* 1621725
* SBIR Phase I: Science-Backed Games to Enhance Early Language Acquisition
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Tammy Kwan, Cognitive ToyBox
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is developing digital apps for children that promote
first language acquisition. Research shows that early language development
impacts future outcomes: A toddler's vocabulary size predicts language skills
years later as well as future academic performance. Parents keep track of
language-related milestones, and if a child falls behind, they tend to jump to
the worst conclusions. This project aims to reduce parental anxiety by
developing science-backed apps to accelerate early language acquisition. Due to
the growing use of touchscreen devices by young children and the corresponding
need for high-quality children's apps, this project has the potential to
generate significant returns on commercial and social levels. The existing
market has a dearth of apps that are equal parts educational and engaging for a
young child, and the proposed apps aim to fill this gap. While these apps are
designed for use by all children, the impact could be most significant as a
therapy for late talkers and for children with language-related disorders. The
apps could also supplement current intervention programs for children with
limited linguistic enrichment at home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project departs
from existing language-related educational apps by leveraging advances in
developmental psychology. Existing products teach new words through mass
practice, often with dubious success. In contrast, the proposed apps are based
on the principle of learning-to-learn (L2L): teaching high-level abstractions
that help children learn broad classes of new words. By teaching principles
rather than individual words, children become more efficient learners in the way
they learn best: at home through normal interactions with their parents and
caregivers. Previous studies have shown that guiding children to the right L2L
principles early can accelerate vocabulary growth, and through partnerships with
the scientists, this project aims to translate this research into commercial
products. This Phase I project will be evaluated through a randomized control
study, testing the effectiveness of the first L2L app for accelerating early
vocabulary growth. The project scope also includes the development of additional
learning-to-learn apps that guide children towards other important principles of
word learning. The proposed apps will be designed, and rigorously evaluated, to
best support early learners, with the largest potential impact for the children
who need it most.