* 1621685
* SBIR Phase I:  Proactive Network Configuration Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Ari Fogel, Intentionet, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project stems from technology that automatically
analyzes network configurations for errors. Computer networks are so tightly
woven into the fabric of modern business and society that the delivery of almost
all products and services relies on them. Yet networks are notoriously difficult
to manage correctly today, and configuration errors that compromise
availability, security, and performance are common. Today operators are left to
simply wait for bad things to happen and then diagnose and repair the errors as
quickly as possible to mitigate the damage. The technology developed in this
project will enable organizations to identify network security and availability
errors before they are introduced into the running network, thereby saving
significant time and money, preventing unauthorized access to customer
information, and minimizing down time. The project will also lead to a better
understanding of the most prevalent kinds of network configuration errors and
how to design networks to prevent them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will perform the research and
development necessary to demonstrate the technical feasibility of a proactive
approach to detecting network configuration errors, as instantiated in a
software tool. The key innovation underlying the approach is the ability to
comprehensively and precisely model and validate the behavior of a network
solely by analyzing the network's configuration files. The proposed work has
three primary technical goals. First, configuration languages are extremely
diverse and complex, so the tool currently only supports features that have been
used by the networks to which it has been applied. A key challenge is to augment
the logical model underlying the tool to support other features that are used by
real-world networks. Second, the tool is currently computationally expensive for
large networks. Scalability will be improved by leveraging the structure
inherent in network configurations and topologies to perform configuration
analysis modularly. Third, to be usable by network operators, the tool must
integrate with existing source-control repositories and must provide an
expressive interface enabling operators to explore the analysis results. In
summary, these research directions will turn the software tool from a research
prototype into an expressive, scalable, and usable tool for analyzing real
networks.