* 1621910
* SBIR Phase I:  Stable Undercooled Metal Materials for Soldering Heat-Sensitive Components and Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Ian Tevis, Surface Applied Fluid Interface Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will enable the use of flexible and printed electronic
technologies for heat-sensitive materials such as plastics, papers, and organic
electronics that cannot employ traditional soldering or conductive adhesives
because of temperature, cost, and/or performance limitations. The foundation for
the proposed research is a no-heat-added solder paste made from liquid-metal
particles that act like filled balloons, releasing a liquid metal when popped
and then turning solid. Printed electronics offer potential for major
manufacturing growth for the United States, because the device structure lends
itself to being manufactured domestically, offering transportation advantages
and overall lower costs of ownership. This technology may have applications in
commercial flexible displays, wearable biomedical sensors, lightweight
electronics for military equipment, and radio frequency identification tags for
supply-chain connectivity. The development of the products enabled by this
technology is expected to make U.S. citizens, institutions, military, and
government agencies more efficient and effective with better inventory/waste
tracking, biometrics collection, weight reduction, and object networking.
Enabling new U.S. technologies creates market opportunities for the Internet of
Things and telemedicine, as well as manufacturing opportunities to make
electronics in the U.S., creating significant jobs, businesses, and tax
revenue.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing
unique undercooled metal microparticles for use in no-heat-added soldering of
printed/flexible electronics. The research will decouple the heating from the
joining of the metal?significantly lowering the processing temperature and thus
preserving function for heat-sensitive electronics and substrates. The key to
the innovation?an oxide encapsulating shell?prevents heterogeneous nucleation
with a thin oxide shell and undercooling's enhancement on the micro- and
nanoscale. It can be mechanically sheared or removed by chemical flux action to
enable the liquid metal inside to first flow and coalesce, and to then solidify.
The metal alloys can remain as liquids at room temperature for months. Research
will increase the production yield and reliability of bismuth alloys that melt
at 139°C to less brittle tin/silver/copper SnAgCu solder that melts at 217°C.
Objectives are to 1) develop a material that can join/coat materials with solid
metal without adding heat, 2) demonstrate the properties of the joint compared
to conductive adhesives and traditional soldering, and 3) demonstrate a
Wheatstone bridge and flexible Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) prototype
device. Undercooled solders will be applied using flux strategies to make
mechanically and electrically robust joints in an electronic device at room
temperature.