* 1621379
* SBIR Phase I:  Compliant Force Control Module for Linear Actuators
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Maciej Pietrusinski, AndrosRobotics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies primarily in its
contribution to the rehabilitation robotics, assistive technologies and
collaborative robotics fields. Technologists engaged in developing devices and
products in these fields are greatly benefiting from the lower prices of
electronics brought on by the growth of the telecommunications industry, but
those same technologists don?t have ready access to compliantly controlled
actuators that make physical robot-human interaction safe. Developing such
actuators is costly, it takes a long time, and it requires very specific and
rare expertise. The introduction of a new line of inexpensive (as compared to
existing technologies), highly backdrivable linear actuators onto the market
will enable a new breed of robotic rehabilitation and assistive products, as
well as co-robots and perhaps even gaming interfaces with haptic
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will focus on developing a proof of concept of the compliant
force control module (CFCM), for converting simple linear screw-driven actuators
into highly backdrivable, force-controlled actuators. There is great interest
and opportunity in co-robots, but in order for these devices to safely
manipulate objects and interact haptically with humans, they must be inherently
safe. Compliant force-controlled actuators can render such co-robots safe, but
due to their novelty such equipment is not commercially available. A proprietary
force sensor design will be implemented and research will be performed on
various methods for achieving high performance with sufficient stability margins
in both hardware and software. Research will be performed on control algorithm
approaches for minimizing the effects of mechanical play, stiction and inertia.
The use of visco-elastic materials as the compliant element to replace the
purely elastic elements (springs) will be investigated for the potential to
mitigate the mechanical issues found in economical mechanical transmissions. The
ultimate goal of the proposed effort is to demonstrate the improved force-
control performance of an off-the-shelf linear actuator when equipped with the
CFCM technology.