* 1621696
* SBIR Phase I:  Forced Cooling of Semi-Permanent Molds for Fine Grain Steel Castings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Nicholas Moroz, Wayne Steel Tech
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of creating fine grain ultra-high strength steel (UHSS) castings
using a novel semi-permanent active forced cooling mold casting manufacturing
process. With the demand for low-cost high performance cast components for
light-weighting applications for the defense, off-highway, automotive and
construction industries, new manufacturing methods are needed for the production
of steel and cast iron components. This innovation will utilize active cooling
methods, effectively arresting the grain growth of the casting within the mold,
and resulting in greatly improved mechanical properties, process yield and
productivity. Compared to traditional sand casting, this process is predicted to
reduce manufacturing cost per casting by up to 40%, and to increase productivity
(casting throughput) by up to 150%. This disruptive technology targets the steel
and other ferrous metal casting industry, which domestically accounts for over
10 million tons of steel castings annually, with revenues reaching $20 billion.
This industry is highly fragmented, with frequent consolidation of smaller
players. The proposed technology will be implemented at the foundry level,
providing significant improvement in casting quality, operational efficiency,
and overall casting yield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project includes the development of a semi-permanent mold casting system with
active cooling, the determination of the effects of the active cooling on the
performance of the produced castings, and a techno-economic study of the
innovation in use at the foundry level to determine to costs/benefits of
implementation at scale. The innovation of this technology lies in the
application of active cooling to the casting within the mold, and in the semi-
permanent mold construction. The main objective of this Phase I is to develop a
proof-of-concept casting apparatus and to produce a series of steel plates with
varying forced cooling rates from which to determine the effect of cooling rate
in the mold on grain size, elongation, strength of the casting and soundness of
the casting. It is anticipated that this manufacturing process will produce
aerospace grade properties at cast iron manufacturing cost. Completion of this
Phase I will enable scale up of the casting process to complex parts.