* 1621861
* SBIR Phase I: Easy-to-Use Software for Automation Integration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Eric Minnick, AE Machines, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project can dramatically transform the population of
people to whom automation, and its well-documented benefits, is available. The
lack of tools targeted at truly nontechnical users that still have the
aspiration to be practically useful (rather than educational in nature) is a
barrier to many. The approach taken in this proposal could reduce or remove this
barrier and bring simple, moving machines into many more environments. For
hobbyists, this means increased ability to self-design the logical behavior of
the machines and simple devices already being created in this group. For small
to medium sized businesses, this may mean increased productivity, quality, and
revenue, particularly for small-batch processes. Further into the future, this
technology can be applied to home automation where it is critical for society
that all users have control over the behavior of their connected devices,
particularly in such a personal space where social and cultural considerations
require individual customization to design how the "smart" things around the
home move.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has two main
objectives. First, the computational scalability of an initial, proof-of concept
prototype will be tested. Technical hurdles for this objective include the
development of a scalable code architecture and support for a larger number of
so-called sensing and action primitives, which will be explained in the
proposal. Second, the ability of an untrained user to move from a contextualized
use-case to specific logic design will be determined. Technical hurdles for this
objective are in the domain of human factors, where a relatively complex process
must be distilled to essential steps that an untrained user can relate to a
familiar process in a particular environment.