* 1621982
* SBIR Phase I:  NimbleDroid: Combining Program Analysis Breakthroughs and Big Data to Improve Mobile App Performance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Junfeng Yang, NimbleDroid, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to greatly improve mobile app user
experience, boost developer productivity, and speed up mobile innovations by
automating the mundane and simplifying the complex in Android app performance
debugging and optimization. Apps are now everywhere. They innovate almost every
industry. By making it easy to build high-performance apps, users enjoy better
experience and developers enjoy better productivity, benefiting every industry
and person that use apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to modernize the software development
process by combining both program analysis research breakthroughs and big data
technologies. Toward this vision, this project aims to build a unique product
with innovative technologies to help developers optimize Android app
performance. The product continuously tests app performance across code changes
to detect performance issues as soon as slow code is introduced. In contrast,
existing tools alert developers too late, after real users have been affected
and many code changes have been merged, making it both stressful and difficult
to find the problematic code. The product gives actionable diagnosis by
pinpointing what problematic code developers need to fix and explaining the why
and how of the fix. It is thus much more intelligent and easy to use than
existing tools.