* 1621177
* SBIR Phase I:  Modified Ionic Liquid Electrolytes for Low-Cost, High-Energy Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Tyler Evans, SiILion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will enable a high-performance, large particle size
silicon anode for integration in SiILion's proprietary high energy Li-ion
system. While rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the
portable electronics market for nearly a decade, they have failed to gain
widespread commercial success in high power and high capacity applications due
to material limitations. Demand for a battery providing 400 Wh/kg, 700 Wh/L
(almost double the specific energy of current state-of-the art lithium-ion
batteries) is growing. Reaching the performance demands of next-generation Li-
ion batteries will require breakthroughs in next-generation electrode materials.
If successful in enabling its proposed 900 Wh/L technology, SiILion could offer
the public an opportunity to own an affordable, safe, environmentally conscious
vehicle while also providing safe, high energy batteries for applications
ranging from consumer electronics to grid storage. Moreover, SiILion's high
energy battery technology has major implications in the aerospace and defense
industries, providing a non-flammable battery for vehicular and on-person
applications. In the race to develop the next successful Li-ion technology, the
U.S. economy stands to gain; SiILion's proposed Li-ion battery system provides
an opportunity for the U.S. to own high impact battery technology and reclaim a
leadership position in the Li-ion market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research
aimed towards enabling next-generation electrode materials, both in academia and
industry, focuses on expensive material modification. Conversely, SiILion is
working to enable low-cost and scalable electrode materials using a new class of
electrolyte: room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs). In order to truly realize a
low-cost and scalable bulk-type Si anode, the incorporation of larger Si
particles needs to be achieved. Micron-scale silicon (Micro-Si) is the ideal
anode material for low cost and high capacity, but a full-cell incorporating
Micro-Si has never been demonstrated commercially or in academia because of
complications stemming from the material's expansion during lithiation. Upon
optimizing the micron-Si anode in an RTIL electrolyte, the following areas will
be investigated: (1) overall electrode thickness change upon lithiation and
delithiation, (2) characterization of electrode mechanism and material
morphology throughout cycling, (3) development of full-cells in a coin cell
configuration, and (4) development of full-cells in a large-format
configurations. This SBIR Phase I project will, for the first time demonstrate a
working Micro-Si anode in a Li-ion full-cell, through the optimization of the
electrode architecture and its accompanying electrolyte composition.