* 1621470
* Development of the Electronic Test of Early Numeracy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth McCarthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,777,614.00

The project will develop and refine an electronic Test of Early Numeracy (e-TEN)
in English and Spanish, focused on number and operations. The assessment will
incorporate a learning trajectory that describes students' development of the
understanding of number. The electronic assessment will allow for the test to
adapt to students' responses and incorporate games to increase children's
engagement with the tasks. These features take advantage of the electronic
format. The achievement test will be designed to be efficient, user-friendly,
affordable, and accessible for a variety of learning environments and a broad
age range (3 to 8 years old). The overarching goal of the assessment design is
to create a measure that is more accurate, more accessible to a wider range of
children, and easier to administer than existing measures. This project is
funded by the Discovery Research Pre-K-12 Program, which funds research and
development of STEM innovations and approaches in assessment, teaching and
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The e-TEN will assess informal and formal
knowledge of number and operations in domains including verbal counting,
numbering, numerical relationships, and mental addition/subtraction. The items
will be designed using domain-based learning trajectories that describe
students' development of understanding of the topics. The test will be designed
with some key characteristics. First, it will be semi-adaptive over six-month
age spans. Second, it will have an electronic format that allows for uniform
implementation and an efficient, user-friendly administration. The test will
also be accessible to Spanish speakers using an inclusive assessment model.
Finally, the game-based aspect should increase children's engagement and present
more meaningful questions. The user-friendly aspect includes simplifying the
assessment process compared to other tests of numeracy in early-childhood. The
first phase of the development will test a preliminary version of the e-TEN to
test its functionality and feasibility. The second phase will focus on norming
of the items, reliability and validity. Reliability will be assessed using Item
Response Theory methods and test-retest reliability measures. Validity will be
examined using criterion-prediction validity and construct validity. The final
phase of the work will include creating a Spanish version of the test including
collecting data from bilingual children using both versions of the e-TEN.