* 1621920
* SBIR Phase I:  Implantable Robotic System for Hearing Loss Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Allan Henslee, IOTAMOTION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be improved
capabilities of current hearing assistive cochlear implants through the
development of a miniature implantable robotic system. It will enable many more
patients with hearing loss to retain their hearing capacity much longer over
their lifetimes. Hearing loss has a significant impact on physical and mental
health, education, employment, and overall quality of life, and has been linked
to an increased risk of dementia and feelings of depression, frustration,
anxiety, and social isolation. 53 million people have severe-to-profound hearing
loss and are eligible for traditional cochlear implants, but there are an
additional 300 million with partial-to-moderate disabling hearing loss who are
not eligible for a traditional implant and do not significantly benefit from
other hearing assistive devices alone. The development of this technology will
enable a much wider population of those with hearing loss to receive the
benefits of a cochlear implant, using a novel wireless control and the added
convenience of personalized hearing loss treatment regimens. This technology
will also facilitate commercial opportunities for use of the implantable robotic
system in other applications where an implantable electrode/wire requires
precise and dynamic remote position adjustments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will design, develop and
test a prototype of an implantable robotic system that wirelessly optimizes
cochlear implant function and enables clinician adjustments as patient hearing
deteriorates. Though traditional cochlear implants are used to treat severe-
profound hearing loss, recent advances in hearing preservation technologies have
allowed those with partial hearing loss, such as from noise exposure or aging,
to benefit from cochlear implants. Unfortunately, clinical trials have found
that more than 50% of these recipients experience continued hearing
deterioration after cochlear implantation. Treatment options are limited to
additional surgery for electrode replacement or living with limited hearing
because the implants cannot be adjusted. This research is focused on developing
an implantable robotic control system that will enable cochlear implants to
dynamically adjust to post-surgical hearing decline without the need for
additional surgery. In Phase I, individual components will be assembled into a
functioning implantable robotic system that meets design and surgical size
requirements to effectively move an electrode within a human cadaveric cochlea
model. Anticipated results will include a prototype that has a novel
micromechanical system for electrode adjustments, wireless communications for
external control, and safe transcutaneous power.