* 1621011
* Supporting Success in Algebra: A Study of the Implementation of Transition to Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Deborah Spencer, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,853,850.00

The project will research the impact and implementation of Transition to
Algebra, a year-long mathematics course for underprepared ninth grade students
taken concurrently with Algebra 1 to provide additional support. Nationally,
there is a need for programs that support students' learning of algebra and that
provide research-based resources and models particularly for students in need of
additional support. The design of the Transition to Algebra curriculum reflects
the idea that students underprepared for Algebra 1 can benefit from very
specific help in building the logic of algebra by connecting arithmetic pattern
and algebraic structure. The materials feature the use of mental mathematics,
puzzles, explorations, and student dialogues to connect arithmetic pattern to
algebraic structure. These features should encourage students to expect
mathematics ideas to make sense, and to build algebraic habits of mind and
problem solving stamina. The research will investigate the effects of the
curriculum on students' algebra achievement and their attitudes towards
mathematics. The Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
questions examine the impact of the Transition to Algebra course on students'
attitudes and achievement in mathematics in combination with teachers'
instruction and the types of supports teachers need to successfully implement
the intervention. The project will use a pre-post quasi-experimental design,
along with propensity score methods to reduce selection bias threats, to examine
the implementation in approximately 35 treatment schools and 35 comparison
schools. Qualitative and quantitative data will be collected and analyzed to
address research questions. The study will also investigate how teachers use and
adapt Transition to Algebra materials, and the supports critical to successful
implementation. For example, the study will examine whether and how school and
district activities such as common planning time, coaching, and other
professional development experiences influence the implementation fidelity of
the curriculum. Qualitative data will be collected through interviews and
classroom observations. Quantitative data will be collected using student and
teacher surveys, an algebra readiness assessment, a standardized end-of-course
assessment, and students' scores on state tests.