* 1621333
* Systemic Formative Assessment to Promote Mathematics Learning in Urban Elementary Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* PAMELA GROSSMAN, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 02/28/2021
* USD 3,163,145.00

Districts have long struggled to implement instructional programming in ways
that meaningfully and sustainably impact teaching and learning. Systemic
education reform is based on the hypothesis that prevailing patterns of
incoherence and misalignment in an educational system can send mixed messages to
local implementers as they try to respond to various cues and incentives in the
environment. Systemic reform seeks to bring alignment to education systems in
multiple ways, including consistency across instructional philosophies,
alignment across grade levels, and vertical coherence from district to schools
to classrooms. This project builds on the Consortium for Policy Research in
Education's (CPRE) ongoing, NSF-funded experimental study of the impacts of the
Ongoing Assessment Project's (OGAP) math assessment intervention on elementary
teachers and students in Philadelphia-area schools. The project will combine the
OGAP math intervention with research-based understandings of systemic reform.
OGAP is based upon established theory and research demonstrating the impact of
teachers' use of ongoing short- and medium-cycle formative assessment on student
learning. It combines these understandings with recent research on learning
trajectories within mathematics content domains. By bringing to bear the
strengths of all three of these areas of research - formative assessment,
learning trajectories, and systemic reform - the project promises a significant
contribution to the knowledge base about the application of math learning
research to classroom instruction on a large scale. This project will produce
concrete tools, routines, and practices that can be applied to strengthen
programs' implementation by ensuring the strategic support of school and
district leaders. This project is funded by the Discovery Research PreK-12
(DRK-12) and EHR Core Research (ECR) Programs. The DRK-12 program supports
research and development on STEM education innovations and approaches to
teaching, learning, and assessment. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPRE and the School District of Philadelphia (SDP) will
establish a research-practice partnership focused on developing, implementing,
refining, and testing a systemic support model to strengthen implementation of
the OGAP math intervention in elementary schools. CPRE's current experimental
study of OGAP's impacts reveals, preliminarily, statistically significant
positive effects on teacher knowledge and student learning. As a result, SDP has
decided to expand OGAP into an additional 60 schools in 2016-17. However, the
current OGAP study has also revealed weak implementation stemming from a lack of
consistent leadership support for the intervention. The project will address
this implementation challenge by developing, refining, supporting, and
documenting a systemic support component that will accompany OGAP's classroom-
level implementation. The systemic supports will be developed by a research-
practice partnership between CPRE; SDP; OGAP; the Graduate School of Education
at the University of Pennsylvania (PennGSE); and the Philadelphia Education
Research Consortium (PERC). The team will use principles of design-based
implementation research to iteratively refine and improve the systemic support
model. Along with the design and development of the systemic support model, the
project will conduct a mixed-methods study of its impacts and roll-out. A three-
armed quasi-experimental study will examine the differential impacts of OGAP,
with and without systemic supports, and business-as-usual math programming on
teacher and student outcomes. A mixed-methods study will examine teacher and
administrator experiences in both treatment groups, and will provide feedback to
inform the iterative development of the systemic support model.