* 1621878
* In situ Seismic Anisotropy in the Source Region of Global Deep Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Yingcai Zheng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2018
* USD 136,992.00

Earthquakes deeper than ~60km occur at subduction zones in the downgoing
lithospheres known as slabs. Depending on the depth range at which they occur,
they are known as either intermediate-depth, which can be destructive to human
society, or deep-focus earthquakes. It is very challenging to explain the
occurrence of these events since normal mantle rocks become ductile and this, in
principle, should inhibit the occurrence of earthquakes. Yet more than 20% of
the earthquakes worldwide occur at 60 km or larger depths. Moreover, it has been
observed that a large proportion of deep earthquakes radiate seismic waves
differently than that expected from the double-couple mechanism of shallow
earthquakes. These lines of evidence often lead to believe that the physics of
deep earthquakes are fundamentally different from that of shallow earthquakes.
The research goal of this study is to understand the physics of deep earthquakes
and their seismic radiation by taking into account the seismic structure of the
subducting oceanic slab where they occur. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is to elucidate why many deep earthquakes show a large non-double-
couple-components in the results of moment tensor source analysis. The source
focal mechanism solution is often used to infer important earthquake source
mechanics. Specifically, this study tests the following well-formulated
hypothesis for a particular subduction zone: could the presence of a uniform
seismic anisotropic layer in a small volume inside the slab explain the non-
double-couple component observed in all earthquakes contained in that region
without the need of invoking anomalous earthquake source processes? Such
anisotropy is expected since significant shearing should occur at the plate
interface due to slab sinking. First, by using forward modeling, this study
validates the approach of using earthquake radiation patterns to directly invert
for in situ anisotropy around the earthquakes. Then 22 deep-earthquake groups in
six global subduction zones: Tonga, Mariana, Japan, Kurile, South America, and
Java subduction zones are analyzed. Second, for each of the 22 groups, the
researchers invert for a single common anisotropy. Preliminary results show that
the existence of the in situ laminated anisotropic fabric (i.e., tilted
transverse isotropy) around the earthquakes could produce the observed non-
double couple component in earthquake radiation pattern using earthquakes with
conventional double-couple mechanisms due to faulting. In all subducting slabs,
the inverted anisotropic fabric is parallel to the subducting slab interfaces,
regardless of depth. The typical inverted shear-wave anisotropy is large, ~25%,
in slabs worldwide. The consistency of the inferred anisotropy with respect to
the slab geometry and large anisotropy values across many subduction zones fill
an important knowledge gap regarding the slab internal structure produced by
stress and chemical metamorphism. These new results can provide a critical
synergistic link for a wide range of deep slab processes in understanding slab
dynamics and plate tectonics.