* 1621126
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Industrially Viable Organometallic Catalyst Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Anil Guram, Art of Elements, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be derived from the novel catalyst developed of
the project. The project will, if successful, dramatically improve the
efficiency and scope of a specific class of industrially significant chemical
reactions which are indispensable for the manufacture of many useful products
such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and electronics. The improvements, for
example, will provide access to newer materials for the production of newer and
improved related products to address unmet biological and engineering needs. The
catalyst discoveries will also enhance the scientific knowledge base of both
fundamental and applied catalysis science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives in this Phase I research project are to develop a collection of novel
and improved organometallic catalysts for industrially relevant cross-coupling
reactions; and to address current unmet industrial needs for higher catalyst
efficiency, selectivity and scope of these reactions. The Phase I research will
involve detailed and innovative investigations of the current state-of-the-art
catalysts; systematic and iterative design, synthesis, and testing of the new
organometallic catalysts; and demonstration of improved performance of the new
catalysts in relevant cross-coupling reactions. The catalysis knowledge gained
from this Phase I research will enable catalyst design and development efforts
in the current project for specific industrial applications. The development and
commercialization of a collection of new and improved catalysts in this Phase I
project will significantly expand the efficiency and industrial utility of
cross- coupling reactions towards creating new products based on this chemistry.