* 1621254
* Building a Next Generation Diagnostic Assessment and Reporting System within a Learning Trajectory-Based Mathematics Learning Map for Grades 6-8
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jere Confrey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,180,473.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This proposal seeks to design a next generation diagnostic assessment
using learning progressions and other research (in the learning sciences) to
support middle grades mathematics teaching and learning. It will focus on nine
large content ideas, and associated Common Core State Standards for Mathematics.
The PIs will track students over time, and work within school districts to
ensure feasibility and use of the assessment system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will build on prior funding by multiple funding agencies and address
four major goals. The partnership seeks to address these goals: 1) revising and
strengthening the diagnostic assessments in mathematics by adding new item types
and dynamic tools for data gathering 2) studying alternative ways to use
measurement models to assess student mathematical progress over time using the
concept of learning trajectories, 3) investigating how to assist students and
teachers to effectively interpret reports on math progress, both at the
individual and the class level, and 4) engineering and studying instructional
strategies based on student results and interpretations, as they are implemented
within competency-based and personalized learning classrooms. The learning map,
assessment system, and analytics are open source and can be used by other
research and implementation teams. The project will exhibit broad impact due to
the number of states, school districts and varied kinds of schools seeking this
kind of resource as a means to improve instruction. Finally, the research
project contributes to the nationally supported move to create, use, and apply
research based open educational resources at scale.