* 1621403
* SBIR Phase I:  The Math Simulator - Where Data Input is Directly Linked to Functional Output
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* James Laidlaw, MidSchoolMath, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is designed to address the dramatic drop in US student
proficiency happening in the middle school grades. Seen across years of
international test data, this drop highlights the urgent need to prepare
students for success in the math classroom. Without a solid foundation in math,
US students cannot succeed in science, technology and engineering. They will be
less likely to graduate high school, will struggle to succeed in college, and
are at risk of being left behind in a global economy. Many look to technology to
address this challenge - but the 22 million US students struggling in
mathematics do not need yet another virtual tutorial, online lecture or more
practice time on a computer doing textbook-based math problems. What they need
is a simulator. A comprehensive simulator where they can see, hear and
experience just how math works - and why it matters. This project would develop
an innovative product that delivers interactive video challenge math problems,
aligned to Common Core State Standards for 5th through 8th grade mathematics,
into any classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This product will use a complex
programming system and codebase to allow teachers to collect student data and
responses to complex math problems that result in functional output, accepting
rapid real-time responses from multiple student devices, that can range from
computers to mobile phones, in a low-bandwidth environment. Within the product,
teachers generate tasks and challenges for students; students would grapple with
multi-step problems and provide answers, with the teacher maintaining ultimate
control over what is shared out with the classroom as a whole when the
simulation is played out. Student data and responses are captured and are
connected directly to a robust learning management system. The product is
anticipated to be highly effective by providing students with an opportunity for
Productive Failure (PF) prior to instruction; PF shows a higher effect size for
both conceptual learning and transfer to novel situations than typical
approaches where instruction is provided first. The Phase I project will conduct
preliminary research using an experimental design to determine effect size of
student growth from use of the intervention on a single CCSS standard.