* 1621210
* MOSART HSPS: Misconceptions Oriented Standards-Based Assessment Resource for Teachers of High School Physical Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,648,234.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in the Harvard Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics at Harvard University are developing and validating assessment
instruments intended to measure chemistry and physical science concepts for
students and teachers in grades 9 through 12. This project builds upon the
widely used K-12 Misconception Oriented Standards-based Assessment Resource for
Teachers (MOSART) developed by this research team. The project is developing 500
new test items that are intended to assess disciplinary core ideas in chemistry
and physics aligned to Next Generation Science Standards. The new measures will
be used to measure the knowledge acquired in a year of study by 10,000 students
and 200 teachers in chemistry and physics. The new assessment items and
instruments will be made available to other researchers and practitioners
through the project website and the on-line MOSART assessment
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessment development process is based on
prior research conducted to develop similar MOSART items and instruments, which
includes design efforts of assessment specialists, content experts, and research
scientists. Pilot items are tested with a national sample of approximately
20,000 high school students and their teachers. Data will be analyzed using item
response theory to model student responses. Outcomes consist of item parameters,
test and sub-test characteristics, and predictive linkages among items.
Descriptive statistics are generated to establish the state of student
knowledge, pre-and post-test performance by item and by standard, and teacher
knowledge. Descriptive analyses are followed by hierarchical linear modeling
(HLM) to examine the relationships between teacher-level and program-level
variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MOSART instruments have been widely used
and are based on a model of cognition with a strong research base in
misconceptions in science education. These additional Grade 9-12 chemistry and
physics instruments will address gaps in the current MOSART system of
assessments. The new instruments focused on chemistry and physics disciplinary
core ideas provide a much needed set of assessments for researchers and
practitioners, particularly teacher professional development providers.