* 1621496
* Supporting Teacher Practice to Facilitate and Assess Oral Scientific Argumentation: Embedding a Real-Time Assessment of Speaking and Listening into an Argumentation-Rich Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Bryan Henderson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 699,552.00

This is an early-stage design and development collaborative study submitted to
the assessment strand of the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in
response to Program Solicitation NSF 15-592. The fundamental purpose of this
project is to support teacher practice and professional learning around oral
scientific argumentation in order to improve the quality of this practice in
classrooms. To achieve this purpose, the project will examine the validity of a
new technology-based formative assessment tool for classroom
argumentation--"Diagnosing the Argumentation Levels of Groups" (DiALoG)--for
which psychometric validation work has been conducted in a laboratory setting.
The DiALoG assessment tool allows teachers to document classroom talk and
display scores across multiple dimensions--both intrapersonal and interpersonal
--for formative assessment purposes. The project will work with 6th-8th grade
science teachers to monitor and support argumentation through real-time
formative assessment data generated by the DiALoG instrument. DiALoG will be
used in conjunction with "Amplify Science", a Lawrence Hall of Science-developed
curriculum that incorporates the science practice of engaging in argument from
evidence, and a suite of newly developed Responsive Mini-Lessons (RMLs), which
consist of 20-30 minute instructional strategies designed to assist teachers to
provide feedback to students' thinking and follow-up to argumentation episodes
that the DiALoG tool identifies in need of further support. The study will allow
the refinement and expansion of DiALoG and evaluation of its impact on teacher
pedagogical content knowledge and formative assessment practices in widespread
classroom use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address two specific
research questions: (1) How can DiALoG be refined to provide a formative
assessment tool for oral argumentation that is reliable, practical, and useful
in middle school classrooms?; and (2) How does the use of DiALoG affect teacher
formative assessment practices around evidence-based argumentation, when
implementing science units designed to support oral argumentation? In order to
answer these questions, the project will conduct a randomized control trial with
100 teachers: 50 will teach argumentation-focused curriculum with DiALoG, 50
will teach the same curriculum without DiALoG. Both control and treatment
teachers will receive all digital and physical materials needed to teach three
Amplify Science curriculum units. Treatment teachers will be provided also with
the most recent version of DiALoG, including the linked RMLs, as well as support
materials for using DiALoG with the Amplify curriculum. A subgroup of focus
teachers (5 from the treatment group, and 5 from the control group) will be the
subject of additional data collection and analysis. Three focus lessons, in
which students are engaging in small-group or whole-class oral argumentation,
will be selected from each of the three Amplify Science curricular units.
Teacher measures for the randomized control trial will include validated
instruments, such as (a) a pre- and post-assessment of teacher pedagogical
content knowledge; (b) post-lesson and post-unit surveys in which teachers will
self-report on their formative assessment practices; and (c) video recordings of
selected lessons in the focus classrooms. In order to observe potential
differences in formative assessment practices between treatment and control,
protocols will be used to analyze the video recordings of focus classrooms,
including (a) Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol; (b) Assessment of
Scientific Argumentation inside the Classroom; and (c) Formative Assessment for
Teachers and Students. The key outcome of this work will be a research-informed
and field-tested prototype to improve the quality of teaching and learning
argumentation in middle school science classrooms usable in different learning
environments.