* 1621787
* CDS&amp;E: Computational Riemannian Approaches for Statistical Analysis and Modeling of Complex Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anuj Srivastava, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,987.00

Associating structures or morphologies of biological parts to their
functionalities in larger, complex biosystems is a grand challenge with
widespread applications. Approaches to this challenge require efficient tools
for quantifying shape differences in structures of interest, extracting normal
modes of variability, and using shape as a predictor in regression studies. This
project aims to develop computational techniques for analyzing shapes of two
types of biological parts: (1) subcortical structures in human brain,
represented as 2D surfaces inside MRI-imaged brain volumes, and (2) neurons,
represented as tree-like structures obtained using high-resolution microscopy.
While recent research, including the Human Connectome Project and the
NeuroMorpho database, has focused on imaging-based generation of large databases
of such structures, the techniques for systematically analyzing them lag far
behind. This interdisciplinary research aims to develop fundamental solutions
for characterizing shapes of biological structures using tools from several
different areas. It is anticipated that the techniques under development will
also be applicable in broader scientific contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
techniques for comparing morphological properties are either purely topological
(generally focusing on part counts while ignoring their shapes, e.g. the tree-
edit distance) or purely geometrical (focusing on geometries of curves and
surfaces). This project aims to bridge the gap between these two approaches by
comparing geometries of objects but allowing certain topological variability. It
will also address the most challenging issue of shape analysis -- registration
of parts across objects -- using Riemannian methods. These tools will also
naturally extend to analysis of trees with temporally-evolving structures. The
nature of the framework under development -- automatic registration and
comparison of parts across brain surfaces and neurons -- makes this approach
both novel and challenging, and the tools needed are interdisciplinary. The
project will use elements from differential geometry (especially the geometry of
Hilbert manifolds), algebra, computational statistics, and imaging sciences to
develop efficient solutions. A significant portion of this project will concern
development of real-time, scalable algorithms for analyzing large datasets
available for studying subcortical anatomy and neuronal morphology.