* 1621673
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing the Standalone Tongue Drive System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Seyedabdollah Mirbozorgi, Bionic Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 176,888.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on bringing
enhanced independence, productivity, and quality of life for hundreds of
thousands of individuals in the US who suffer severe physical disability due to
spinal cord injury or other debilitating neurodegenerative disorders, such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Due to improvements in emergency medicine and
increasing average age in the society, these individuals represent a growing
population that is underserved by current assistive technologies (ATs). The ATs
being relied upon to carry out basic tasks are still primitive, offer limited
versatility, and fail to meet end-user needs. Meanwhile, computers and internet
play ever-growing roles in everyday life and are regarded as equalizers that
allow all individuals to have similar vocational, recreational, and educational
opportunities. The Tongue Drive System (TDS) offers individuals with severe
physical disabilities an intuitive and superior mechanism for accessing computer
based resources ? wheelchairs, smartphones, computers, smart homes, etc. TDS
harnesses the power of the tongue, which often retains full capability in these
individuals despite losses of other body functions, to drive human-computer
interfaces. TDS has the potential to revolutionize the current US AT market with
an overall anticipated market size of $1B within its primary market segment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
aims to establish a new architecture for a wireless and wearable tongue drive
system (TDS) to address existing barriers to commercialization. While
functional, the current research-grade TDS prototype is based upon a sub-optimal
architecture relying on multiple devices to process and deliver user commands,
opening the door to reliability, performance, and safety issues. The current
system?s reliance on off-board processing, the commonly used 2.4 GHz band, and
the use of multiple wireless links for command transmission result in a slow
implementation that is sensitive to packet loss and interference. In safety
critical modes of operation, such as steering a powered wheelchair, these
sources of risk and performance degradation are unacceptable. The proposed
research will consolidate key TDS functions within a standalone TDS headset that
can interface with any target peripheral with a direct wireless link. Hardware
redesigns will include a powerful microcontroller to onboard sensor data
acquisition and signal processing algorithms. Dual radio chipsets will be
incorporated to maintain interoperability with commercial devices using 2.4 GHz
radios, while also supporting less utilized frequency bands for safety critical
operations. The result of this research will be a robust AT suitable for safely
critical deployments.