* 1621960
* SBIR Phase I:  Diamagnetically Directed Self-Assembly of Light Emitting Diodes for Fabricating Large Area, Direct View Displays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* clinton ballinger, selfarray
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to bring a disruptive Light Emitting Diode
(LED) assembly technology closer to commercialization and enable the creation of
a transformative, low cost manufacturing platform needed to manufacture future
efficient high resolution LED displays as well as other complex integrated
electronic systems. This project's success will revolutionize large-area LED
array assembly manufacturing, leading to significant improvements in display
quality, while achieving large reductions in display energy consumption, just as
high efficiency LEDs have dramatically reduced energy consumption in lighting
systems. Direct view all-LED displays offer superior viewing quality and high
resolution at significant energy savings over current LCD and OLED technologies.
There is a huge demand for information displays of increasing higher resolution,
but LED display manufacturers face a very high cost in LED packaging. This new
LED assembly technology can drastically reduce the LED packaging cost by an
order of magnitude for extremely high quality LED displays. This technology can
also be extended to the assembly of any other types of small semiconductor die
components on large area substrates for systems, such as solar systems, flexible
electronics, and distributed networked electronic
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop and help commercialize a radically new technology
for high speed, high precision assembly of small LEDs for manufacturing energy
efficient, high performance direct view Light Emitting Diode (LED) displays.
This patent-pending technology overcomes the limitations of incumbent pick-and-
place technologies and wafer-scale stamping technologies currently in
development. This assembly tool is considerably simpler and less expensive,
while achieving much higher assembly rates for almost any LED size, pixel pitch
and display dimensions. The objective of this project is to demonstrate the
commercialization viability of this technology with well characterized baseline
processes. A set of process metrics and scaling rules will be established for
future product development. This project will result in a prototype assembly
system and a LED display demo to demonstrate the value proposition of this
technology for the LED display manufacturing industry.