* 1621065
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational Tools for Analyzing the Dynamics of Biological Processes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Anastasia Deckard, Mimetics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2017
* USD 224,901.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of software tools for the
analysis of the dynamics of biological networks involved in cell-level
processes. These tools will be used to increase the understanding of how living
organisms respond to environmental changes and stresses. For example, the tools
to be built will help to show how crop plants respond to drought stress at the
level of the cellular networks that control plant growth and development. These
tools also will provide information that allows commercially important
biological processes, such as fermentation used in industries from food and
beverage to biosynthesis of fine chemicals to pharmaceuticals, to be more
accurately controlled, making them more reliable, more efficient, and more
predictable. In addition, these tools will help researchers analyze potential
side effects of proposed drug treatments at an early stage. The power of these
computational tools may multiply the value of costly experiments and trials by
speeding up development, reducing costs, and bringing the benefits of advanced
biological research to society.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a biological data analysis
pipeline that takes times series datasets as inputs, preprocesses these to deal
with noise and missing data, runs a suite of analytic tools, and integrates,
interprets and visualizes the results. The objectives of this project are to
build test tools to help users select features of interest in data they provide;
implement additional node and edge finding algorithms to complement those
already in the pipeline; develop algorithms for combining information from
replicate experiments and measurements to improve the statistical power of the
methods; develop modules that permit users to incorporate a wide variety of
prior biological information to reduce the size of the computational space to be
explored; test the full pipeline on known data to ensure accuracy and stability
of results and identify computational bottlenecks; select, implement, and test
visualization tools to enable users to examine probable network topologies; and
apply all of the above to non-periodic systems such as fermentation data to
determine modifications that may be required for this type of data.