* 1621416
* Algebra Project Mathematics Content and Pedagogy Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Timothy Glaude, Virginia State University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 10/31/2017
* USD 1,512,826.00

Algebra continues to serve as a gatekeeper and potential barrier for high school
students. The Algebra Project Mathematics Content and Pedagogy Initiative
(APMCPI) will scale up, implement and assess the efficacy of interventions in
K-12 mathematics education based on the well-established Algebra Project (AP)
pedagogical framework. The APMCPI project team is comprised of four HBCUs
(Virginia State University, Dillard University, Xavier University, Lincoln
University), the Southern Initiative Algebra Project (SIAP), and four school
districts that are closely aligned with partner universities. The purpose of the
Algebra Project is to improve performance and participation in mathematics by
members of students in distressed school districts, particularly those with a
large population of low-income students from underserved populations including
African American and Hispanics. The project will provide professional
development and implement the Algebra Project in four districts and study the
impact on student learning. The research results will inform the nation's
learning how to improve mathematics achievement for all children, particularly
those in distressed inner-city school districts.

The study builds on a prior pilot project with a 74% increase in students who
passed the state exam. In the early stages of this project, teachers in four
districts closely associated with the four universities will receive Algebra
Project professional development in Summer Teacher Institutes with ongoing
support during the academic year, including a community development plan. The
professional development is designed to help teachers combine mathematical
problem solving with context-rich lessons, which both strengthen and integrate
teachers' understanding of key concepts in mathematics so that they better
engage their students. The project also will focus on helping teachers establish
a framework for mathematically substantive, conceptually-rich and
experientially-grounded conversations with students. The first year of the study
will begin a longitudinal quasi-experimental, explanatory, mixed-method design.
Over the course of the project, researchers will follow cohorts who are in
grade-levels 5 through 12 in Year 1 to allow analyses across crucial transition
periods - grades 5 to 6; grades 8 to 9; and grades 12 to college/workforce.
Student and teacher data will be collected in September of Project Year 1, and
in May of each project year, providing five data points for each student and
teacher participant. Student data will include student attitude, belief,
anxiety, and relationship to mathematics and science, in addition to student
learning outcome measures. Teacher data will include content knowledge,
attitudes and beliefs, and practices. Qualitative data will provide information
on the implementation in both the experimental and control conditions. Analysis
will include hierarchical linear modeling and multivariate analysis of
covariance.