* 1621976
* SBIR Phase I:  Smartwatch-powered tag games for improving vaccination awareness
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Nirit Glazer, SVN, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop attractive and stimulating educational
activities to improve vaccination awareness and understanding. Scientific
evidence shows that vaccines are effective in preventing infectious diseases
such as influenza, a contagious respiratory illness. However, despite CDC's
recommendation for universal influenza vaccination, fewer than 50% of all
children in the US, and only 1 in 3 of African-American children, are vaccinated
each year. The proposed activities are designed to educate kids and parents
about the benefits of vaccinations, in order to increase the number of
vaccinated children. Through a tag game and wearable devices, participants
simulate transmission of influenza, and thereby better visualize the health
risks of going unvaccinated. The long-term goal is to improve the health
literacy of young students in a fun and exciting way. Educating children about
health concepts promotes healthy behaviors, and leads families toward better
health-related decisions. Improving health literacy, especially in a technology-
oriented society, is key to developing a thriving population that can understand
and use new information. The commercial outcome of the proposed SBIR project
will lead to a marketable product that will be targeted toward hands-on museums
and has both individual and societal benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scalable educational technology in this project will engage children in modeling
scientific phenomena in a fun and exciting way, while at the same time help them
to better understand such phenomena. The system uses smartwatches for managing
tag games that educate children about the benefits of vaccination against
influenza. Each participant is assigned a health status, such as infectious,
healthy, or immune, and then runs around to simulate the spread of the flu.
Through these participation-based activities, students will develop better
understandings of the underlying concepts of infectious disease transmission,
community-level (herd) immunity, and disease outbreaks. Similar activities can
be used to teach other scientific phenomena such as chemical reactions and phase
changes. The project will evaluate the effectiveness of activities using
systematic surveys producing feedback from participants. This work fills a
market need for educational technology tools that provide powerful and memorable
learning experiences that not only improve health literacy but also foster
student interest and confidence in science and math. Educating children by
exposing them to the sciences, especially in health-related areas, is essential
to improving wellbeing, and aligns with NSF?s mission of promoting science
education.