* 1621767
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a closed system for autologous cell therapy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* BethAnn Murphy, Celvive Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to transform the current models for bone marrow-
and cord blood-derived cell therapies and make cell therapy, especially the
patients' own cells, more widely available for use by healthcare providers and
patients. Two major technical hurdles in the regenerative medicine field have
prevented the translation of cell therapy from the bench to the bedside, despite
the huge surge in clinical trials being conducted worldwide: 1) The lack of
devices for the isolation of native clinically active bone marrow or cord blood
derived cells without gradient selection and centrifugation that lead to cell
loss and decreased cell viability; and 2) The logistical hurdles of cell
isolation and processing in "centralized" cell production facilities. The
prevalent approaches involve the collection of patient tissues such as bone
marrow samples at hospitals, transport of samples to the central cell production
facilities, isolation and expansion of cells using different protocols, and
transporting the cell product back to the hospital sites for transplantation
into patients. Every step of this cell therapy and transplantation process is
expensive, involves multiple teams and poses a potential risk for introducing
contamination, cellular loss and other complications. The technology proposed in
this project is incorporated in a device that has the potential to overcome
these two hurdles. The device allows the derivation of adherent bone marrow
cells (ABMCs) that are native or minimally manipulated, in a GMP-compliant
process for isolation and delivery of cells for cell therapy applications in
hospitals and outpatient clinics, thereby circumventing transportation
requirement and central facility processing and making cell therapy more widely
available.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to overcome the hurdles in the regenerative
medicine field by developing a device that enables GMP-grade stem cell
processing in a functionally closed system. This project will validate GMP-grade
isolation of the fraction of the bone marrow, the adherent bone marrow cells
(ABMCs) for use in cell therapy applications, initially for spinal cord
injuries. While the ultimate goal is to conduct IND enabling studies, this Phase
I grant objectives covers: 1) GMP-compliant coating of the device surface with
matrix molecules and validation for efficient collection of ABMCs, 2) Post
processing validation of ABMC sample integrity. Since the device also has a
provision component for freezing of the processed samples, objective 3) is to
validate ABMC freezing and cell recovery. Safety assays will include sterility
and end product monitoring. Non-retrospective flow cytometry assays will be
utilized to analyze CD34, CD44, CD45, CD73, CD90, CD105, CD106, CD166, and CD271
expression, essential markers that distinguish ABMCs. Higher percentages of
CD106 and CD271 are expected for ABMCs. The potential for CFU-F formation, along
with adipogenic, osteogenic and neuronal potentials of ABMCs will be examined
and compared with standard mesenchymal stem cells. The collection of bone marrow
cells with superior regenerative potentials, as indicated with previous pilot
studies, is anticipated.