* 1621670
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a Rapid, Point-Of-Care, Diagnostic Technology Platform with the Diagnosis of Liver Cancer as the First Application
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Johann deSa, Instadiagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in the area of personalized and
preventative medicine. The proposed work is aimed at bringing current
laboratory-based blood/urine/saliva-tests, to the point-of-care, such as
primary/urgent/emergency care facilities, community centers, and for some
diseases, retirement homes, and self-testing. Current standard time-to-results,
ranging from days or weeks, will be reduced to a few minutes, allowing for
disease screenings during routine physician visits resulting in early-diagnosis
and improved treatment monitoring. It will promote preventative care, and
therefore lead to improved treatment outcomes, patient satisfaction, and
eventually reduced healthcare costs. This work will result in the development of
a portable, low-powered, hand-held device that can be operated in-the-field, in
low-resource settings, here in the US and internationally, thus supporting
improved health management in these under-served communities. This unique
technology has the potential to further improve the current standard of care by
reliably and reproducibly detecting multiple diseases from the same few drops of
blood in a few minutes. Although a single disease, liver cancer, is the initial
target, future generations will target diseases ranging from cancers to viral
and bacterial infections and can be expanded to environmental and veterinary
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a
proprietary multimodal approach (essentially lab-on-chip) that will translate
the entire laboratory based diagnostic testing procedure to a rapid and
disposable point of care test. The challenge lies in low sample volume
availability (few drops), complex sample type (unprocessed whole-blood), short
time-to-results and need for high accuracy and reliability. To address these
stringent requirements, a platform technology based on a unique combination of
label-free, very high frequency piezoelectric biochips, magnetic nanoparticles,
and microfluidics is being developed. During this Phase I, key technology
component designs and specifications that are required for the point-of-care
detection of Alpha Fetoprotein with performance comparable to the current gold
standard centralized laboratory method, i.e. ELISA, will be developed. At the
end of this Phase I project, the critical designs of individual cartridge
components will be fabricated and tested. These components will serve as
critical inputs to the integrated prototyping to be performed in phase II that
will result in a portable point of care diagnostic device.