* 1621808
* Pervasive Healthcare Doctoral Consortium 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 22,215.00

Pervasive Healthcare Doctoral Consortium 2016&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
the Sixth Pervasive Healthcare Doctoral Consortium is to provide doctoral
students a supportive scientific forum for students to engage in inter- and
multi-disciplinary scholarship focusing on organizational, technical, social,
and biomedical issues surrounding health-related technologies. The consortium
provide a forum for expert and peer critique of students' doctoral work with the
goal of improving their dissertation. Student participants will also have the
opportunity to receive networking support and career advice from
internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the doctoral consortium brings
together people who might not otherwise engage with one another and engage in
inter-disciplinary research in fields involving healthcare and pervasive
computing. The consortium also exposes participant to different scientific
disciplinary approaches and develops the next generation of scholars in
pervasive computing in the domain of healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of the Sixth Pervasive Healthcare Doctoral Consortium is to support doctoral
students through constructive remarks and feedback on their interdisciplinary
research from prominent researchers and through interaction with other students.
Student participants from a broad range of disciplines including pervasive
computing, biomedical informatics, computer science, information science,
engineering, clinical sciences, law, and medical informatics will give short
presentations of their work and receive constructive feedback from five
internationally respected experts in pervasive healthcare. The expert panelists
will also provide student participants with career guidance and mentoring
through presentations and small group advising throughout the day. In addition,
the doctoral consortium will be held during pre-conference activities, thus
student participants will have the opportunity to see the conference and network
with conference attendees.