* 1621939
* SBIR Phase I:  Genetic improvement of loblolly pine wood for increased density
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Michael Harrington, Genoverde Biosciences, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to increase wood production of managed loblolly
pine tree farms by 20%. Global demand for forest industry products, e.g., pulp
for paper, saw timber, and wood pellets for fuel, is expected to rise 60-100% by
2060. As the world's 4th largest exporter of forest products, the U.S. is well
positioned to help meet these growing needs. To do so, managed loblolly pine
tree farms will play a large role in supplying the demand. Using a biotechnology
gene trait approach to introduce cell wall gene technology, the goal is to
engineer pine trees with 20% more wood density over conventional crops. This may
result in more wood material per tree, per acre with no added cost to production
processing, i.e., no increase use of land, water, or fertilizers. As an added
benefit, bioengineered trees with cell wall gene technologies aid in protecting
the environment by sequestering more atmospheric CO2 thus helping to combat the
negative effects of global climate change. Ultimately, this work may lead to the
development of renewable materials needed to meet societal needs while helping
to protect the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase (SBIR) I project proposes to evaluate the use of a biotechnology
gene trait approach to bioengineer loblolly pine for high wood density by
modifying secondary cell wall gene regulation. The proposed research would
utilize a newly adapted pine transformation protocol to introduce cell wall gene
platform technologies, together with ubiquitously expressed and secondary wall-
specific promoters, to significantly and selectively increase cell wall density
in loblolly pine. Bioengineered plants will be selected using herbicide
resistance and the effects of transgene incorporation analyzed through gene
expression and histochemical analysis. The anticipated outcome of this project
will be 400 bioengineered pine seedlings with greater strength and increased
value to be tested in greenhouse and field trials once approved. This project
will serve as proof-of-concept testing for select cell wall gene technologies in
commercial tree crops towards technology commercialization.