* 1621158
* Support for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Virginie Renson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 382,936.00

With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, the Archaeometry Laboratory at
the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) is a world leader in
compositional analysis of archaeological materials like ceramics, chert,
obsidian, and metals. Such chemical analyses are essential pieces of evidence
used by archaeologists to investigate the technology, economics, social and
political organization, identity, and religious practices in ancient societies.
Understanding past human behavior can inform modern efforts to address issues
such as population movement, resource exploitation, group interaction, and
internal group social stress. The long-term success of the Archaeometry
Laboratory has resulted in an unparalleled database of artifact and raw material
chemical compositions that greatly enhance the explanatory power of future
analytical studies as well as provide the raw material for large-scale research
projects using existing data. The laboratory is able to support a wide variety
of projects and numerous students, researchers, and visiting scholars every
year, and contributes to knowledge diffusion through close scientific
collaborations between MURR staff and outside researchers, student education,
and professional publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MURR Archaeometry
Laboratory focuses on elemental and isotopic analysis in order to examine the
production, exchange, and movement of a broad variety of artifacts including
ceramics, lithics, and metals, using neutron activation analysis (NAA), X-ray
fluorescence (XRF), and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
including a laser ablation system and a multi-collector. The laboratory also
supports geochemical research on the petrogenesis of various igneous,
metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. Broader impacts of the Archaeometry
Laboratory at MURR include: (1) availability of affordable chemical and isotopic
analyses for students and faculty from academic departments in the US; (2)
training of undergraduate and graduate students in the selection and use of
laboratory methods of analysis; (3) advice in project design, statistical
analysis, and interpretation of the chemical and isotopic data; and (4) public
access by archaeologists, geologists, and scientists from many disciplines to
the compositional database.