* 1621686
* SHINE:  Characterizing the Coronal Origins of Slow Solar Wind using Heavy Ion Composition and Spectroscopic Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Enrico Landi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 370,563.00

As the most dominant component of the solar wind that engulfs the Earth on the
ecliptic plane at 1 AU, the Slow-speed Solar Wind (SSW) plays a substantial role
in shaping and determining the Geospace environment and the Earth's upper
atmosphere where most of the man-made satellites are located. However, despite
all the efforts devoted to investigating the SSW, two fundamental questions
about this type of wind remain unanswered: (1) where does the SSW originate in
the corona; and, (2) how do the coronal plasma properties determine the in-situ
heavy ion composition of the SSW? This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at
characterizing the coronal origins of the SSW in order to answer these two
important science questions. The project team will study the SSW, utilizing two
completely different techniques: in-situ measurements of local wind plasma
properties, and remote-sensing spectral or imaging observations. When combined
together, these two techniques can become a formidable tool that allows the
investigators to fully exploit their potential to study the origin of the SSW.
This project will benefit the solar research community and serve important
educational functions. By using two completely different measurement techniques,
this project will serve as a bridge between two different solar physics
communities that have been working in parallel with limited interaction: the in-
situ community and the remote sensing community, and will thus stimulate a new
wave of cross collaborations. The research will be carried out at the University
of Michigan at Ann Arbor, where it will support undergraduate education through
the University's UROP program and graduate education through collaboration with
the graduate students in our department. The project will also support a young
female postdoc, thus helping her establish a career as a woman in STEM
disciplines. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic
Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE project is
aimed at characterizing the origin of the solar wind. In order to achieve this
goal, the project team will utilize in-situ measurements from ACE/SWICS and
SWEPAM, Ulysses/SWICS, SWOOPS and Wind/SWE and combine the analysis with remote-
sensing data from SOHO/MDI, SDO/HMI and Hinode/SOT. The in-situ solar wind
observations will be classified based on their coronal origin types rather then
their in-situ properties. Back-tracking methods will be used to identify the
corresponding source regions on the Sun. The physical properties of the solar
wind source regions will be determined using spectral line intensities. This
research project is directly relevant to the NSF's SHINE program, because it
will provide important knowledge about the origin of the solar wind. Such
knowledge is critical for accurate modeling and prediction of the space weather
conditions from the solar surface to the Earth and beyond.