* 1621665
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for interdisciplinary undergraduate research at Georgia Gwinnett College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Simon Mwongela, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 148,443.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program, Professor Neelam Khan from
Georgia Gwinnett College (GGC) and colleague Simon Mwongela have acquired an
atomic force microscope (AFM). In an AFM a laser beam is directed to a surface
area by means of a cantilever (a tip anchored at only one end). As the
cantilever is displaced by interacting with the surface a reflection of the
laser beam is displayed on a detector (photodiode). In this way an image of the
surface can be created with the aid of an electronic system. In general, an AFM
has three major abilities: force measurement, imaging and manipulation. This
microscopy instrument is used to investigate the surface of materials and enable
researchers to obtain nanoscale-level details of surface structure, morphology
and interaction forces for a wide range of systems. The technique provides
images which enable characterization of surfaces on various materials such as
polymers, biological materials and aerosols. Information is obtained on
magnetic, electronic and mechanical properties which can lead to improvement in
desirable properties for materials such as semiconductors, vertebrate visual
pigments and water filtration membranes. The instrumentation is used in research
projects undertaken by undergraduates providing invaluable real-world, hands-on
training for future careers in higher education or industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will be used in research at Georgia
Gwinnett College especially in areas such as (a) chracterizing semiconductors of
groups II-V; (b) characterizing the packing of rhodopsin, a visual pigment, at
membrane surfaces; (c) studying conductive polymer film morphology as a function
of biomolecular oxidant; (d) analyzing natural and synthetic neuromelanin; (e)
analyzing single-particles of local tropospheric aerosols; and (f) analyzing
interactions between pollutants and membranes.