* 1621688
* SBIR Phase I:  A System for Representative Sampling of Powder Blends in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Barbara Alvarado-Hernandez, IBS Caribe, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be realized first in pharmaceutical
manufacturing where powder blends are needed to make tablets. These tablets
constitute 40% of the most profitable pharmaceutical products, and nearly 80% of
commercial products. The proposed device (sampler) will protect employees in
pharmaceutical plants from exposure to potentially toxic drugs. The sampler will
also be suitable for industrial powder blends such as vitamins, nutraceuticals,
powdered milk, and other food products. The sampler will improve quality control
in these companies and lead to representative sampling, thereby reducing risk to
customers and patients. Sampling errors, which are frequent with the current
approaches, will be reduced, increasing industrial productivity and avoiding
production delays. The new sampler will have a positive financial impact in a
number of powder processing industries and at the same time improve product
quality.

The proposed project will provide funding to design devices to sample powder
mixtures. The first work will be with the powder blends that become the tablets
that many patients require. These new samplers are needed because the current
practice in the pharmaceutical industry consists in inserting a spear into 10 -
12 pre-selected locations, which will not detect over or sub-potent blends
outside of these locations. In contrast the new sampler will obtain a cross-
section of a flowing powder, and all parts of the blend have the same
possibility of being selected as a sample. The new device will be based on
concepts first established within the mining industry, which have not been
adapted to the pharmaceutical and powder industries. Experimental and
computational methods will be used to design the new sampler, which will make it
possible to implement statistical methods to assure representative sampling. The
research team will work to provide a commercial sampler and support services to
avoid delays in the introduction of new products and help pharmaceutical
companies grow to obtain new revenues in less time.