* 1621803
* SBIR Phase I:  Unlocking the Internet of Medical Things Through Ultrasonic Networking Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* G. Enrico Santagati, BioNet Sonar
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 10/31/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is development and application of networked
medical implants. The team will conduct an in-depth feasibility study to develop
a proof-of-concept prototype of an ultrasonic Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
miniaturized embedded system. Enclosed in a titanium biocompatible casing, this
platform will be the basis of implantable medical devices with ultrasonic
wireless connectivity and will be applied to multiple therapies in the human and
veterinary spaces. Patients will benefit from implants that provide real-time
wireless telemetry and reprogrammability while minimally affecting the implant
battery life, therefore reducing device/battery replacements that are often
complex and costly. Real-time continuous monitoring may also improve the
clinical outcome for several therapies providing patients with real- time
information about physiological parameters (e.g., glucose or pacemaker
readings). This will reduce time-consuming and expensive in-office visits and
hospitalizations. The IoMT platform will also enable the development of advanced
therapies that require wireless reliable communication through tissues between
multiple implantable sensing and stimulating devices. From a security
perspective, the IoMT will eliminate electromagnetic compatibility concerns of a
crowded radio-frequency (RF) spectrum. It is therefore safer and transparent to
the RF spectrum management procedures of healthcare
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop the first proof-of-concept prototype of an
ultrasonic Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) platform, a miniaturized,
biocompatible implantable device with ultrasonic wireless communication
capabilities. In the near future, wirelessly networked systems of implantable
medical devices endowed with sensors and actuators will be the basis of many
revolutionary therapies. However, biological tissues absorb radio-frequency (RF)
electromagnetic waves, which are the basis of wireless technologies like Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth. As a consequence, higher transmission power is needed to
establish reliable links, which reduces the battery lifetime of an implantable
device. The IoMT platform will offer wireless connectivity through a new and
proprietary technology based on ultrasonic waves that is a safer, more secure,
and lower-power alternative to RF-based technologies. The project team will
conduct four research tasks to demonstrate the technical and commercial
feasibility of the device: (i) explore best practices to design the core
architecture of the IoMT platform; (ii) discover techniques for energy
performance optimization; (iii) define best practices for powering the device;
(iv) integrate and test components on a custom printed circuit board. Throughout
these tasks, the team will recognize and address design tradeoffs between form
factor, biocompatibility of materials, communication performance, and power
consumption.