* 1621363
* Sonified Interactive Simulations for Accessible Middle School STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Bruce Walker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,990,140.00

Students with disabilities often have fewer opportunities for experiential
learning, an important component of quality STEM education. Computer based
simulations in science can provide valuable opportunities for these students to
experience and manipulate natural phenomena related to critical STEM ideas.
However, existing simulations remain largely inaccessible to students with
visual impairments in particular. Recent advances in technology related to
sonification use with simulations can make it possible for these students to
have a more complete and authentic experience. Sonification is the use of non-
speech sounds, such as musical tones, to represent visual information including
data. Such sounds can be manipulated temporally and spatially and can also vary
by amplitude and frequency to convey information that is more traditionally
displayed visually.

Researchers will iteratively develop five middle school physical science
simulations to include sonifications aimed at enhancing accessibility for all
learners, but particularly for those with visual impairments. Data collection
activities will include focus groups and interviews with students and teachers
focused on engagement. The end products of this project will include sonified
simulations, professional development resources, design guidelines and
exemplars, and publications.

The Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.