* 1621491
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Conversational Commons for the Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Thomas Coates, Thington Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that the model of a universal, user-facing
commercially run "commons" results in an easier to use dynamic and creative
Internet of Things, with more power for users and more sales for manufacturers.
The commons allows devices of many protocols to publish, subscribe and react to
updates from one other in a way that is open to manufacturers and
visible/comprehensible to normal Internet Users. Most of the largest Internet
companies (including in auctions, social media and ecommerce) constitute
conceptually similar models in which a central entity helps support the
relationships between consumers, or between consumers and manufacturers/sellers.
This project aims to bring similar efficiencies, power and ease of use to the
network-connected devices of the next few decades, with a view to capturing some
of the value it creates for manufacturers and users in the process (as
e-commerce, social media and auctions platforms have before).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
creating interoperability between all devices at the level of a user interface
and in such a way that a normal Internet User can understand. At present,
limited sub-sets of devices may be interoperable at some levels of their
protocol, and may be able to react to one or extend their networks. But this
interoperability does not extend to all devices, and it does not extend to the
user interface. A normal person cannot make any two devices interact with one
another without resorting to computer programming. The project proposes that the
creation of a centralized real-time-messaging-based "commons" in which devices
(i) publish their status in both human readable language and a parallel
extensible data format, and (ii) can register ways for their major functions to
be triggered which creates a space in which any device can react to state
changes in another. The project aims to demonstrate that (i) the core statuses
of devices can be expressed and easily published in these real-time human-
readable/data messages, that (ii) the data structure can comprise both core data
types and a looser, name-spaced set of data types, that (iii) a real-time rules
engine can trigger a device to action when a set of arbitrary criteria occur,
and that (iv) these criteria and responses can be created through a
comparatively simple user interface.