* 1621844
* SBIR Phase I:  High Power Mid-Infrared Vertical External Cavity Surface emitting Lasers With Gain Coupled Near-Infrared Outputs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Chris Hessenius, TPhotonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I projec is wide ranging due to the flexibility of the
laser source design. The goal of the proposed work is an innovative approach to
the development of a new class of compact, low cost, high-power laser sources at
wavelengths that are currently difficult to achieve while providing addition
functionality with no additional power consumption. This will make a highly
efficient laser package. In addition to the application rich mid-IR, the laser
design can easily be extended to other wavelengths in the far-IR, THz, visible,
and UV portions of the spectrum. The approach can have a significant impact in
many technical fields. The discoveries made within the scope of this program
will have a transformative impact in mid- to far-IR lasers and has the ability
to benefit disciplines including: laser surgery, dental surgery, dermatology,
atmospheric monitoring, chemical sensing, and a broad range of defense
applications including LADAR and laser range finding. In addition to the
technological impact, the proposed research will cover multiple disciplines in
science and engineering including high energy material properties, semiconductor
physics, nonlinear optics and laser physics which will provide a unique research
opportunity.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
need for versatile laser sources operating in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) spectral
region. Currently available lasers sources are limited in their capabilities.
Wavelength selection and maximum output powers are limited, and efficiency,
reliability and costs are also issues. High-power vertical external cavity
surface emitting lasers (VECSEL) which employs multiple chip arrangements have
the potential to reach wavelengths that are not easily attainable in a very
compact package. In addition, the introduction of multiple laser cavities
provides a means for generating outputs in the near-IR with no additional power
consumption. Using a high power doubly-resonant two-color T-cavity VECSEL,
efficient difference frequency conversion will be achieved. High power outputs
in the mid-IR (8-12 Âµm) spectral region will be demonstrated through a novel
design in which the VECSEL chips will contain multiple laser cavities that can
provide broad spectral coverage in the near-IR from the same device. This will
lead to enhanced efficiency and provide more capabilities such as laser
targeting and range finding with no additional power consumption.