* 1621005
* Developing a Model of STEM-Focused Elementary Schools (eSTEM)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Erin Peters-Burton, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2020
* USD 646,545.00

In the United States (U.S.) certain groups are persistently underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and careers,
especially Blacks, Hispanics, and low-income students who disproportionately
fall out of the high-achieving group in K-12 education. Policymakers argue that
future STEM workforce needs will only be met if there is broader diversity
participating in STEM education and careers. Recent reports have suggested that
the nation would benefit from more STEM-focused schools, including at the
elementary school level, to inspire interest and prepare students for future
STEM endeavors. However, there is currently little information on the number and
quality of elementary STEM (eSTEM) schools and the extent to which
underrepresented groups have access to them. This project will study five
elementary STEM schools from across the U.S. that are inclusive of students from
underrepresented groups in order to determine what defines these schools. The
project team, which includes investigators from SRI International and George
Mason University, initially identified twenty candidate critical components that
define inclusive STEM-focused elementary schools and will refine and further
clarify the critical components through the research study. The resulting
research products could support the development of future eSTEM schools and
research on their effectiveness.

The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This Exploratory Learning Strand project will use an iterative case
study replication design to study the design and implementation of five
exemplary eSTEM schools with the goal of developing a logic model that
highlights the commonalities in core components and target outcomes across the
schools, despite the different school contexts. A framework of twenty design
components, taken from research on inclusive STEM high schools and research on
successful elementary schools, will inform the data collection, analysis, and
logic model development. Schools as critical cases will be selected through a
nomination process by experts, followed by screening and categorization
according to key design components. School documents and public database
information, a school survey, and telephone interviews with school
administrators will inform screening and selection of candidate schools.
Researchers will then conduct multi-day, on-site visitations to each selected
school, collecting data from classroom observations, interviews with students,
focus groups with teachers and administrators, and discussions with critical
members of the school community. The project is also gathering data on school-
level student outcome indicators. Using axial and open coding, the analysis aims
to develop rich descriptions that showcase characteristics of the schools to
iteratively determine a theory of action that illustrates interconnections among
context, design, implementation, and outcomes. Research findings will be
communicated through a logic model and blueprint, school case study reports, and
conference proceedings and publications that will be provided on a project
website, providing an immediate and ongoing resource for education leaders,
researchers and policymakers to learn about research on these schools and
particular models. Findings will also be disseminated by more traditional means,
such as papers in peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations, and
webinars.