* 1621729
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable, Miniaturized Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer featuring Autonomous In Situ Alignment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* David Schiering, Cam2Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,844.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a next-
generation handheld Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Handheld
FTIR devices have opened up the possibility of interrogating samples on complex
and difficult-to-access surfaces in many fields. Significantly reducing the size
and weight of the handheld FTIR system will enable direct sampling in a greater
number of applications that cannot be served with current devices. This new
technology has relevance for laboratory and in-field forensic science analyses
(narcotics identification, clandestine drug laboratories, trace evidence);
cleanliness analysis in pharmaceutical and food processing environments;
analysis of pharmaceutical ingredients development and potential counterfeits;
chemical reaction monitoring; raw materials and finished products verification;
aerospace (validation of composite bonding repairs); and chemical/explosives
detection and threat screening (defense, homeland security, transportation,
ports and borders). However, current devices suffer from shortcomings related to
critical ergonomic factors: bulk, size, weight, user interface, and balance.
These problems prevent the potential for large-scale acceptance and use of the
technique. There is a need for a truly handheld (smartphone-sized), lightweight,
high-performance FTIR spectrometer system capable of non-destructive, in situ
analysis of a large variety of surfaces and materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is in the development of truly handheld
Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometer. The systemic optical, opto-
mechanical, electro-mechanical, and electrical circuit design of the device must
be harmoniously optimized to achieve target size and configuration while still
providing high performance measurements. Autonomous in situ alignment will
provide better spectroscopy performance and instrument stability for use in any
spatial orientation. Without this self-healing, robustness feature, a palm-sized
instrument of requisite capability, precision, and resistance to shock could not
possibly be contemplated. Through use of modern mobile computing technology, the
unit will be unsurpassed in ease of use, integration with modern web-based
media, and wireless interconnectivity. Development of highly efficient circuits
and controls will facilitate the capability to run on commercial-off-the shelf
(COTS) batteries. The purpose of this project is to begin the process of
designing and developing the electronics, optical and opto-mechanical components
required for the proposed spectrometer. This will be achieved by developing a
breadboard for the overall system design, and investigating the miniaturization
of FTIR components.