* 1621647
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Process Technology for Point-of-Generation Nitrogen Removal from Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Daniel Smith, Applied Environmental Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to address the grand challenge of human-induced
nitrogen loading to the environment. An easy-to-use and affordable system will
target a major source of nitrogen releases to watersheds: the on-site systems
that treat wastewater from millions of households and commercial facilities
across the U.S. The need to mitigate harmful algal blooms and prevent other
damaging cumulative effects to aquatic ecosystems have created an urgent demand
for onsite technologies that remove nitrogen at its source. The proposed
nitrogen removal technology is modular and adaptable for use in small-scale
systems that treat wastewater from individual homes, community systems and
commercial establishments. The project employs an innovative biological nitrogen
removal process that that will be verified and optimized for high priority
applications in rural, peri-urban, and urban settings. The system is
mechanically simple, generates no waste products, and operates passively with
minimal maintenance, energy or consumables. The results from this project will
help to solve the critical challenge of nitrogen control by providing a highly
efficient, low-cost, commercializable system that is practicable for on-site
wastewater treatment in new and retrofit systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives of this Phase I research project are to design, construct,
field-test, and critically evaluate variant prototypes of an innovative
bioreactor system to remove nitrogen from onsite wastewater. Prototype
bioreactors will be operated and monitored over multiple months to investigate
their salient operational characteristics and define effective design and
treatment regimes. The bioreactors will be installed to treat real household
wastewater under field conditions. Nitrogen analytes will be monitored across
the bioreactor systems to delineate the effects of biotreatment on four nitrogen
species: organic nitrogen, ammonium, nitrate and nitrite. The effects of the
biotreatment system on chemical and biochemical oxygen demand, inorganic
chemical parameters, and other wastewater constituents of interest will also be
elucidated. The project will critically evaluate the effectiveness of total
nitrogen removal and the stability and resiliency of individual nitrogen removal
transformations. The work will confirm the longevity and robustness of the
nitrogen removal process and identify design and operating parameters that
optimize an innovative approach to remove total nitrogen from on-site wastewater
while mitigating nitrogen releases to the environment. Prototype design and
monitoring will facilitate scale-up of results to full-scale biotreatment
systems.