* 1621746
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E-MSS: Local Approximation for Large Scale Spatial Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Gramacy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Computer simulation is growing as a means of studying complex dynamics in
applied science. Once a tool exclusive to industrial engineering and
computational physics, it is increasingly common in biology, chemistry, and
economics. Gone are the days when equilibrium dynamics are appropriate and cute
systems of equations can be solved by hand. Computer experiments are becoming
more diverse, they are becoming more complex and they are growing in size thanks
to modern supercomputing. We need a new vanguard of modeling tools that can cope
with the needs of modern computer experiments, particularly their increasing
size (big data) and rapidly evolving and refining nature as models become more
sophisticated, and supercomputing environments approach the exa-scale. This
funded research targets extensions and applications of a new breed of flexible
and fast response surface methods, the so-called local approximate Gaussian
process (laGP). Our motivating applications come primarily from problems in
computer experiments and uncertainty quantification, and ideas are borrowed from
-- and will represent an important extension to -- the related literatures of
geo-statistics and machine learning. The over-arching goal is a modernization of
the response surface and surrogate modeling toolkit to better serve future
applications across applied science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaussian process (GP)
models are popular in spatial modeling contexts, like geostatistics or computer
experiments, where response surfaces are reasonably smooth but little else can
be assumed. GP models provide accurate predictors, but increasingly impose
computational bottlenecks: large dense matrix decompositions impede efforts to
keep pace with modern trends in data acquisition. A scramble is on for fast
approximations. Two common themes are sparsity, allowing fast matrix
decompositions, and supercomputing, allowing distributed calculation. But these
inroads are at capacity. Rapidly expanding mobile device networks, high-
resolution satellite imagery (and GPS), and supercomputer simulation generate
data of ever-increasing size. This funded research centers on local approximate
GP (laGP) models as a means of enabling the powerful GP spatial modeling
framework to address modern big data problems. Initial implementations show
promise, expanding data size capabilities by several orders of magnitude.
However much work remains to ensure that laGP methods can supplant conventional
GPs in diverse spatial modeling contexts. Here we propose several methodological
enhancements, many involving shortcuts that have provably minimal impact on laGP
performance. We are motivated by two big data computer model emulation
applications: one involving satellite positioning and another on solar power
generation. Yet we are mindful that for our efforts to have impact, the wider
spatial modeling context must always be kept in view.