* 1621301
* InquirySpace 2: Broadening Access to Integrated Science Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Hee-Sun Lee, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,488,969.00

This project will create technology-enhanced classroom activities and resources
that increase student learning of science practices in high school biology,
chemistry, and physics courses. The project addresses the urgent national
priority to improve science education as envisioned in the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) by focusing less on learning facts and equations and
instead providing students with the time, skills, and resources to experience
the conduct of science and what it means to be a scientist. This project builds
on prior work that created a sequence of physics activities that significantly
improved students' abilities to undertake data-based experiments and led to
productive independent investigations. The goal of the InquirySpace project is
to improve this physics sequence, extend the approach to biology and chemistry,
and adapt the materials to the needs of diverse students by integrating tailored
formative feedback in real time. The result will be student and teacher
materials that any school can use to allow students to experience the excitement
and essence of scientific investigations as an integral part of science
instruction. The project plans to create and iteratively revise learning
materials and technologies, and will be tested in 48 diverse classroom settings.
The educational impact of the project's approach will be compared with that of
business-as-usual approaches used by teachers to investigate to what extent it
empowers students to undertake self-directed experiments. To facilitate the
widest possible use of the project, a complete set of materials, software,
teacher professional development resources, and curriculum design documents will
be available online at the project website, an online teacher professional
development course, and teacher community sites. The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;InquirySpace will incorporate several innovative
technological and pedagogical features that will enable students to undertake
scientific experimentation that closely mirrors current science research. These
features will include (1) educational games to teach data analysis and
interpretation skills needed in the approach, (2) reduced dependence on reading
and writing through the use of screencast instructions and reports, (3)
increased reliance on graphical analysis that can make equations unnecessary,
and (4) extensive use of formative feedback generated from student logs. The
project uses an overarching framework called Parameter Space Reasoning (PSR) to
scaffold students through a type of experimentation applicable to a very large
class of experiments. PSR involves an integrated set of science practices
related to a question that can be answered with a series of data collection runs
for different values of independent variables. Data can be collected from
sensors attached to the computer, analysis of videos, scientific databases, or
computational models. A variety of visual analytic tools will be provided to
reveal patterns in the graphs. Research will be conducted in three phases:
design and development of technology-enhanced learning materials through design-
based research, estimation of educational impact using a quasi-experimental
design, and feasibility testing across diverse classroom settings. The project
will use two analytical algorithms to diagnose students' learning of data
analysis and interpretation practices so that teachers and students can modify
their actions based on formative feedback in real time. These algorithms use
computationally optimized calculations to model the growth of student thinking
and investigation patterns and provide actionable information to teachers and
students almost instantly. Because formative feedback can improve instruction in
any field, this is a major development that has wide potential.