* 1621088
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Assessment to Enhance Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Richard Lehrer, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,023,531.00

Although many in education advocate for evidence-based teaching, implementation
of such practices is often quite difficult for teachers. Assessment and
accountability data are commonly used for system-level reforms, but are seldom
designed to help teachers guide day-to-day instructional decision-making. More
useful assessment systems should deliver actionable information to assist in
guiding instructional decisions, communicate the development of student
knowledge, and integrate various forms of data to assist teachers. Such systems
must be logistically feasible to implement, provide suitable grounds for
interpreting information about achievement, and exist in a teacher community
interested in ongoing feedback about student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will modify an existing assessment system (BEAR Assessment System) to
provide ongoing, instructionally productive evidence to teachers about student
learning and to link student work products and formative assessments with
summative assessments in models that generate useful estimates of student
growth. To design and test the assessment system, researchers will study teacher
integration of assessment tools with instruction via classroom observations,
video records, and interviews. Feedback from teachers and observations of their
assessment practices will inform revisions to the assessment system. Multiple
iterations will focus on how best to represent and display assessment results
for tracking individual and group learning. Researchers will investigate new
psychometric models that link information from student classroom work, responses
to formative assessments, and summative evaluations to provide more reliable
estimates of student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.