* 1621067
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Electroless Nickel/Immersion Gold (ENIG) Surface Finish for Better Reliability of Electronic Assemblies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kunal Shah, LiloTree
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,986.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a cost-
effective novel Electroless Nickel Immersion Gold (ENIG) surface finish to
achieve robust solder joints for better reliability of electronic assemblies.
Currently available ENIG surface finishes are prone to so-called "black pads",
which are sites of galvanic hyper corrosion that lead to failures associated
with de-wetting of solder, brittle solder joints, component disconnection, and
overall malfunction of electronic assemblies. Existing substitute surface
finishes are either very expensive or do not resolve the black pad defects
fully, and they can compromise other key properties. The cost-effective novel
ENIG to be developed will eliminate black pads, corrosion related issues,
achieve robust solder joints and provide improved quality &amp; reliability of
electronic assembly products to end consumers. This will allow manufacturers to
avoid major product field failures and the resulting consequences. This new
technology would be a potential replacement for existing ENIG (with a market
value in excess of $400 million) and other surface finishes (representing a
market exceeding $1 billion).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project includes development of a cost-effective novel ENIG to eliminate
black pads and achieve robust solder joints. The root cause of black pad defects
has been identified as hyper corrosion activity of the immersion gold process
which originates at intergranular boundaries and crevices of the nickel-
phosphorous surface. Galvanic hyper-corrosion occurs between gold and nickel
atoms, resulting in nickel depletion and an enrichment of phosphorous atoms in
the localized area. The proposed research would use an interfacial engineering
approach at the gold and nickel-phosphorous interfaces to prevent black pads and
eliminate brittle solder failures in the electronic assemblies. The main
objective of the proposed Phase I research is to achieve marked improvement in
corrosion resistance (eliminate black pads) and attain robust solder joints
(eliminate brittle solder joint failures). This will involve identifying right
interfacial chemistry and process parameters. Corrosion resistance of this new
process will be evaluated using electrochemical corrosion tests and acid tests.
In addition, solder joint strength and properties (brittle/ductile) will be
investigated using ball shear tests and cold ball pull tests.