* 1621151
* Doing the Math with Paraeducators: A Research and Development Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Myriam Steinback, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 539,976.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

Over one million paraeducators (teaching assistants and volunteers) currently
assist in classrooms, and another 100,000 are likely to be added in the next ten
years. Paraeducators (paras) are often required to teach content, such as
mathematics, but there are few efforts to provide them with the knowledge or
supervision they need to be effective when working with a range of students,
including those with disabilities and for whom English is a second language. The
project will focus on developing the confidence, mathematical knowledge, and
teaching strategies of paras using classroom activities that they are expected
to implement. The planned professional development will enable them to make a
greater difference in the classroom, but it will also increase their access to
continuing education and workplace opportunities. The work will be conducted in
the Boston Public Schools (BPS) and will focus on grades K-3, where the largest
numbers of paras are employed. Given the importance of early math learning in
predicting mathematical achievement, supporting paras who work in the early
grades is particularly important.

The project will design and pilot professional development that supports
paraeducator knowledge development and addresses instructional challenges in
teaching mathematics. The project will address the following goals: research the
current roles of paras in mathematics instruction, the preparation of their
collaborating teachers, and the opportunities for collaboration and planning
between supervising teachers and paras in BPS; pilot, develop, implement, and
research a model for professional development program for paras that targets
specific activities they can implement that are key to student learning in
number and operation in K-3; document how paras assume new roles that increase
student engagement and empower them as mathematical learners; pilot, develop,
implement, and research a supervisory component to help teachers set
expectations, and structures for debriefing and reflecting along with their
paras; and identify next steps for an early stage development study based on our
findings. A needs assessment survey will investigate the context in which paras
work. The iterative process of design-based research will develop, test, and
implement the targeted professional development with paras, measuring how
prepared they feel to implement new ideas and how they translate their learning
into new pedagogical practices. Crosscase analyses, descriptive statistics,
tallies and coded behaviors from observations, and themes from paras, and
teacher and administrator interviews will be collected, coded, and analyzed.
Furthermore, an efficacy survey will be administered periodically to document
longitudinal changes in paras, which will be integrated in the crosscase
analyses.