* 1621420
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a low-cost production platform through engineered bacteria for a novel natural acaricide.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Christine Santos, Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to reduce the incidence of Lyme Disease through
the biomanufacturing of a novel natural acaricide. New cases of Lyme Disease
have grown by nearly 50% over the past decade while the existing synthetic
acaricides are dwindling in use due to regulatory and consumer safety concerns.
The CDC and USDA have begun to champion a highly effective natural acaricide
extracted from grapefruit. This target molecule is a GRAS-approved natural
product, which has been used extensively as a food ingredient for decades. It is
thought that this compelling safety benefit combined with potent efficacy will
spur increased spraying in public areas and private residences. However, the
cost of producing this natural acaricide has been prohibitive, and there is an
opportunity to develop alternative sustainable production
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
a microbial process for the economical and sustainable production of a highly
potent natural acaricide. Increasing wariness of synthetic insecticides combined
with the need to prevent tick-borne illnesses creates a tremendous opportunity
for natural acaricides. The project's terpene target has long been known as a
highly effective acaricide; however, its commercialization has been hampered by
a high cost of production. The aim is to develop an alternative fermentation
process for biosynthetic production enabling the cost reductions required to
effectively penetrate the acaricide market. The main objective for this project
is to increase titers by an order of magnitude. This will be accomplished by
employing established and novel metabolic and protein engineering approaches.
Overall, this project will provide a new sustainable, cost-effective production
route, thereby enabling acaricide commercialization.