* 1621116
* CAREER: Integrated Modeling of Sustainability and Reliability for Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Seth Guikema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,554.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award is
to provide an approach for assessing the economic, environmental, and social
sustainability and reliability of interdependent power and water systems. This
is intended to better support proactive management of public and private
infrastructure, particularly in areas susceptible to natural hazards such as
hurricanes and earthquakes. The research develops indicators for measuring
trends in the sustainability of power and water systems, providing a basis for
changing the management and funding of these systems to improve their
sustainability. The project also provides new computational frameworks for
modeling interdependent power and water systems. The impacts of natural hazards
such as hurricanes and earthquakes will be combined with the effects of aging to
develop a more holistic reliability modeling approach for infrastructure
systems. The reliability and sustainability models are brought into the
infrastructure management process to help support meaningful change in power and
water systems in hazard-prone areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
work will contribute to the development of improved methods for assessing and
managing aging infrastructure systems in the US. These improved methods would
allow limited public and private funds to be used more efficiently to improve
infrastructure systems before they fail rather than relying on a reactive
approach of repairing failures after they occur. This project will also develop
a series of on-line and classroom teaching materials for middle school, high
school, college, graduate school, and professional education. These materials
will help to further establish a pipeline of students who are interested and
educated in infrastructure engineering.