* 1621117
* Development and Empirical Recovery for a Learning Progression-Based Assessment of the Function Concept
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Moses, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,350,056.00

The project will design an assessment based on learning progressions for the
concept of function. A learning progression describes how students develop
understanding of a topic over time. Function is a critical concept for algebra
learning and understanding. The goal of the assessment and learning progression
design in this project is to specifically incorporate findings about the
learning of students traditionally under-served and under-performing in algebra
courses. The project will include accounting for the social and cultural
experiences of the middle and high school students when creating assessment
tasks. The resources developed should impact mathematics instruction (especially
for algebra courses) by creating a learning progression which captures the range
of student performance and appropriately places them at distinct levels of
performance. The important contribution of the work is the development of a
learning progression and related assessment tasks that account for the
experiences of students often under-served in mathematics. The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The learning progression development will begin
by comparing and integrating existing learning progressions and current research
on function learning. This project will develop an assessment of student
knowledge of function based on learning progressions via empirical recovery
(looking for the reconstruction of theoretical levels of the learning theory).
Empirical recovery is the process through which data will be collected that
reconstruct the various levels, stages, or sequences of said learning
progression. The development of tasks and task models will include testing
computer-delivered, interactive tasks and rubrics that can be used for human and
automated scoring (depending on the task). Item response theory methods will be
used to evaluate the assessment tasks' incorporation of the learning
progression.