* 1621489
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Fabric Exoskeleton to Improve Mobility of Elderly Individuals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Timothy Swift, Other Lab Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project span various areas.
Societally, the development of an ultra low cost exoskeleton for elderly
assistance could provide a pathway to reduced falls for millions of elderly
individuals a year. This would bring along with it increased community mobility
and quality of life in addition to the hundreds of millions of savings that it
passes on to the healthcare sector. Technically, the development of ultra light
exoskeletons with high power density actuation present a significant improvement
over conventional technologies. The research in this effort seeks to further
invest in the technical foundations for applying light weight, low cost
compliant exoskeletons into real world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project we will develop the
technical foundation required for a lightweight powered knee orthosis that is
designed to assist elderly individuals in high power maneuvers in their daily
lives. It is estimated that 3 million falls occur annually that result in
prolonged hospitalization with 39% of them being attributable to muscle weakness
as a result of aging. These falls also present a significant monetary burden as
non-fatal falls alone cost the US $19 billion in direct medical care annually.
Specifically, the project will leverage previous advancements in the design and
control of high strength fabric centered robotics to enable the device prototype
outside the laboratory setting in elderly care applications. As a result this
effort seeks to make advancements in the areas of mobile pneumatic
infrastructure, low power closed loop control, and intent recognition.