* 1621554
* Non-Gaussian Temperature Distribution Tails in Observations and Models:  Implications for Future Extreme Temperature Exceedances
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* J. David Neelin, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2022
* USD 415,660.00

It is reasonable to expect more heat waves in a warmer climate, but it is not
clear how many more heat waves should occur for a given mean warming. Days with
heat waves at a specific location can be counted by determining the temperature
for which 95 percent of recorded temperatures are below it, referred to as the
95th percentile temperature. Heat wave days can then be defined as exceedances
of the 95th percentile temperature, and they occur by definition on the warmest
five percent of days. We can then ask how many additional days are warmer than
that today's 95th percentile temperature when climate warms, with the
expectation that the answer will be more than five percent of days. Previous
work by the PIs suggests that the increase in heat wave days for a given mean
warming can be highly variable from region to region, for example their results
suggest a greater increase in heat waves in western states and the northern
midwest than in the southeast US. This project seeks to determine how applicable
these result are for anticipating increases in heat wave frequency, and to
understand the fundamental processes which produce regional differences in the
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates of change in extreme temperature
occurrence often assume a "normal", or Gaussian, temperature distribution, in
which the average temperature is the same as the 50th percentile (or median)
temperature, which is centered between the 95th and the 5th percentile
temperatures. If instead the median temperature is shifted toward the 95th
percentile, so that cold exceedances are more extreme than warm exceedances, the
distribution has a "short tail" on the warm side. The PIs show that if warming
amounts to an overall shift in the distribution, meaning that if the 5th, 50th,
95th and other percentile temperatures all increase by the same amount, there
will be a greater increase in heat wave occurrence for a short tailed
distribution than for a normal distribution. Thus it is possible to gain insight
into warming-induced increases in heat wave days by understanding the processes
that give rise to short temperature tails in present-day climate. The PIs
hypothesize, on the basis of the large-scale spatial patterns of regions of
short and long tails in present-day climate, that the spatial variations in
exceedance change are primarily the result of meteorology and atmospheric
circulation rather than local factors such as the dryness of the soil. This
hypothesis is tested using observations and climate model simulations, and
differences between present-day and projected future climate in model
simulations is used to assess the extent to which analysis of present-day tails
can account for warming-induced exceedance change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
behavior of temperature extremes is of practical as well as scientific interest
given the hazards to human and natural systems posed by extreme heat. Better
guidance on changes in heat wave occurrence would be valuable for decision
makers in areas including agriculture, forestry, health services, and urban
infrastructure. The work has educational broader impacts through its connection
with a Research Experiences for Undergrauduates (REU) site at Oregon State
University, and it also provides support and training for a graduate student.