* 1621495
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of an Acyl Ethanolamine Surfactant by Fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kevin Jarrell, Modular Genetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project would be commercialization of a surfactant (acyl
ethanolamine) made from renewable raw materials, which do not compete with food
sources. Surfactants are the bubbly components of cleaning products that give
them their cleansing power. Surfactants are manufactured from petroleum or from
seed oils, such as palm oil. The use of those raw materials increases greenhouse
gas pollution and contributes to deforestation of rainforests. Society is
demanding environmentally sustainable (greener) products with reduction or
removal of toxicity. The demand for greener chemicals creates an opportunity to
replace today's surfactants with greener alternatives. The surfactant chemicals
produced in this project are inherently safer than traditional chemicals because
toxic solvents are not used, and the surfactants are biodegradable and produced
from renewable raw materials such as sugars, and as a result do not contribute
to increased greenhouse gas accumulation. The acyl ethanolamine surfactant is
designed to replace current commercial surfactants, which are contaminated,
during the current manufacturing process, with the carcinogen 1,4 dioxane. The
surfactant produced by the effort described here will not contain any 1,4
dioxane. Successful completion of this project will demonstrate a new technology
for the production of nonionic surfactants. This is significant since nonionic
surfactants represent about 40% of the $30 billion surfactant market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this Phase I research project
is to construct a Bacillus strain that produces an acyl amino alcohol
surfactant, namely, acyl ethanolamine. Certain naturally existing peptide
synthetase enzymes catalyze the linkage of particular amino acids to other
particular amino acids. In addition, certain peptide synthetase enzymes catalyze
the linkage of particular fatty acids to particular amino acids. Past work
demonstrated that this system can be engineered to catalyze the creation of
unique molecules, such as acyl glycinate (fatty acid linked to glycine). During
enzymatic synthesis of acyl glycinate, glycine is covalently attached to the
synthetase via a thioester bond. Product release is catalyzed by a thioesterse
domain. Release by a thioesterase results in production of fatty acid linked to
the amino acid glycine. Certain naturally occurring peptide synthetase enzymes
use reductase domains to release products. We hypothesize that release of acyl
glycine via a reductase domain will result in the synthesis of acyl
ethanolamine, rather than acyl glycine. The objective of this Phase I project is
to create a chimeric peptide synthetase enzyme that converts acyl glycine into
acyl ethanolamine during the process of release of the product from the enzyme.