* 1621651
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing healthcare service robots to improve hospital workflow
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Andrea Thomaz, Diligent Droids, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,646.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project on health care service robots is in improving
the quality of care in hospital systems that are increasingly burdened by an
aging population and labor shortages. This project has potential for positive
societal impact by reducing the workload of medical staff whose primary
responsibilities require special training and human-centered skills, such as
nurses. With U.S. life expectancy on the rise, skilled nurses are becoming more
in demand. Automation could ameliorate the labor shortage by allowing humans to
focus on providing skilled care. In addition, the proposed project aims for our
technology to be general-purpose enough to eventually transfer to other markets,
such as longterm care facilities and eventually individual consumers. Robots
that perform assistive tasks in homes could increase the feasibility of
independent living for many older adults.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is aimed at establishing the technical and commercial feasibility of our
approach. The team is working closely with a strategic partner hospital to first
establish a process map and understand where service robots could have the most
impact in their workflow, defining the highest impact robot tasks. The core
technology proposed in this project will be around the learning algorithms for
quickly and efficiently training the needed behaviors for robots to accomplish
these high-impact tasks in a hospital setting. Additionally the team is in
building social robots that work seamlessly in dynamic human environments. The
ultimate goal is to develop a service robot that hospital staff view as a
competent member of the care team. Finally it is proposed to pilot test the
developed robot technology in a month-long trial, quantifying the impact that
reduced workload can have on the nursing staff along a number of dimensions.