* 1621106
* SBIR Phase I:  Dissectables
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Glen Gerbush, Dissectables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop anatomical models that can be dissected
to reveal internal structure and to achieve specified learning objectives.
Correlated digital media will guide the user through the dissection. This
innovation is in response to an international trend to reduce anatomy education
at medical and dental schools, and in response to increasing facility costs and
increasing awareness of the hazards of using cadaveric material. Dissectable
models are tangible learning assets that replace cadaveric specimens and can
offset the reduction in anatomy education in medical institutions; ensuring that
medical students receive a solid grounding in the anatomical sciences. The
models and adjunct materials can be adapted to other student populations
including K-12, post-secondary, graduate education, and continuing medical
education. The models are created using additive manufacturing to reduce costs
and to allow the accurate representation of internal structure. The models are
constructed of materials that mimic the tactile characteristics of the actual
tissue and can be dissected, similar to the real specimens, to reveal this
internal structure. The efficacy of all of these materials in learning will be
assessed to improve the models and media design. The models, when paired with
animations, interactive media, dissection guides, and self-assessment materials,
will benefit students by maintaining tactile learning experiences in anatomy
education.

This SBIR Phase I project plans to supplement or replace the tactile experience
of gross anatomy dissection with the use of simulated specimens. Success will
require technical advances in digital 3D model production using low-cost
multihead 3D printing to achieve a scalable production of anatomical and
biological models. Custom, low-cost multihead printers will be constructed that
can print a specimen in multiple materials that differ in texture or color or
are used as support material for the print. Achieving these technical advances
will generate strong early branding and distribution advantages as market
barriers to possible competitors. Technical challenges will also include the
integration of specific learning objectives into the models, achieving a
comparable appearance and texture of actual specimens, and maintaining
sufficient low-cost for student and institutional use. The proposed models, when
paired with animations, interactive media, dissection guides, and self-
assessment materials, will benefit students who prefer tactile learning
experiences, and will benefit institutions that are turning away from specimen
dissection or cannot provide those resources. Pilot studies will help determine
best practices in printing, scale of production, the structure of adjunct
digital materials, curricular implementation, and marketing in Phase II. This
Phase I project is an initial step in the creation of sophisticated and accurate
alternatives or supplement to the use of cadaveric specimens.