* 1621135
* Nanowire Interfaces for Composites with High Strength Across Strain Rates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Henry Sodano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 270,289.00

The research objective of this award is to study nanostructured interfaces in
polymer fiber reinforced composites such that lightweight materials can be
designed for both structural and ballistic performance. To achieve this
objective a nanostructured interface consisting of ZnO nanowires will be grown
on the fiber surface. The nanowire growth process is highly controllable and
acts to enhance the load transfer between the matrix and fiber and provide out
of plane reinforcement. The controllable nanowire growth provides a means for
optimizing the interfacial properties such that an ideal material response can
be obtained at both high and low strain rates. The optimal interface will be
designed through a series of experimental tests and molecular dynamics
simulations performed under this research effort to provide a fundamental
understanding of how a nanostructured interface carries load and how it fails at
both high and low strain rates. The findings will be used to illuminate other
potential materials for further gains in strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this this award focus on creating a better understanding of
interfaces in composite materials. Specifically, the award will identify a
theory defining the relation between a nanoscale interface and the bulk
composite properties and a first of its kind lightweight multifunctional
material that provides excellent loading bearing properties and blast
resistance. The findings will be used to illuminate other potential materials
for further gains in strength and applications for the technology. Additionally,
Improved understanding of the interaction between materials with a
nanostructured interfaces and how the properties of nanomaterials translate to
the bulk could lead to improved interfacial performance in carbon fiber
composites or fiber reinforced ceramics and metals.&lt;br/&gt;