* 1621828
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative visual search and similarity for decor, apparel, and style
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Sean Bell, Grokstyle LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop and commercialize visual search
for fine-grained recognition of products and style in interior decor and
apparel. The technology will help the broader public find items that may be
difficult to search for using traditional text-based search. In many markets
(home decor, fashion, etc.), customers seek products that have unique visual
appearances that cannot easily be expressed with a text-based search. This
project will develop visual search tools for the home decor and apparel markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop software based on deep learning for product and apparel
recognition and style recognition. Our prior prototype uses deep learning to
recognize specific products from "regular" photographs taken by customers, where
the challenge is that these regular photos of products can have many different
backgrounds, sizes, orientations, or lighting when compared to the iconic
product image, and the product could be significantly occluded by clutter in the
scene. The goal of this project is to generalize the work to achieve broad
applicability through four major objectives: Generalizing the settings and
product categorization and taxonomy to support a broad range of customers and
product types (Objective 1); semi-automatic detection of products in scene
images to scale to large photo collections (Objective 2); refining the trained
models for fine-grained matches to meet customer needs (Objective 3); and
deploying the system live to companies (Objective 4).