* 1621876
* SBIR Phase I:  Diesel Labs: Leveraging social media analytics to solve for cross-channel media planning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Anjali Midha, Diesel Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to trigger a major shift toward mobile
content across the marketing industry - broadening the market and generating
larger economic impact. Massive amounts of media dollars are poised to shift
toward mobile video, but will not flow freely until ads can be delivered on the
right content (engaging and safe) to the right people (targeted consumer
segments) at the right time (when consumers are actively engaged). This SBIR
Phase I project will radically advance the scientific and technological
understanding needed for marketers to deliver ads this way, thereby enabling
them to build their brands with sight, sound, and motion content delivered
surgically through the most personal and engaging channel available - mobile.
With the project facilitating this transition: 1) brands will be able to
advertise more efficiently across TV and mobile media; 2) content producers, now
able to extract fair market value for their efforts, will be motivated to create
more and better content; and 3) audiences will benefit from improved content
quality, selection and accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is designed to enable brands and
agencies to quickly and efficiently extend TV media plans into the rapidly
growing mobile video space. While marketers have sophisticated TV planning tools
at their disposal, they currently lack the ability to integrate TV/mobile video
advertising in a way that optimizes their audience engagement and media spend.
The research objective of this SBIR Phase I project is to develop social media-
based recommendation technology to help marketers plan mobile video ad campaigns
that seamlessly integrate with their traditional TV campaigns. The proposed
project will 1) validate the technical and commercial feasibility of this
approach and 2) produce an alpha version of the technology. Anticipated
technical results include: building and testing a video content discovery
engine; validating and implementing a planning system; initiating UI testing and
user studies.