* 1621951
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable System for Detection of Harmful Algal Bloom Toxins in Freshwater and Marine Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Michael Lochhead, MBio Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 217,702.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to initiate development of an effective
technology that will enable users in the field to perform laboratory-quality
cyanotoxin testing to help protect drinking water, monitor commercial food
resources, and provide critical data for ecosystems management. Harmful algal
blooms (HABs) in United States and global freshwater and marine environments are
increasing in frequency and duration and constitute a growing public health
threat while also carrying substantial economic, ecologic, and food supply
implications. The goal is to initially launch a system that delivers a panel of
water toxin results in less than 15 minutes. Validation will be with customers
in public health and regulatory agencies followed by placements with water
resource managers of commercial drinking water systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I research project
are designed to provide a user-friendly platform with a unique combination of
attributes. A cost competitive system that delivers multiple immunoassay results
from a single sample using a single, simple protocol, provides lab quality
accuracy and reliability, and connected data management incorporating smart
phone infrastructure and cloud-based systems. This Phase I project is designed
to deliver three key technical objectives. (1) One-Step Assay - deliver a
single-step, &lt; 15-minute duplex microcystin / cylindrospermopsin assay tuned
to drinking water recommendations. (2) Sample Prep - establish preliminary
component designs for the water sample-to-cartridge interface, including designs
that enable intra-cellular and dissolved toxin methods. (3) Connectivity -
develop the electronics and software infrastructure plan for distributed systems
networking.