* 1621516
* SBIR Phase I:SBIR Phase I: Continuous roll-to-roll wire coating process to produce CNT EMI shields
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Alberto Goenaga, Dexmat Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,705.00

This SBIR Phase I project strives to reduce aircraft wire weight in order to
improve aircraft range and reduce operating costs. Commercial and military
aerospace companies are heavily concerned with fuel costs associated with
aircraft operation, as this expense contributes significantly to the total costs
of the company. Substantial reductions in aircraft weight could save millions of
dollars per plane over its operating lifetime. For example, eliminating a single
pound from a military fighter aircraft can save up to $3,000 over its lifetime,
as well as increase its operating range, capacity to carry a larger payload and
extend its time-on-station capabilities. These cost savings will benefit
commercial aviation companies from decreased expense, resulting in a higher net
income. Enhanced financial performance promotes company growth and the creation
of more jobs throughout all levels of the organization. Increased income and job
growth in this sector with stimulate continued national economic growth,
providing benefit to the government via tax collections and increased commercial
sector performance. National defense and aerospace sectors would also benefit
from fuel cost reductions reducing costs and greenhouse gas emissions. This
project directly aligns with the NSF mission to progress science, advance
national prosperity and secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides innovative
contribution to wire development and manufacturing through the use of a carbon
nanotube deposition process in order to produce shielding for wires. This
process is versatile and can be used to produce cables with a commercial metal
inner conductor or a carbon nanotube fiber bundle as inner conductor and a
specific conductivity similar to tin. It combines high strength, electrical
conductivity and thermal conductivity with low density, which makes them ideal
for applications where weight reduction is a priority, specifically in aerospace
applications. Until now, only minor reductions in wire weight have been
achieved, through advances in composite connectors, thermoplastic cable clamps,
downsizing connectors and using thinner wall insulation. The use of carbon
nanotubes would remove the need for component removal due to decreased weight.
The goal of this project is to prove out a continuous roll-to-roll wire coating
process to produce carbon nanotube electromagnetic interference shields suitable
for a large volume manufacturing operation. This will be accomplished through
the use of foundationary methods of carbon nanotube deposition developed prior
to this Phase I project. This project will produce the methods required for
developing roll-to-roll continuous carbon nanotube wire coating.