* 1621253
* Understanding and Improving Learning from Online Mathematics Classroom Videos
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Michelle Perry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,209,143.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. elementary teachers face many challenges. They are
asked to teach all subjects to students with different needs and abilities. To
do this well, they need good professional learning opportunities. Many teachers
look online for such opportunities, but little is known about the quality of
those opportunities and how they can be improved to help teachers meet their
challenges. The goals of this project are to learn more about how teachers use
one popular website for elementary mathematics teachers and how this website and
similar ones can be adapted to better support teacher learning. Specifically,
the project will (1) interview teachers about their use of the website, (2)
investigate how to improve the ways teachers interact with video resources on
the site by testing different ways of guiding their attention, and (3) examine
how teachers' interactions with these video resources are related to their
students' learning of mathematics. Findings from this project will be used to
build and share effective ways to support teacher learning online. The project
will thus benefit teachers who use the popular website, teachers who use similar
websites, researchers who study how teachers learn from such websites, and the
students of teachers who learn from such websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Video-
based learning has been the focus of much professional development research over
the past decade. As video-based learning has been found to be effective, many
professional developers have taken this learning to scale through the online
space. A number of high profile and popular virtual learning communities (VLCs)
have emerged to allow teachers to interact with video, but the scant number of
studies on the effectiveness of such VLCs show some difficulties in engaging
teachers in sustained, reflective professional learning. The purpose of this
project is to investigate several major issues in the design and implementation
of effective VLCs for teachers and to examine the relation between teachers'
reflective engagement with VLCs and their students' mathematics learning
outcomes. The investigators propose 3 studies, which build on each other, to
address these issues. This project will (1) interview teachers who are members
of a popular VLC, to investigate what they learn and how they contribute to
community; (2) investigate conditions that impact the posting of reflective
commentary about video cases through iterative experiments, as reflective
commentary has the potential to build community and to support teacher learning;
and (3) investigate the relation between reflective reactions to video cases and
student mathematics outcomes. Through these investigations, this project will
explore issues that impact the scalability of teachers learning asynchronously
from online video. Results will be used to develop guided pathways - a prototype
of an innovation that will be based on the results from the research - on one
widely used VLC. Thus, this project will provide both a contribution to the
field of STEM teacher education research and an immediate, research-based
product that can be disseminated to thousands of teachers through an existing
VLC.