* 1621558
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Objective Model Analysis Tool and Multi-Model Ensemble Forecast System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Leela Watson, InitWeather, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 201,673.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance societal goals such as protection
of life and property, protection against lost revenue and improved planning by
providing a technically innovative product to help operational forecasters
create better weather forecasts. The explosive growth in the availability of
high-performance computing clusters has significantly increased the amount of
forecast data available to operational meteorologists. Making sense of all of
the available data in a timely fashion has become difficult and the market
exists for products that streamline this process. Any improvement in weather
forecasting will have direct and indirect positive effects for businesses and
society by increasing safety, helping in daily and weekly planning, helping to
mitigate storm related expenses and helping businesses avoid weather-related
expenses that can then trickle down as cost-savings for the customer. The
technology will allow forecasters to produce better forecasts more quickly and
will be valuable in operational settings at national weather centers, to
individual users, and in a host of commercial applications such as energy,
agriculture, and media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to demonstrate the technical feasibility
of operationally synthesizing multiple streams of global, regional, and ensemble
weather model forecast data in real-time to provide a streamlined product of
model performance and then use that information to create new global or regional
forecast maps. The complexity of accessing and analyzing vast amounts of
forecast data creates a significant challenge to the operational forecaster.
Analysis of all available forecast data is difficult since forecasters are under
pressure to process the data in a short amount of time. Furthermore, the
analysis is usually subjective. The proposed technology will ameliorate these
issues by creating a model performance and forecast product that consolidates a
majority of forecast data into one, easy-to-use interface. The goal of the
project is to provide operational forecasters with a tool that gives an
objective look at model performance with minimal effort and provides them with a
new forecast product that is better than any single model.