* 1621991
* SBIR Phase I:  A miniaturized, low-cost, implantable wireless glucose sensor technology for Diabetes management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Muhammad Mujeeb-U-Rahman, Integrated Medical Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
novel, real-time biomedical sensing platform that can revolutionize personal
health and clinical research. Chronic diseases (cardiovascular, diabetes, etc.)
are the leading causes of death and disability in US. Diabetes alone affects
more than 29 million people in US, resulting in $245B annual health care cost.
Disease management requires a long-term and reliable body metabolite monitoring
system. The proposed wireless sensing technology will address this need by
providing low-cost, minimally invasive, subdermal sensing of interstitial fluid
(ISF) constituents using a novel mm-size integrated system utilizing scalable
microelectronics fabrication technology. The proposed development effort will
allow the use of this technology to wireless sensing applications in medical
research (drugs/diseases) and connected or digital health. Currently, diabetes
patients rely on painful and discrete fingerstick measurements or expensive
(&gt;$4k/year) and short-lived (7 days) transcutaneous devices for glucose
monitoring. A low-cost (&lt;$500/year), pain free, reliable and accurate glucose
monitor will have a broad commercial impact by providing a solution suitable to
a diverse set of patients as well as clinicians and researchers. The proposed
project will result in a truly "user-independent" operation of implantable
glucose sensors, rendering competitive market edge and job creation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
intended to develop a wireless monolithic sensing platform that combines
sensing, control, autonomous powering, and communication on a single mm-size
microchip implant. The extremely small device size minimizes foreign body
response and results in a stable sensor-tissue, allowing for much longer and
stable operation compared to current devices. The device utilizes wireless
operation using industry standard technologies, simplifying system development
and integration. The sensor is fabricated on the semiconductor platform to form
a fully integrated system and avoid expensive wiring and packaging. The scalable
nature of the semiconductor technology enhances manufacturability, reduces unit
cost in volume production, and ensures the availability of high volume
manufacturing. Phase-I seeks to develop the integrated sensor solution in a
needle-shape form and provide appropriate insertion/extraction device as a
proof-of-concept to allow for a small-scale animal study to characterize the
functionality of the system. It is also proposed to test the feasibility of
achieving performance goals (in-vitro MARD, stable in-vivo operation longer than
state-of-the-art CGM devices, determination of in-vivo MARD) using the proposed
system. After successful feasibility phase, we will optimize the system
performance and move to FDA IDE filing for clinical trials needed for
commercialization, during Phase II.