* 1621559
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of plant alkaloid therapeutics via fermentation of engineered yeast
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Catherine Thodey, Antheia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide a sustainable, secure, and low-cost supply
of established and emerging plant-based medicines. The class of molecules
targeted for microbial biosynthesis are the benzylisoquinoline alkaloids, a
diverse group of plant therapeutics that includes the pain-relieving opioids and
the anti-cancer noscapinoids. Approximately 100,000 hectares of opium poppy are
grown annually to extract more than 800 tons of opiate active pharmaceutical
ingredients (APIs). This process diverts land use from food crops and consumes
horticultural supplies including water, pesticides, herbicides, and nitrogen-
and phosphorus-fertilizers. The existing supply chain suffers further
vulnerabilities due to crop susceptibility to climate and disease, restricted
growing seasons, and the logistical and security concerns associated with
transporting poppy materials across the globe. This project will develop
technology to manufacture medicinal opioids and plant-based medicines by yeast
fermentation. The technology will allow for year-round, market-responsive
production of valuable APIs in secure, local bioreactor facilities. An
independent technoeconomic model shows yeast-based production will lower the
cost of opiates by 10-50 fold. Furthermore, this technology will provide for
diversification into the biosynthesis of rare and novel molecules for drug
discovery, with indications spanning cancer, infectious, and cardiovascular
diseases.

This SBIR project proposes to develop baker's yeast as a scalable production
system for medicinal opiates and related plant therapeutics. While much effort
has been directed to establishing yeast strains that make high levels of other
plant-specialized metabolites, such as terpenoids, platform strains for this
diverse class of alkaloids do not exist. The key technical hurdle addressed by
this project is to engineer strains capable of synthesizing high levels of the
common branch point molecule, reticuline, from tyrosine. This project will use
synthetic biology tools to improve existing prototype strains by 1) engineering
alternative biosynthesis routes to increase pathway flux and bypass bottlenecks,
2) protecting a key unstable building block molecule from degradation by the
host cell metabolism, and 3) implementing a spatial engineering approach to
promote enzyme access to target substrates. The goal is to generate a platform
yeast strain that will be used to target valuable molecules at commercially-
relevant titers of greater than 1 g/L. The platform strain also will be used to
access previously inaccessible natural benzylisoquinoline molecules, and an even
greater number of non-natural derivatives. This technology will broadly
transform the approach to provision, discover, and develop needed medicines and
drug candidates.