* 1621836
* SBIR Phase I:  Converting Greek yogurt waste into a low-calorie natural sweetener
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Kulika Chomvong, Zimitech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) program will be to develop a technology to convert the acid whey
waste generated by Greek yogurt production into a natural sweetener. The Greek
yogurt industry is on the rise. However, making authentic Greek yogurt is a
wasteful process - producing 3 parts waste for every part of Greek yogurt made.
An economical use of Greek yogurt waste will capture the full value of the waste
materials, minimize waste transportation cost, decrease bacterial outbreak risk,
and reduce the carbon footprint for the environment. In parallel, the technology
will ensure a sustainable supply of a rare low-calorie natural sweetener, which
was shown to help lower blood sugar and improve cholesterol levels, in addition
to its antioxidant, anti-cavity and pro-digestive properties. The innovation
will enhance scientific and technological understanding of conversion of non-
food biomass to value-added chemicals.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to use synthetic biology and metabolic
engineering to develop engineered yeast as a self-renewing biocatalyst for
processing the environmentally hazardous waste from Greek yogurt production into
a low-calorie natural sweetener. Greek yogurt companies struggle to dispose of
its waste. The waste, which contains significant amounts of lactose, cannot be
discarded without a pretreatment step because it stimulates bacterial growth,
polluting water systems. The research addresses this challenge through the
development of self-sustained microbes as catalysts in a continuous process,
allowing lactose uptake with minimal waste pretreatment. This process produces a
low-calorie natural sweetener as a product, whose market supply is currently
limited by production cost. Anticipated technical results include strains with
high yield and productivity, a specific product purification method and
successful assembly of a live yeast reactor. The design overcomes substantial
financial, logistical and thermodynamic bottlenecks in Greek yogurt waste
treatment, and the low-calorie natural sweetener production.