* 1621504
* SBIR Phase I:  A Systematic Approach, Language and Platform for Building and Distributing Interactive Educational Games in Operations Management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Brendan Kennedy, Fathomd, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR phase I project will create a web-based platform for developing and
distributing interactive, mobile-enabled games for Information and Operations
Management. Each of these games will illustrate one to two fundamental academic
concepts by having students engage in short, round-based interactions that last
less than one classroom session. Recent studies (Burke, 2012; Sitzmann, 2011),
show that educational games, which focus on key concepts and provide immediate
feedback to players, help students understand, learn and internalize fundamental
academic concepts. The project addresses widespread obstacles reported by
professors to incorporate games into their teaching, including the scarcity of
games that were both relevant and technically capable in classroom environments.
The broader impact of the proposed project is an increase in the adoption of
pedagogically and academically validated educational games that facilitate
retention and effective use of business concepts relevant to managing
organizations. Hence, this proposal has potential to empower the workforce to be
more productive and innovative, thus driving U.S. economic growth. Moreover, the
eventual opening of the platform to a variety of third-party authors will
accelerate game innovation and usage in other business and engineering
disciplines at a lower cost, which will enhance the effectiveness of a broader
STEM workforce.

This project will employ automatically validated language to eliminate runtime
errors in multiplayer Operations Management games, which will have been designed
using a scientific Game Research & Development (GR&D) process for hosting on a
web-distribution platform. Debugging runtime errors presents a particular
challenge for non-professional programmers, such as professors. With runtime
errors mitigated, the correctness of a program can be validated at compile time.
Therefore, all games created with the project Game Description Language (GDL)
will have a guaranteed level of technical quality and stability, allowing
professors to focus on pedagogical relevance rather than technical stability of
games. To mitigate the problem of runtime errors, this project employs methods
of mainstream video game development, which relies heavily on non-professional
programmers for storyline scripting. The main technical hurdle is that these
methods must be tailored to result in automatically validated language capable
of expressing the range of Operations Management games conceived during the GR&D
process. The goal of the proposed R&D is a platform prototype able to support 10
simultaneous users of four games implemented using the GDL. Pilot tests with
users will assess critical usability metrics to facilitate further, larger-scale
testing and GDL improvements in Phase II.