* 1621536
* SBIR Phase I:  Three Dimensional Data Construction Platform Using Near Field Communications for Interaction With Engineering Game
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Matt Stewart, Digital Dream Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project explores the approach of teaching fundamental
engineering concepts through engaging gameplay using a proprietary platform. The
platform consists of tiles that can be put together in different ways in 3
dimensions, acting as an input to a game. The game is implemented on a paired
device that can be on a tablet or a computer. The player will be presented
increasingly difficult challenges and puzzles within game, and will have to use
the physical tiles to assist in constructing the solution. The field of
engineering exists in 3 dimensions, and the proposed project aims to explore
building the intuition of this field within our youngest learners. The broader
impact is in the vision for the platform to exist as a means to introduce
different STEM topics in a fun and engaging manner, creating fond memories that
could lead to more children with an interest in pursuing STEM related fields in
the future. The project also has a mission to remain gender neutral in its
design, so as to provide games that foster interest in both girls and
boys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I Project will explore, through the
use of near field communications, the extension of a proprietary platform that
can read and construct data in 2 dimensions to 3 dimensions. There is a given
theoretical limit to which near field communications are viable, and this
project will explore optimizations and additions to the current proprietary
solution to achieve a communications distance closer to the theoretical limit.
The proprietary system is highly compact, and the project will be researching
ways to prevent self interference while improving the range of the system. The
main explorations include a look at optimizing off-the-shelf near field
communications inlay designs, optimizing the current antenna design and network,
and the potential addition of a signal amplifier to boost the range of the
system.