* 1621344
* Developing Preservice Elementary Teachers' Ability to Facilitate Goal-Oriented Discussions in Science and Mathematics via the Use of Simulated Classroom Interactions
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jamie Mikeska, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,077,154.00

There is widespread recognition in educational literatures that academic
discourse is important for supporting students' developing understanding in the
disciplines of science and mathematics. College and career-ready standards also
call for attention to supporting students' learning of how to think and
communicate like disciplinary experts. The teaching practice of orchestrating
classroom discussion is intended to support students in obtaining higher levels
of academic achievement but also to support students' participation in a
democratic society. However, research has found that teachers--particularly
novice teachers--struggle to orchestrate discussion effectively for science and
mathematics. The investigators of this project hypothesize that opportunities to
1) practice orchestrating discussions in simulated classroom environments; 2)
receive constructive feedback on their practice; and 3) reflect on that feedback
and their experiences with peers and teacher educators, develops preservice
teachers' abilities to lead productive classroom discussion. This may allow them
to be more effective at orchestrating discussion when they begin teaching real
students in science and mathematics classrooms. The project team, which includes
investigators from Educational Testing Service (ETS) and software engineers at
Mursion, will develop, pilot, and validate eight discussion-oriented performance
tasks that will be embedded in an online simulated classroom environment. The
resulting research and development products could be used nationwide in teacher
preparation and professional development settings to assess and develop
teachers' ability to support classroom discussion in science and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This Early Stage Design and Development
project will 1) iteratively develop, pilot, and refine eight science and
mathematics discussion-oriented performance tasks (six formative, two
summative), scoring rubrics, and rater training materials; 2) deploy the
intervention in four university sites, collecting data from 240 prospective
teachers in both treatment and business-as-usual courses; and 3) use data
analyses and expert review to build a five-part argument for the validity of the
assessment and scoring rubrics. Data sources include prospective teachers'
background and demographic information, cognitive interviews, surveys, scores on
content knowledge for teaching (CKT) instruments, performance and scores on the
developed performance tasks, discussion scores on Danielson's Framework for
Teaching observation protocol, and case study interviews with prospective
teachers. The project team will also conduct interviews with teacher educators
and observe classroom debrief sessions with prospective teachers and their
teacher educators. The research will examine each teacher's scores on two
summative performance tasks administered pre- and post-intervention and will
look for evidence of growth across three formative tasks. Linear regression
models will be used to understand relationships among teachers' CKT scores, pre-
intervention performance task scores, group assignment, and post-intervention
performance task scores. A grounded theory approach to coding qualitative data
of 24 case study teachers, observations of debrief sessions, and interviews with
teacher educators will generate descriptive use cases, illustrating how the
tools can support prospective teachers in learning how to facilitate discussions
focused on science and mathematics argumentation. Mursion will develop a webpage
on its website dedicated to this project that will allow the team to post the
new performance-based tasks, scoring rubrics, and examples of performance in the
simulated environment for teacher educators, educational researchers, and policy
makers and collect feedback from them that can be used as another information
source for refining tools and their use. Research findings will also be
disseminated by more traditional means, such as papers in peer-reviewed research
and practitioner journals and conference presentations.