* 1621858
* GSA Penrose Conference on Layered Mafic Intrusions an Associated Economic Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Eric Ferre, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Layered mafic intrusions are scientifically and economically important because
they are the geological reservoir for 80% of the palladium and other platinum
group elements that derives from high-risk jurisdictions, such as South Africa,
Zimbabwe, or the Russian Federation. In the US, layered intrusions such as the
Stillwater Complex, have supplied chromium ore and other economic resources over
the years. These complexes constitute world class natural laboratories to train
students in igneous petrology and economic geology. This award will support the
travel and registration costs required for the participation of ten early-career
scientists and graduate students in the Geological Society of America (GSA)
Penrose Conference on 'Layered mafic intrusions and associated economic
deposits' that will be held in Red Lodge, Montana, U.S.A. from August 8th to
12th, 2016. Advances in science often occur when scientists talk to each other,
discuss their results and formulate new hypotheses. The format of GSA Penrose
conferences provides the opportunity for in-depth interactions amongst
participants for several days of focused discussion. National and international
experts will interact with early-career scientists to brainstorm on new
approaches and pressing questions regarding the origin, evolution and ore
deposit formation of layered mafic intrusions. The conference also provides the
best venue to allow the next generation of scientists to meet and interact with
industry professionals in the area of ore genesis and exploration. Finally, it
is expected that the conference will provide clarity on key topics primed for
advance on understanding layered mafic intrusions over the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this Geological Society of
America (GSA) Penrose conference are i) to explore recent advances in the
petrology, geochemistry and economic geology of layered mafic intrusions; ii) to
enhance the training of early-career and graduate scientists in any aspect of
the geosciences pertaining to layered mafic intrusions; and iii) to define the
key questions regarding layered mafic intrusions that need to be addressed in
the coming decade. This award will provide support for ten early-career
scientists to attend this conference.