* 1621027
* EAGER: Plant Sensory Perception via Heme Modulation of K+ Channels
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Sarah Assmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,275.00

One of the major goals of plant biology is to find out how plant growth can be
optimized to maximize crop production. The goal of this project is to develop a
mechanistic understanding of how plants balance growth with water loss. The
experiments described in this proposal will provide new insights into how crop
plant production could be optimized under various growing conditions. The
project relies on application to plant cells of techniques used in neuroscience
in order determine how these cells respond to stimuli on the molecular level.
Results of experiments performed on plants during the course of this project may
in turn provide valuable information for future studies on how similar signaling
pathways impact nervous system function in many different species of animals.
The impact of these plant cellular responses on whole plant growth and water
conservation will also be assessed. This innovative approach provides an unusual
opportunity for students to gain cross-disciplinary training in both plant
biology and neuroscience. The project will serve as a training ground for both
graduate and undergraduate researchers, in some cases providing the latter with
their very first research experience. Furthermore, it will support educational
outreach efforts by the investigators targeted towards introducing science
careers to underrepresented middle school and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments outlined in this proposal are
specifically targeted at defining the molecular mechanism(s) through which
cellular oxidation state and gaseous messengers regulate plant guard cell K+
channels and stomatal apertures. The opening and closing of stomata by guard
cells is mediated in large part by these channels and is sensitive to oxidation
state and gases. However, the molecular pathways that connect these cellular
signals to changes in K+ channel activity are not yet known. In this project,
the investigators will test a novel hypothesis that oxidation state and gaseous
messengers regulate K+ channel activity directly through a prosthetic group
integral to the channels themselves. The hypothesis is based on the finding that
gating of many CNBD family cation channels, including these plant K+ channels
and several important classes of animal CNBD family channels, is regulated by
similar prosthetic groups.