* 1621736
* SBIR Phase I:  Phase I Research:  Beam/Hub Connection Design - Considerations for Wind Energy Industry loadings for A Precast Footer Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Douglas Krause, RUTE Foundations
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 01/31/2017
* USD 224,474.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project supports research into
the structural engineering of a modular foundation for large wind energy towers.
Structural connections using assembled components have never been contemplated
in cases where the forces involved are of the magnitude currently experienced in
today's wind turbines. About 3,000 turbines (and foundations) are constructed
each year in the U.S. and about 10,000 internationally, representing a $1
billion domestic market. This market is served well today by cast-in-place
concrete technology. Nevertheless a lighter, stronger, and quicker-to-install
foundation system would introduce tremendous value to the entire wind energy
industry. First, it would improve project economics and reduce the price of
clean wind electricity. Second, the innovation would eliminate financing and
project timing issues inherent with current concrete works. Third, the
innovation would allow farmland to be fully recovered at the end of the project
lifecycle, as the proposed structural elements are designed to be lifted back
out of the earth, re-tested for strength, and then reused. Fourth, the new
approach will eliminate 5,000 tons of carbon dioxide emissions for each 100
megawatt wind farm, based on a reduction in the required cement for the
incumbent cast-in-place technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project consists in advanced materials research, advanced structural
engineering research, advanced construction methods research, and combining the
three into a structural element that can meet the massive overturning forces
required of a wind turbine foundation. The research will include finite element
modeling of structural design discoveries, plus new research into post-
tensioning concrete systems, and new analytical methods in foundation study. The
results of the research program are intended to yield a commercially viable
structural element that can connect the tower to the girder elements safely,
efficiently, and cost-effectively, based on the scale and requirements of the
wind industry.