* 1621104
* Organizing to Learn Practice: Teacher Learning in Classroom-Focused Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Meghan Shaughnessy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,699,839.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growing evidence about the powerful effects of skillful
teaching on students' learning creates a need to for professional development
that impacts teachers' actual practice. Just as other professions (e.g.,
nursing, social work, law) have centered practitioners' learning in "live"
practice with structures that support learning in context, the project will
investigate whether and how this can be accomplished in teaching. The approach
uses a "live mathematics classroom" as a common text for working on practice,
where participants are not only watching and discussing but are engaged in
developing and learning practice. The project also explores the following
variations in practice-based professional development: (1) on-site and remote
participation of teachers; and (2) the addition of supplementary practice-
focused professional development. The project will generate new knowledge
regarding ways in which elementary teachers of mathematics can be supported to
learn effective teaching practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
a fundamental challenge for professional development, that is, how to support
teachers to improve their practice. Teachers profit from well-designed
opportunities to develop new visions for practice, learn more about students'
thinking, or work on specific mathematical topics or tasks. Still, such
opportunities are often insufficient to support teachers with the complexity of
classroom teaching. These kinds of professional opportunities focus on critical
resources for instruction but not on the details of teaching practice itself.
This practice-centered professional development is situated within a summer
mathematics program for fifth graders. The proposed research will explore the
impact on teachers' practice, as well as on their knowledge and dispositions,
from participating in these structured ways. Three studies will resolve the
following three sets of questions: (1) What do teachers learn from structured
participation in the class? Does their participation impact their own teaching
practice, and if so, in what ways? (2) Does the setting of the peripheral
participation matter? Does this form of participation impact their own teaching
practice, and if so, in what ways? (3) Does the addition of professional
development focused on a particular teaching practice impact teachers' own
practice, and if so, in what ways? How does the addition of professional
development focused on a specific instructional practice compare across the in-
person and online forms of participation in terms of impact on teachers' own
practice? The project will collect and analyze several types of data pre- and
post-intervention, including measures of mathematical knowledge for teaching,
measures of language for talking about the work of teaching and students, and
skill with leading a mathematics discussion, and the mathematical quality of
instruction. The project will generate new knowledge related to to organizing
professional learning around supports that teachers need to learn practice as
well as ways to study their learning of teaching practice.