* 1621794
* SBIR Phase I:  Clean Air Exhuast Lines Explosion Isolation Device for Combustible Dust Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Nicholas Licht, CV Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to provide a safer working environment for powder
bulk handling facilities, while simultaneously helping the facility reduce its
energy consumption by allowing it to recycle conditioned air back into the
building. The risk associated with combustible dusts are catastrophic, yet the
awareness of the risks is still lacking. Commercially, this project would design
a product that would be installed at powder bulk handling facilities, that
handle combustible dust, that would prevent fire propagation from the combustion
of dust from entering the work area of the facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project are developing an
economical device which will act as a flame and pressure arrestor for dust
deflagrations, while maintaining enough airflow through the device to allow the
process to be balanced. Determining an appropriate stack-up of mesh material
that will quench the propagating deflagration, while also withstand the
pressures developed during a deflagration, will also help expand the field of
knowledge of combustible dust, and developing protection equipment for them.
Through the development of this product, additional full scale test will have to
be performed which will add to the database of how combustible dust events occur
and react.