* 1621194
* Learning Evolution Through Human and Non-Human Case Studies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Briana Pobiner, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,082,245.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project aligns with Alabama's College &amp; Career-Ready
Standards (CCRS) for biology in grades 9-12 relating to Unity and Diversity.
These standards are based on the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and go
into effect during the 2016-2017 school year. Building on prior work
(DRL-119468), this project will develop and test two curriculum units on the
topic of evolution for high school general biology courses, with one unit
focusing primarily on human case studies to teach evolution and one unit
focusing primarily on case studies of evolution in other species. The two units
will be compared to examine how different approaches to teaching evolution
affect students and teachers. The project will also develop and field test a
Cultural and Religious Sensitivity (CRS) Resource to provide teachers with
strategies for creating supportive learning environments where understanding of
the scientific account of evolution is aided while also acknowledging the
cultural controversy associated with learning about evolution. The impacts on
student and teacher outcomes of using the curriculum units and the CRS Resource
will be tested in classrooms by comparing the outcomes of the human versus non-
human units, and by using or not using classroom strategies from the CRS
Resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine student and teacher
outcomes of four treatment groups: 1) Curriculum Unit 1, 2) Curriculum Unit 1
with the CRS Resource, 3) Curriculum Unit 2, and 4) Curriculum Unit 2 with the
CRS Resource. The research questions are: 1) In what ways does using examples of
human versus non-human evolution to teach core evolutionary concepts affect
understanding of, acceptance of, and motivation to learn about evolution among
high school introductory biology students? 2) In what ways do using teaching
strategies that focus on acknowledging the cultural controversy about evolution
using a procedural neutrality approach affect high school introductory biology
teachers' comfort and confidence with teaching evolution? 3) In what ways does
using examples of human versus non-human evolution to teach fundamental
evolutionary concepts in conjunction with teaching strategies that focus on
acknowledging the cultural controversy about evolution using a procedural
neutrality approach affect understanding of, acceptance of, and motivation to
learn about evolution among high school introductory biology students? And 4) In
what ways does using examples of human versus non-human evolution to teach
fundamental evolutionary concepts in conjunction with teaching strategies that
focus on acknowledging the cultural controversy about evolution using a
procedural neutrality approach affect high school introductory biology teachers'
comfort and confidence with teaching evolution? The project will use a 2 X 2 X 2
mixed factorial quasi-experimental research design to answer these questions,
and will include a total of 32 teachers, 8 in each treatment group, along with
approximately 800 students. Each assessment will be administered as a pretest
two weeks prior to starting the curriculum unit and as a posttest immediately
after completing the unit. Test scores will be the within-subjects factors, and
Curriculum Unit and CRS Resource will be the between-subjects factors.