* 1621997
* SBIR Phase I:  Multifunctional Reconfigurable Antenna Development for 5G Small Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Bedri Cetiner, i5 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its capability to
create a positive impact for every wireless system. This project concentrates on
the antenna element along with control algorithms and targets commercial
wireless communication applications, i.e., 5G cellular small cells. As any
wireless platform uses an antenna, an advancement accomplished for this element
will create a positive impact for every wireless system. For example, the
tactical military antennas must not only have reduced size, signature and cost,
but must also ensure that maximum efficiency, dynamic mutual coupling tolerance
and coverage area are achievable at all times, for any frequency and in any kind
of environment. The proposed multifunctional reconfigurable antenna (MRA)
technology with dynamically changeable properties is ideal for military and
commercial antenna applications. Society will benefit from the increased array
of applications of wireless networks driven by the proposed innovative design
principles and MRA technologies. This project also has a strong educational
component and will provide excellent opportunities to train students at
undergraduate and graduate levels in interdisciplinary fields that combine
wireless communication theory, antenna design, and fabrication technologies. If
successful, this project will significantly enhance accessing the wireless
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project targets to revolutionize the way wireless communication is
performed by developing a new class of antenna technology called multifunctional
reconfigurable antenna (MRA). The frequency band, radiation pattern and
polarization properties of an antenna directly impact the coverage, capacity,
and quality of service achieved by wireless networks. Particularly, 5G and
beyond wireless systems must employ multiple input multiple output (MIMO)
technology to attain improved spectral efficiency, advanced interference
management capability, higher network capacities and energy efficiencies with
reduced cost, size and weight. However, achievement of this represents a
significant challenge particularly if the MIMO systems use legacy antenna
technology, which has not seen much change since the invention of antennas more
than 100 years ago. The intelligence of these systems is limited to adaptive
signal processing, which are optimized in isolation independent from antenna
properties that are assumed fixed. The proposed MRA technology enables a single
antenna element to dynamically change its properties, thereby the joint
optimization of all system parameters (environment, EM wave properties, and
communication algorithms). Success on this frontier has the potential to
revolutionize the antenna systems in terms of agility, performance, power
consumption, cost, and size.