* 1621862
* SBIR Phase I:  A nano-liter 3D cell culture well plate for high-throughput screening
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Deepak Solomon, Neofluidics, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of a 3-dimensional (3D) culture
well plate to be used as a high-throughput screening (HTS) tool for research and
drug discovery. The core technology is a novel well plate that incorporates
micron-meter-sized channels and compartments, and will have the ability to
perform autonomous media exchange and drug loading non-invasively in an
automated and high-speed fashion. The well plate will allow larger libraries of
potential drug candidate compounds to be screened against 3D cultured cells.
This would enable pharmaceutical companies and screening centers to increase the
probability of finding new drug candidates by elevating the scale and throughput
necessary for their discovery and validation. The technology also will increase
scientific understanding of cells by providing a tool to study their behavior in
an in vivo-like environment, which is important when studying tumor spheroids
and exploring cancer therapeutics.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a 3D cell culture tool by
integrating novel microfluidic technology into a well plate format. 3D cell
culture is emerging as the next generation drug screening method, as it provides
a window into cellular responses by culturing and studying cells in an in vivo-
like environment. Currently, however, there are no tools available in the market
for testing 3D cultured cells against drug compounds in an HTS fashion. A
prototype of the well plate will be fabricated and several important parameters
that are required to conduct HTS studies on tumors will be studied. Parameters
such as the uniformity in culturing 3D tumors, volume of media required for
healthy cellular growth, and effectiveness of the plate to perform screening of
drug compounds will be determined. It is anticipated that the microfluidic well
plate will create a uniform number of tumors in each microfluidic well and
produce results similar to those derived from the current state of the art 3D
cell culture platforms. Proprietary patented microfluidic technology developed
and verified during the SBIR Phase I project will help integrate 3D cell culture
into the mainstream drug discovery cascade.