* 1621176
* Geological models for Explorations of Dynamic Earth (GEODE): Integrating the power of geodynamic models in middle school Earth Science curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Scott McDonald, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,698,654.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will contribute to the Earth science education
community's understanding of how engaging students with dynamic computer-based
systems models supports their learning of complex Earth science concepts
regarding Earth's surface phenomena and sub-surface processes. It will also
extend the field's understandings of how students develop modeling practices and
how models are used to support scientific endeavors. This research will shed
light on the role uncertainty plays when students use models to develop
scientific arguments with model-based evidence. The GEODE project will directly
involve over 4,000 students and 22 teachers from diverse school systems serving
students from families with a variety of socioeconomic, cultural, and racial
backgrounds. These students will engage with important geoscience concepts that
underlie some of the most critical socio-scientific challenges facing humanity
at this time. The GEODE project research will also seek to understand how
teachers' practices need to change in order to take advantage of these
sophisticated geodynamic modeling tools. The materials generated through design
and development will be made available for free to all future learners,
teachers, and researchers beyond the participants outlined in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEODE project will develop and research the
transformational potential of geodynamic models embedded in learning
progression-informed online curricula modules for middle school teaching and
learning of Earth science. The primary goal of the project is to conduct design-
based research to study the development of model-based curriculum modules,
assessment instruments, and professional development materials for supporting
student learning of (1) plate tectonics and related Earth processes, (2)
modeling practices, and (3) uncertainty-infused argumentation practices. The
GEODE software will permit students to "program" a series of geologic events
into the model, gather evidence from the emergent phenomena that result from the
model, revise the model, and use their models to explain the dynamic mechanisms
related to plate motion and associated geologic phenomena such as sedimentation,
volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and deformation of strata. The project will
also study the types of teacher practices necessary for supporting the use of
dynamic computer models of complex phenomena and the use of curriculum that
include an explicit focus on uncertainty-infused argumentation.