* 1621325
* Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars Teacher Academy Resident System
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Mary Benjamin, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 01/31/2023
* USD 3,731,454.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Jackson State University will
investigate the effectiveness of a teacher academy resident model to recruit,
license, induct, employ, and retain middle school and secondary science and
mathematics teachers for high-need schools in the South It will prepare new,
highly-qualified science and mathematics teachers from historically Black
universities in high-needs urban and rural schools. The project involves a
partnership among three historically Black universities (Jackson, State
University, Xavier University of Louisiana, and the University of Arkansas at
Pine Buff), and diverse urban and rural school districts in Jackson,
Mississippi; New Orleans, Louisiana; and Pine Bluff Arkansas region that serve
more than 175,000 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will include 150
middle and secondary school teacher residents who will gain clinical mentored
experience and develop familiarity with local schools. The 150 teacher residents
supported by the program to National Board certification will obtain: state
licensure/certification in science teaching, a master?s degree, and initiation.
The goal is to increase teacher retention and diversity rates. The research
question guiding this focus is: Will training STEM graduates have a significant
effect on the quality of K12 instruction, teacher efficacy and satisfaction,
STEM teacher retention, and students? science and mathematics achievement? A
quasi-experimental design will be used.to evaluate project's effectiveness.