* 1621732
* SBIR Phase I:  Pellet based 3D print extrusion process for shoe manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* D.Casey Kerrigan, JKM Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing a
novel cost-effective 3D printing process to manufacture shoes. Currently shoes
are mass manufactured, typically overseas, using fixed molds that do not
optimally meet the need of an individual. 3D printing of shoes offers the
promise of providing individual customization tailored not just to fit, style,
and colors, but to individual biomechanics and medical needs, the latter of
which are being poorly met with mass manufactured shoes. However, a number of
technical challenges exist to make 3D printing of shoes sufficiently cost-
effective that it can be provided beyond just a select few individuals. This
project develops a novel and cost-effective 3D printing process to manufacture
components of shoes, using readily available and recyclable thermoplastic
pellets. This novel 3D printing process will enable the manufacture of new,
innovative shoe designs that cannot be made with any other manufacturing
process. Additionally, it will make mass customization of shoes a reality,
providing access to healthy customizable shoes for many individuals. Unlike
traditional manufacturing processes currently being done overseas, this novel
manufacturing technology is very amenable to implementing in the United States
on a local level. Thus, this project will not only help move shoe manufacturing
back to the United States, generating income for tax revenue, it will create new
high-tech jobs in manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
develops a novel 3D printing technology to print a proprietary mix of
elastomeric type material developed based on years of published research of the
biomechanical effects of footwear by the proposer. The primary innovation
proposed is a miniature-sized plasticizing screw-based extruder that reliably
and consistently extrudes all types of elastomeric type material including foam,
the latter of which, to our knowledge, has never before been 3D printed.
Previous attempts using a simple auger instead of a true plasticizing screw have
produced inconsistent and unreliable results. The goal is to develop a reliable
miniaturized screw-based extruder, integrated into a specially constructed 3D
printer sized to make a pair of shoes, whereby pellets are fed through a hopper.
The extruder-printer design will be based on unique experience in extruding
elastomeric types of materials and will be evaluated for reliability and
consistency in a specially instrumented 3D printer. This technology if
successful, will allow for a novel manufacturing process where a bank of 3D
printers operate simultaneously, each producing their own made-to-order pair of
shoes and/or shoe components. This system will offer the potential for a cost-
effective footwear solution that is customized not only to fit, but to an
individual's specific biomechanical and medical needs. Additionally, it will
allow for the creation of novel healthy designs based on the proposer's research
that cannot be made with any other manufacturing process.