* 1622881
* STTR Phase I:  EW-EP2: Printable and Flexible Micro-Supercapacitor using Graphene and Carbon Nanostructure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Salma Rahman, MIHRAB Nanotechnology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 212,289.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that due to the
increased mobility of human beings and the nature of modern economic and social
activities a variety of power challenges need to be addressed for portable
electronic and mechanical devices. The needs include quick power delivery,
light-weight but high-capacity energy storage, superior low-temperature
operation and ability to handle millions of cycles. On average a soldier, a
construction worker or an everyday handyman carry between 50 to 100lb of weight
while they are working in their duty sites. A significant portion of this load
is from the primary and backup batteries used for their tools and equipment,
because corded delivery of power is not always possible. Computing,
communication, biomedical and avionic industries are also constantly searching
for light-weight but highly efficient energy storage gadgets. The ability to
integrate graphene and carbon nanostructure based microsupercapacitors in the
next generation energy delivery/storage solutions for portable devices and tools
will open the doors for new education, research, product development and
economic growth. Due to ultra-light-weight, transparency, extremely high thermal
stability and tensile strength, and superior electrical conductivity graphene
based supercapacitor would also be suitable for flexible, printable, transparent
and wearable electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project plans to develop a non-Faradic, thin-
film and electrochemical microsupercapacitor utilizing graphene and carbon
nanotube (CNT) with high gravimetric energy density. The proposed
microsupercapacitor would combine high energy storage capacity of batteries with
high power delivery capability of regular capacitors. It would be compatible to
commercial lithographic techniques and printable circuit technologies. A
limiting factor in the miniaturization of the existing carbon-based
supercapacitors is a relatively low volumetric energy density (VED) due to the
poor packing density of structures like tangled CNTs. The VED of CNT-based
supercapacitors is many orders of magnitude lower than the mainstream energy
storage devices. The opportunity to miniaturize the supercapacitor exists with
novel designs that strive to minimize its intrinsic components like electrodes
and separators that do not directly contribute to cell energy storage. The
proposed design would primarily use graphene nanoribbon (GNR) as electrode,
which will not have the tangling issue of CNT. Due to the 2D flat nature of GNR
the scaling and packing density of GNR devices would be extremely high. The
long-term goal is to achieve an energy density over 100 Wh/kg using an array of
the proposed microsupercapacitors.