* 1622082
* SBIR Phase I:  Large-Scale Behavioral Analysis Utilizing Convolutional Neural Networks and Its Application to In-store Retail Marketing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Everett Berry, Perceive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an infrastructure for exposing and
interpreting a previously unavailable dataset: fine-grained human interaction
with a physical environment. Humans are continuously building and shaping the
world but there exists little data to examine these effects. Beyond retail, this
technology could affect how teachers layout classrooms, how disaster workers
provide relief, or how factories keep their workers safe. The subtle physical
details that affect humans everyday will be understood and investigated in ways
not possible without the proposed system. This technology will benefit society
specifically by improving the economic efficiency of retailers and broadly by
increasing scientific understanding of how humans interact with their physical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project uses a neural network and generic 3D scene reconstruction
in combination with low-cost, wireless cameras to model an environment with
accurate object classification and spatial relationships. Recently, neural
networks have proven adept at a variety of image classification tasks but their
applications in video classification, namely for human actions, have been less
explored. 3D scene reconstruction has made similar advances, progressing from
images to videos but has always required some prior knowledge of the physical
scene. Within the past year, multiple groups have proposed methods for
completely generic scene reconstruction from multiple view cameras. Finally,
energy harvesting methods for devices such as cameras and wireless transmitters
have been demonstrated to be feasible in laboratory experiments but have not
been incorporated into commercial products. In this project the two computer
vision algorithms will be developed in parallel with camera hardware so that the
software and hardware systems may be integrated and demonstrated by the end of
the project.