* 1622155
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Multi-layer Electrode Platform for high performance Li-ion batteries using low-cost manufacturing process
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Neelam Singh, Big Delta Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to eliminate the trade-off between power density
and energy density that currently limits the design and application of mass-
market consumer goods such as: electronics, power tools and transportation.
These products require high power for communication uplinks, regenerative
braking, acceleration or physical actuation. However these products also require
high energy for long-duration base loads which affect the total application run
time or endurance of the product. Current battery technologies hinder the
ability of designers and engineers to create batteries with both high power and
long-duration as these qualities are inversely related. Thus a compromise on the
performance and quality of their products is necessitated, resulting in either a
high powered or a long-duration battery. Through this project advancements in
battery technology will be achieved in order to enhance the quality, power
density, and power performance of batteries and battery operated mass-market
consumer goods across a multitude of industries. This project aligns with the
NSF's mission as it seeks to promote the progress of science pertaining to
battery technology and applications while increasing the prosperity of
businesses that develop, manufacture, market and sell these products through
increased product quality and market
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong technical innovation
in the proposed project is the development of a novel platform technology for
manufacturing high-performance Lithium-ion batteries. This platform will
revolutionize how batteries are designed and manufactured in applications from
electrical vehicles to consumer electronics. Slot-die coating, the modern state-
of-the-art manufacturing process, produces electrodes within a very limited
thickness range through a one-shot coating process. Slot-die coating limits the
range of electrode thickness able to be produced and makes multi-layer electrode
production impossible due to the one-shot coating process employed. This project
will utilize a ground-breaking approach to produce thick, multi-layer electrodes
with functional gradients and faster coating speeds. This will not only increase
energy density of the resulting battery, but it will also reduce the cost of
production. The Phase I goal of the purposed project is to develop multi-layered
electrode architectures with maximized energy and power performance through
computational modeling and experimentation. In order to accomplish this goal the
project will incorporate cell performance simulation software to effectively
capture the design principle required for multi-layer electrode development. The
scope of this project will encompass extensive testing on Lithium-ion pouch cell
prototypes in order to validate the performance advantages of the designed
electrode architectures.