* 1622196
* SSSC Plumbing and Energy Reliability Improvements
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2018
* USD 179,989.00

The Sitka Sound Science Center (SSSC) supports scientific research conducted in
the Eastern Gulf of Alaska, an important location for study of the North Pacific
and the Tongass, the country's largest national forest. A broad array of
scientists conduct marine biological research at a time when changes to the
ocean in the Gulf of Alaska will have dramatic impacts on world economies and
local communities, in a critically important geographic part of the United
States where changes in the climate, oceanography and biology are being
monitored closely. With formal and informal partnerships with high profile
organizations such as the University of California Santa Cruz, University of
Alaska, Scripps Oceanographic Institution, the Smithsonian, Stanford, Duke,
University of Washington, Alaska Department of Fish and Game and NOAA, the SSSC
hosts many researchers whose field work and scientific experiments require
dependable systems. Located in Sitka, Alaska, a community that is 33% Alaska
Native, SSSC provides research and educational opportunities for minorities as
well as rural coastal community members. The facility hosts many NSF-funded
visiting scientists, and it conducts its own research and science educational
programs which are also supported by the NSF. Additionally, it provides informal
science educational experiences to thousands of visitors and students each year.
SSSC hosts hundreds of local and non-local k-16 students as interns, in camps,
field courses, and after school programs, who will have opportunities to conduct
successful educational research projects because of these
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will improve the seawater
system by installing a back up saltwater intake system to ensure reliable
saltwater flow from the North Pacific to the Sitka-based field station,
replacement of fouled and deteriorated salt water plumbing from the pump to the
facility and backup power generation for the entire facility. The improved
infrastructure has been laid out in a completed facility master plan prepared by
engineers, architects and major stakeholders. This straightforward project has
been designed with consultation with other facilities that rely on saltwater in
the region. This physical plant improvement project will create important system
redundancy, and facility support in an island location where dependability is
critical to conduct meaningful research. Reliable water delivery and energy
backup systems will ensure dependable scientific integrity for experiments
conducted in the wet laboratories of the Sitka Sound Science Center. These
improvements will also help build capacity as they will be compatible with a
heat exchange system designed for our facility. The SSSC website is at
http://www.sitkascience.org/.