* 1622958
* STTR Phase I:  A platform for reactive and adaptive motion generation for real-world manipulation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Nathan Ratliff, Lula Robotics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project revolves around the
democratization of extremely complex motion generation, perception, and control
systems. Most roboticists today program without understanding heat transfer,
motor controllers, and lowlevel&lt;br/&gt;message passing. Abstractions improve
robot accessibility and enable organizations to leverage a broader range of
expertise. This project will further the modern robotics abstraction to obviate
specialized knowledge of low level task processes such as movement and vision
across a variety of robots. Product driven companies are best suited to develop
business logic and a thoughtful customer&lt;br/&gt;experience, and most struggle
to acquire suitable in-house talent to remain competitive with foundational
robotics techniques. This system addresses fundamental behavioral prerequisites
for applications ranging from collaborative robotics in manufacturing and
fulfillment to assistive robotics, caretaking, and personal home robotics as
well as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),&lt;br/&gt;autonomous vehicles, and
entertainment robots. With higher level interfaces, programmers can more easily
leverage their creativity and intuition enabling a new generation of
applications unhindered by the present day difficulties of low level
development. Beyond the commercial potential, these advantages are pervasive:
researchers, students, and children alike, of all genders and ethnicities, will
be empowered to interact with, program, and study robots at a substantially
higher level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will address the increasing need for a higher level
interface to robots that abstracts away perception, motion generation, and
control. Many competing techniques for motion generation and perception populate
the literature, but recently optimization has become a common unifying theme
playing a prominent role in continuously running and adapting behavior with the
promise of speed and generality. This project will utilize state of the art
technology in continuous motion optimization and modern real time vision and
tracking techniques to build an integrated system appropriate for use across
multiple robots. These techniques involve optimization, Riemannian geometry, low
level control, online learning and more&amp;#894; many components are well
suited to generalizing across robotic platforms, but questions remain regarding
processing speed, robustness, and the utility of&lt;br/&gt;existing modeling
tools. This project will assess the viability of such a higher level system by
studying the latencies of reactions, precision of manipulation, and its long
term robustness especially in the context of collaborative robotics for
manufacturing using evaluations across multiple physical robotic platforms. The
technical results will illuminate the role of optimization in&lt;br/&gt;motion
generation and perception for real world productionizable systems and uncover
any remaining scientific question that must be addressed.