* 1622890
* I-Corps: On-chip Integration of Optoelectronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Joanna Millunchick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

There is a growing movement known as the Internet of Things which involve
creating a massive network of interconnected smart devices. This includes
everything from self-driving cars to refrigerators that can communicate directly
with one?s smartphone. This will enable the automation of many different types
of jobs, improving the efficiency in practically every of industry. Wearable
tech and automated kiosks are examples of early adopters of this type of
technology. However, before this concept can take full effect, sensor technology
needs to be optimized and become more affordable. Devices use sensors to
interact with the world around them, much like how a person uses their five
senses to interact with the environment. In many cases, in order to automate a
certain task, the computer or automation device needs to be equipped with
different types of sensors. The sensors need to be small enough to be
inconspicuous, yet should require little power to operate. Ideally they would be
powered without any external power source. Currently, the materials and
processing steps are too many and pose a barrier for widespread adoption. This
project aims to significantly reduce the cost of sensor manufacturing when it
includes items such as solar cells, light emitting devices, or photodetectors.
Immediate adopters of the technology would be sensor manufacturing companies.
Benefits of this technology include new types of smart devices which could
improve business to business and machine to machine informational
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its core, the proposed technology is a method
of integrating optoelectronic devices with conventional silicon CMOS chips using
nanostructures. The process developed by this team involves depositing a
polycrystalline film on top of an existing logic chip, and growing the optically
active device directly on top. This both makes the sensor thinner and eliminates
costly wire-bonding steps. Through the customer discovery portion of the project
the team hopes to achieve two things: to identify its customer base and
commercialization method, and to identify a viable product offering. The
customer discovery process will help the team determine which market will be
easiest to enter at its current stage. The team members plan on interviewing
both major and minor players in both fields. Another goal for this project is to
identify the type of optoelectronic device the team should prototype.