* 1622000
* SBIR Phase I:  Online Collaborative Math
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Donald Carney, Fluidity Software
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Phase I SBIR project proposes to research and develop a fully pen-centric
software application for tablet devices which has the potential to become a
groundbreaking component of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math)
education. Teachers and students are rapidly gaining access to mobile tablet
devices with touch sensitive screens and educators are quickly adopting one-to-
one (1:1), online, blended and distance learning environments wherein teachers
and students have mobile tablet devices. The research and development of Phase I
will create a new application providing online collaborative math (OCM) for use
on networked tablet computers. OCM brings the power of co-located persons
working side-by-side and collaborating with paper and pencil to distributed
online environments with students writing on tablets. OCM enriches the static
paper-and-pencil experience with powerful handwriting and gesture-driven math
functionality for computation, graphing, and interactive illustrations enabling
rich online collaboration. OCM has the potential to evolve into a robust
commercial application suitable for worldwide use by teachers and students for
the teaching and learning of math and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCM provides
a high degree of interaction using handwritten math notation on tablet
computers. Increased interaction in distance learning is associated with
improved achievement and student satisfaction. The development of OCM is both an
art and a science. The art involves making OCM feel like a true collaboration.
The science involves developing the technology to create the feel of true
collaboration. OCM enables two or more persons to create documents for their
collaborative use in teaching and learning STEM subjects. OCM will provide an
innovative mechanism to synchronize document state among multiple editors in
real-time with minimal or no loss of data/information due to edit conflicts,
thereby producing the feel of true collaboration. OCM represents over 10 years
of research and development in the field of pen-centric math expression
recognition and is presently covered by three patents pending. The goal of Phase
I is to build a prototype OCM application and test its feasibility and efficacy
in a computer simulated teaching environment. Ultimately, OCM will have a broad
impact on the worldwide use of tablet computers in online, distance, and blended
learning environments.