* 1622525
* STTR Phase I:  fMRI Dynamic Phantom for Improved Detection of Resting-State  Brain Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Lilianne Mujica-Parodi, ALA Scientific Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to dramatically improve the detection
sensitivity of resting-state fMRI. In recent years, large-scale ($150M- $1.2B
USD) and long-term (10-12 year) international investments (e.g., NIH Human
Connectome Project, White House BRAIN Initiative, UK Biobank, EU Human Brain
Project) have expanded the reach of human fMRI to include faster pulse sequences
and more complex analytic tools, higher field strength, integration with multi-
scale experiments and modeling, and an emphasis on integration of data across
multiple scanner/study sites. This generation of fMRI studies goes beyond the
original simplistic models that focused upon activation maps, to investigate
connections, networks, and dynamic nonlinear circuits in the brain. New ways of
thinking are being applied to some of our highest-impact areas of societal
interest, ranging from clinical depression, addiction, autism, and brain injury,
to age-based cognitive degeneration. However, while fMRI research dramatically
accelerates, quality assurance protocols for the MRI machines needed to generate
these findings have lagged far behind, relying upon static phantom protocols no
longer fully capable of targeting quality control issues relevant to current and
emerging applications. The Stony Brook Dynamic Phantom is designed to address
this urgent need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds upon a 1st
generation working prototype of the dynamic phantom (patent pending), to develop
engineering improvements in the 2nd generation prototype necessary to increase
its durability and reliability in preparation for commercialization. The six
objectives addressed in Phase I are associated with increasing precision,
accuracy, reliability/reproducibility, and usability from the perspectives of
both the phantom's hardware and software.