* 1622408
* Food-Energy-Water Nexus in Islanded Communities and High Latitudes: Issues, Pathways, and Implications
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Elaine Drew, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2018
* USD 49,929.00

1622408&lt;br/&gt;Prakash&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainability of the rural
Alaskan lifestyle is increasingly suspect. This proposed food-energy-water nexus
workshops will lead to collaborations and results with the potential to add to
this public discussion on the sustainability of this lifestyle. Attendees will
be a diverse group representing academia, agencies, communities, organizations,
and industry. The agenda emphasizes active participation to facilitate
discussion and progress in key fields. The key result of the event will be a
report including a summary of discussions, ideas for further study in the food-
energy-water field, and recommendations for ways to transform workshop results
into visualizations, decision-support tools and other concrete
deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of the greater than 25 food-
energy-water nexus workshops recently funded by the NSF, none have addressed the
unique and significant challenges to food, water, and energy production and
acquisition posed by high-latitude environments and "islanded communities."
These include extreme swings in weather and daylight hours and the isolation of
many Arctic communities from the main transport network and electrical grid. As
a result, islanded communities are especially vulnerable to fluctuations and
disruptions in supplies of food, energy, and water. Short growing seasons make
agriculture difficult, water pollutants and hygiene are constant concerns, and
imported energy costs are exorbitant. In addition, the local renewable energy
sources are sporadic in nature and difficult to maintain. These issues make it
incumbent upon the research community and the nation to find ways to improve the
stability, efficiency, and affordability in all three areas of the nexus for
islanded communities. The growing emphasis on the food-energy-water nexus has
yet to be extended to islanded communities, making these areas both a crucial
and fertile area for examination and research. Furthermore, the self-contained
nature of these communities makes them excellent places to examine the FEW nexus
as a relatively closed system. The workshop is organized around three areas: 1.
Infrastructure Engineering, including topics such as efficient greenhouses,
improved equipment to store and manage intermittent energy loads from
renewables, and infrastructure to affordably provide clean drinking water and
proper sewage disposal, 2. Environmental Engineering, including topics such as
bioaccumulated toxins in subsistence foods, and the high energy levels needed to
provide clean water in islanded communities, and 3. Society and Economy,
including topics such as the rising energy requirements (and hence prices) of
subsistence practices and the need for improved security of water sources.