* 1622232
* SBIR Phase I:  Passive Radio for the Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Bryce Kellogg, JEEVA WIRELESS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable Wi-Fi and
other radio transmissions at up to 10000 times lower power than has been
possible. The technique for the first time can generate Wi-Fi and other radio
transmissions using backscatter communication, for orders of magnitude lower
power than conventional techniques. These backscatter transmissions can be
decoded on conventional Wi-Fi Access Points, phones, and other devices. Given
the increasing interest in the Internet-of-Things where small computing devices
are embedded in everyday objects and environments, improving the energy
efficiency of communication by up to 10,000 times will substantially extend
battery life. As a result, this project would make the Internet of things more
viable economically and environmentally, since batteries will travel to
landfills at a slower rate. Economically, reducing or eliminating batteries from
pervasive sensors will lead to growth in the semiconductor industry, and also in
other businesses, which will be able to allow their customers to search the
physical world, thanks to the new sources of data about the physical
world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project introduces the key insight that the power-hungry, high-frequency
analog and RF components found in battery-powered radios can be grouped together
into a wall-powered device called the helper node. The energy constrained,
battery-powered mobile/embedded endpoint device contains only low frequency and
mostly digital components, making its power consumption negligible. The mobile
devices transmit data by reflecting RF signals generated by the helper. This
novel partitioning of the radio system allows the Endpoint to communicate far
more efficiently than was possible with active radio techniques. This project
aims to create a complete network stack that enables passive devices to coexist
with conventional active devices in the ISM band. The system consists of ultra-
low energy endpoint sensors, wall-powered helper devices, and commercial off the
shelf active radio routers. The project involves building working networking
hardware, designing and implementing a network stack matched to the project?s
unique needs, and testing the resulting system with real customers. If
successful, the project will have delivered the critical enabling technology for
the vision of pervasively connected devices with billions of devices connected
to the Internet without the need to replace batteries.