* 1622295
* Improving Estimates of Anthropogenic Aerosol Cooling and Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Timothy Delsole, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2020
* USD 448,195.00

It is generally accepted that the warming effect of greenhouse gas increases
over the 20th century was to some extent offset by cooling from aerosol
pollution, and the extent of the cancellation is a central question in the
detection and attribution of climate change. The observed temperature record
could represent strong greenhouse warming masked by substantial aerosol cooling
or weaker warming offset by less cooling. The two alternatives have very
different consequences for future warming if greenhouse gases continue to
accumulate while aerosols level off or decline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier
work by the PI and others has attempted to separate out the aerosol cooling
(essentially a shading effect) using the fact that the surface temperature
response to aerosols has a distinct spatial pattern, and sophisticated "optimal
fingerprinting" techniques have been devised to identify that pattern in
simulations of 20th century climate. Work in this project extends the
methodology by combining surface temperature with other variables to help
characterize the aerosol effect. Two variables that show promise in combination
with temperature are precipitation and surface insolation (direct and indirect
sunlight). The patterns are identified in climate model simulations using
various 20th century climate forcing factors including all forcings combined,
aerosols alone, and all forcings except aerosols. Additional work seeks to apply
the method to observations, taking into account characteristics of observing
networks including the geographic distribution of the stations and their periods
of record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts because better
estimates of 20th century aerosol cooling will be helpful to derive
observational constraints on climate sensitivity, which is the most important
factor determining the severity of the long-term societal risk posed by global
warming. Such guidance would directly benefit policy makers addressing climate
change impacts, and would also be valuable for climate model development. The
work also provides an assessment of the value of particular types of
observations (for instance precipitation and insolation) for constraining
aerosol cooling, and these estimates could be valuable for prioritizing
investments in new observational infrastructure.