* 1622377
* Collaborative Research:  SHINE:  Characteristics of Solar Energetic Particle Events Resulting from Filament Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Neeharika Thakur, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2020
* USD 91,857.00

Understanding the details of solar energetic particle (SEP) acceleration is
critical for accurate predictions of space weather and potential impacts on
sensitive space-based assets. This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at studying SEP
events associated with filament eruptions on the Sun. The goal is to isolate and
investigate SEPs accelerated at CME-driven shocks with minimal flare material
contributions. The work expands on other researchers' recent results by using
more instruments to cover a broader energy range and extend the analysis. The
methodology involves spectral and elemental composition data analysis techniques
that are well established. The dissemination of the scientific results will be
made broadly to the scientific and space weather prediction communities through
published articles, scientific talks, and personal communications. In addition,
project results and relevant data sets will be made available via the public web
pages of the ACE and STEREO Science Centers. The three project teams have
excellent track record of publications, participating (often in leadership
roles) in various workshops (e.g., SHINE), and attending scientific conferences.
Both the team leader and a Co-PIs are under-represented minorities and funding
is included for the involvement of an undergraduate student. The project will
promote strong international collaborations for the benefit of advancing space
weather research both in the USA and worldwide. The research plan of this 3-year
SHINE project includes four main tasks. The first task is to examine the
characteristics of heavy ions for previously identified events. The spectral
shape variation as a function of particle species reveals characteristics of the
accelerating shock, while the composition provides important clues regarding the
SEP seed population. The second task is to study smaller SEP events associated
with filament eruptions by using the more sensitive SEP sensors onboard ACE and
STEREO. The inclusion of STEREO data alone has the potential to increase the
number of events suitable for study and, in combination with near-Earth
spacecraft, allows the examination of SEP characteristics as a function of
longitude. The third task is to define stronger constrains on the primary
acceleration region by combining calculations of the particle-release times, for
both for single-and multiple-spacecraft events, with timing of the corresponding
solar signatures. The fourth task is to study in detail similar filament
eruption events without associated SEP events in order to identify specific
features that are key to SEP generation. The project is directly relevant to the
NSF's SHINE program, because it will provide important knowledge about the
acceleration and transport of SEPs during solar eruptive events. Such knowledge
is critical for accurate modeling and prediction of space weather conditions
from the solar surface to the Earth and beyond. The research and EPO agenda of
this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.