* 1622181
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable and Highly Effective Anti-Corrosive Primers Using Organic Additives
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Gregory Albarian, Poly-Fiber, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop a novel and fully
sustainable/renewable anti-corrosion epoxy primer formulation that meets or
exceeds the corrosion protection that is provided by the toxic chromate-based
systems. In addition, it is projected this primer will replace other epoxy
primers that rely on additional valuable metal assets, for example zinc. The
pioneering approach developed in this project utilizes US resources/scientific
knowledge and it employs a new class of all-organic anti-corrosion pigments
bringing in a fresh and very effective scientific method. These pigments will be
manufactured in the US with no reliance on foreign metal supplies or labor; the
chemical processing methods developed in this SBIR effort are US patent pending
and are both environmentally and economically outstanding in performance. This
SBIR project is a case where US based innovation and science combine to create
US jobs in manufacturing and bring to light a transformational technology in the
anti-corrosion epoxy primer business. Stopping corrosion keeps US commercial and
defense assets in service, keeps productive people working, and keeps our
country safe and prosperous. Mitigating corrosion is truly one of the important
technological challenges ahead in the 21st century as natural resources and
energy become limited and more costly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings to fruition first a detailed new and disruptive chemical
synthesis technology for an economically and environmentally sound production of
specific all-organic anti-corrosive pigments. The project utilizes these all-
organic anti-corrosive pigments to advance and create a new class of Low
volatile-organic-compound (VOC) anti-corrosion epoxy primers based on the art
and science of solvent selection and blending. This combination of innovations
is positioned to provide the first non-chromate and all-organic anti-corrosion
epoxy primer that can replace with ease the present toxic and costly chromate-
based primers. Current synthetic technologies cannot afford a cost-effective
route to the additives and this program addresses that concern and will prepare
several examples at the 100 g to 1 Kg scale to fully demonstrate the technology
and provide parametric data for the design of larger chemical reactors and
processes. This Phase I project will also create a new series of high-solids
epoxy coatings that meet the Low-VOC emission value, dry time, corrosion
protection, and adhesion requirements as laid out in appropriate military
standards; primers developed in the project will be tested to meet these
stringent requirements. These data will provide the critical performance and
test data necessary to validate the coating formulations for certification and
acceptance in both the commercial and defense marketplaces.