* 1622768
* Measuring Quantum Dot Interactions Using Coherent Two-Dimensional Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steven Cundiff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 316,046.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor quantum dots have
discrete energy levels similar to those in an atom, thus they are often
described as as "artificial atoms". Unlike atoms, the energy level structure of
a quantum dot can be engineered, making them attractive for a wide range of
applications ranging from highly efficient lasers to quantum information
processing. In addition, quantum dots can be embedded in solid-state devices, a
key feature for use in applications. When quantum dots are brought into
proximity to one another, their interaction results in new states, just as the
interaction between atoms results in the formation of molecules. This project
will employ a new coherent optical method to observe and characterize the
interactions between quantum dots with sufficient spatial resolution to isolate
a single dot or a small set of interacting dots. This new optical method is
inspired by established magnetic resonance tachniques that are used to determine
molecular structure. Furthermore, the spectroscopic technique developed by this
project will have broader applications. For example, it could be used to study
excitation processes in photovoltaic solar cells. This project will combine
research and education by training students in the multidisciplinary field of
coherent optical spectroscopy of solid state systems. This training will include
the basic science of the interaction of condensed matter systems with light as
well as practical aspects of photonics and
microfabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor quantum dots grown by molecular beam
epitaxy have possible applications ranging from low-threshold laser diodes to
implementing qubits in quantum information science. Epitaxially grown quantum
dots have been studied extensively using single dot techniques, however single
dot techniques are not as good at probing the coupling between quantum dots.
Interactions can dramatically alter the optical and electronic properties of
quantum dots. Furthermore, quantum information schemes require that there be
controllable interactions between qubits, and hence between quantum dots. This
project probes the coupling between quantum dots using a new implementation of
optical multi-dimensional coherent spectroscopy based on photocurrent readout
and applying it to small ensembles of InGaAs quantum dots. Two-dimensional
coherent spectroscopy was originally developed in nuclear magnetic resonance.
Over the last decade, there has been extensive progress in implementing two-
dimensional spectroscopy in the infrared and optical regions of the spectrum.
The principal investigator's group is a leader in developing methods for using
it to study electronic transitions in semiconductors using near-infrared light.
Recently these studies have included large ensembles of GaAs natural quantum
dots and InAs self-assembled quantum dots. However, the methods used so far,
based on detecting an optical signal produced by the third-order nonlinear
response of the sample, are not appropriate for use on small ensembles of
quantum emitters, which will not generate a well formed signal beam. Thus this
project uses a new approach to two-dimensional spectroscopy that detects a
fourth-order population through measurement of photocurrent. This approach will
be applied to InAs quantum dots and quantum dot molecules embedded in a diode
structure. The goal is to understand and measure the interactions between
quantum dots to advance the fundamental understanding of quantum phenomena in
these nanoscale systems. This understanding can improve the design of systems
with target quantum mechanical states and dynamics.