* 1622852
* STTR Phase I:  Human Microphysiological Model for Assaying the Efficacy of Drugs for Myelin Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Michael Moore, AxoSim Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a commercially-viable human cell-based
model to screen experimental drugs for their efficacy in treating myelin
disorders. Current screening methods used in the R&amp;D of new drugs fail to
successfully predict translation from discovery to clinical success. This
absence results in high attrition rates, increased development time, and
significant R&amp;D costs, most acutely in neurological applications.
Pharmaceutical companies devote up to 15 years and spend over $2B to bring a
single drug to market. On average, 89% of drugs entering clinical trials fail,
while drugs targeting the central nervous system (CNS) fail at a rate of 92%,
due largely to the poor predictive validity of current animal models. As a case
study of demyelinating diseases, multiple sclerosis (MS) affects approximately
400,000 people in the United States and 2.5 million people worldwide. MS
therapeutics represent a $17.2B global market, with an estimated late-stage
preclinical testing market of $50M annually. Development of the proposed
screening platform has the potential to better predict clinical efficacy, while
substantially reducing the time and cost associated with developing new drugs
for MS and other demyelinating disorders, accelerating treatments for millions
of patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
establish the technical feasibility of using a 3D model of living nerve/brain
tissue for screening drugs to treat disorders of myelin, the fatty encasement
surrounding nerve axons. The project aims to build on preliminary work to
include cells relevant to the central nervous system. It will then be shown that
myelination, demyelination, and remyelination can be assessed using clinically-
relevant, physiological metrics. The final goal is to demonstrate the
feasibility of using a humanized assay, derived from induced pluripotent stem
cells, a renewable source of human cells. The resultant model system will be
truly unique, comprised of human cells in an anatomical arrangement that mimics
living nerve tissue, unlocking the potential for clinically-relevant metrics far
earlier in the drug development lifecycle.