* 1622240
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing Nanopores to Facilitate Delivery of Intracellular Cryoprotectants for Biopreservation at Low Temperature
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Xiaoxi Wei, X-Therma Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 224,995.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop a cutting-edge nanotechnology that
will greatly enhance biological preservation of regenerative medicines such as
stem cells, complex tissues, and organs. Such a technology has the potential to
changing regenerative healthcare forever. It would change biobanking for on-
demand cells and tissues and improve mass trauma care and advanced personalized
medical procedures. Biopreservation is required in regenerative medicine at
nearly all levels in the acquisition of source material, isolation, storage and
shipment of a final product to patient. Yet, critically, the field lacks the
ability to safely and efficiently preserve these tissues and medicines severely
limiting product shelf life. Nowhere is the absence of a biobanking technology
more palpable than organ transplantation, where the time window between donor
and recipient (4-7 hours) is not enough to properly match donations, screen for
pathogens, or transport distances. More people will die from premature organ
failure than cancer. Enabling the United States to safely bank organs at subzero
temperature will significantly enhance national healthcare. The US faces strong
commercial and competitiveness reasons to invest in all facets of regenerative
medicine, including organ therapies. Cryopreservation solutions would indirectly
enable significant savings to the healthcare system, the patient, and healthcare
insurance companies with the cost savings from regenerative medicine treatments
estimated to be nearly $250 billion per year in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cytotoxicity of current biopreservation techniques is
largely associated with inefficient cryoprotective agent and water delivery
across the cell membrane during cooling leading to irreparable cell damage from
ice formation. The goal of this project is to establish a fundamentally
different approach to cryoprotective agent optimization by developing first-in-
the-field bioinspired nanopores as transmembrane mega highways to facilitate
safe and efficient intracellular delivery and removal of cryoprotective agents
during cryopreservation. Past research has demonstrated the reliability of
constructing well-defined nanotubular assemblies via the enforced stacking of
shape-persistent macrocycles based on the interplay of multiple hydrogen-
bonding, dipole-dipole, and aromatic pi-pi stacking interactions and their self-
insertion into lipid bilayers. These rationally designed organic nanopores will
serve as selective transmembrane channels when protein channels malfunction at
or below 3 Â°C. As a result, the cell's exposure time to reach ice-free
cryopreservation temperature will be significantly reduced. Post-preservation
cell yield and viability will be greatly improved by reducing intracellular ice
formation. Upon rewarming, these organic nanopores will facilitate rapid removal
of the cryoprotective agents. At physiological temperature, the nanopores will
seal off, and be washed out from the system resulting in low toxicity. Nanopore
function and effect will be examined using liposome-based glucose transport,
cell-based toxicity and cell-based cryopreservation assays.