* 1622726
* I-Corps:  A Novel Design for the Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Arturo Ayon, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed device is a transformational but simple mask that a person wears
while sleeping to treat obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a serious sleep disorder
that affects over 30 million people in the U.S. alone. The main problem is that
the current technology, while effective at treating OSA, is cumbersome and
uncomfortable, causing roughly 50% of patients to stop using treatment as
directed. Left untreated, OSA increases a person's risk of high blood pressure,
heart attack, stroke, and other medical complications. The economic problem is
that non-compliance negatively impacts the cost effectiveness of treatment. The
proposed mask seeks to solve the compliance problem by providing a device that
was designed to make treatment easier and more convenient for the user without
sacrificing clinical effectiveness. The innovative design with no ancillary
attachments leads to increased comfort, enhanced portability, and improved
compliance, all at a lower price point. Increasing compliance will improve
patient outcomes and the cost effectiveness of treatment, directly benefiting
the patient, doctor, and health insurance provider.

The $4 billion worldwide respiratory OSA market is in need of a product designed
to yield compliance. Unlike traditional machines, the proposed device was
developed with no hoses or cables, making treatment easier and more convenient
for the user without sacrificing clinical effectiveness. This device is capable
of generating positive air pressure (PAP) without using motors, blowers, or
needing electricity. Its innovative design with zero ancillary attachments leads
to a dramatically lower price point, increased comfort, and portability, making
it much easier to use and maintain. Commercial impact in the US relies on
regulatory clearance by the FDA for product sale and fitting within existing
insurance reimbursement codes. The market need and best first customer segment
will be identified by the I-Corps team. The technology will be licensed to a new
startup company formed by the Entrepreneurial Lead. The company will pursue
grant and private equity funding to further commercialization efforts, including
pursuit of an SBIR Phase I grant to support continued prototype development,
initial clinical validation, and initiation of the FDA regulatory approval
process.