* 1622875
* STTR Phase I:  Engineering Design Instruction Software for implementing Objectives of Next (EDISON) Generation Standards in K-12
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Christopher Whitmer, Parametric Studio Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project, the Engineering Design Instruction Software for
implementing Objectives of Next generation standards, will combine Science
Technology Engineering and Math (or STEM) concepts together with engineering
design, simulation, 3-D printing, and gaming. When finished the project will
produce a virtual workspace for K-12 engineering design-test-build projects,
where elementary and middle level students can create concepts, build models,
simulate and analyze, and fabricate designs for several types of projects like
bridges, CO2 cars, rockets, and robots. This STTR project will offer positive
exposure to STEM in the early and middle grades, when many students lose
interest in these economically vital fields. Leveraging gamification, team
collaboration, and 3D printing, this project provides an enriching engineering
design experience that connects STEM content to real world applications. In
making these real-world connections through engineering this project seeks to
improve student academic performance in traditional science and math subjects.
These features of this project are also designed to motivate and actively engage
underrepresented students who may otherwise be reluctant to enter STEM fields.
This work has the potential to promote more widespread integration of
engineering in K-12 and better prepare students for future careers in STEM This
SBIR Phase I project will produce a collaborative workspace software that will
use realistic design tools to support upper elementary and middle level students
to create concepts, build models, simulate and analyze, export files for
physical prototyping (3-D printing, cutting, or machining), and integrate with
testing. Through these base of operations, this project will provide what other
engineering curricula cannot - powerful tools for student evaluation,
instructional assistance, and performance tracking. This project will apply real
engineering tools to supports common challenges that appear in engineering
curricula (for example, bridges, CO2 cars, and robotics). Using the commercially
available engines, user experience frameworks, and custom engineering tools, the
team will create a gamified design environment with parametric geometry
creation, modeling, analysis synthesis, simulation and multi-player
collaboration capabilities. In Phase I, the project will be used and evaluated
within several 5th-6th grade classrooms and a week long summer camp. Supporting
curricular materials will be developed in collaboration with our STTR partner
institution. The goal at the end of this project is the release of baseline
product for commercialization that contains two different design project modules
complete with software, curricular support materials, and evaluation data.