* 1622771
* STTR Phase I:  A micro-Thermionic Ionization Source for Chemical Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Patrick Lewis, Defiant Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/28/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will advance the
development of new portable gas analysis systems. Portable analysis systems can
provide timely information about the surroundings, leading to better decisions
in critical situations. For law enforcement, a portable detector based on the
proposed technology will enable officers to focus an investigation on specific
targets, whether narcotics or explosives. Likewise, for military and civil
defense operations, trace explosives can be detected even when the bulk of the
material is well concealed. A portable system with the proposed detector will
easily be able to identify and quantify chemical warfare agents and pesticides
at single part-per-billion levels in complex backgrounds. With precise agent
detection at these low levels, the users of these systems will have better
information and more time to act on that information. In agriculture, a better
detector will lead to a more judicious use of pesticides and thereby increase
their effectiveness while reducing human exposure. Considering all of the
potential applications, the proposed work could lead to significant advancements
in a $600 million segment of the $2 billion annual gas detection market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is based on the
years of work that Sandia National Laboratories and Defiant Technologies have
invested in the development of micro components and systems for chemical
detection. The proposal objective is to develop a new ionization source that can
replace radioactive materials, and other larger and more power hungry thermionic
sources. The new thermionic ionization source will use micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) fabrication techniques to form a millimeter-scale heating element
that operates efficiently at 600 degrees C. New techniques to formulate and
deposit low function work materials on these heaters will be developed and
exploited to construct the ionization sources. The research will entail an
exploration of alkali metal formulations for the low-work function material,
heater fabrication for longevity, and source operating conditions for possible
failure mechanisms. At the end of this Phase I effort, the goal is to develop an
ionization source that can be coupled with portable gas chromatograph and
portable ion mobility systems for the detection and analysis of explosives,
chemical warfare agents, pesticides, and narcotics.