* 1622149
* SBIR Phase I:  Acoustic Size Fractionation of Chromatography Column Particles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Joe Gatewood, Acoustic Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 01/31/2018
* USD 224,886.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the creation of technology that uses sound waves to
separate small particles by size with a level of effectiveness that far
surpasses what is currently available commercially. Such particle size control
is important for enhancing the efficiency of separation techniques such as
chromatography. Chromatography is broadly used in science and manufacturing to
separate components in a mixture. The technology could have applicability in a
broad array of uses both industrial, pharmaceutical and biomedical.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The technical objectives in this Phase I research project
are the development of a novel high-flow, two-stage acoustic fractionation
technology. Acoustic concentration in a flow stream using pressure to force
cells and particles across a flow has been well established. Current systems
generate sufficient acoustic force to concentrate biological cells and small
particles by establishing an ultrasonic standing wave between transmitters and
reflectors that are tens to hundreds of microns apart. These dimensions of a
small channel in the systems limit the sample flow rate to hundreds of
microliters per minute. The proposed R&amp;D will employ novel proprietary
technology developed by Acoustic Biosystems for producing a single planar
acoustic node in a wide rectangular channel. The rectangular flow cross section
supports high sample flow rates through the resonant acoustic waves. The
envisioned acoustic fractionation technology will use two precisely aligned
acoustic pressure nodes within a fluid laminar flow profile. The first acoustic
zone will align all the particles in the solution and the second zone will
spread the particles across the flow by size. Collection of slices of the
laminar flow will yield narrow size fractions of the particles