* 1622840
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Computational System for Assessing Genetic Provenance in Crop Plants and its Practical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Yuri Nikolsky, Prosapia Genetics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,416.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a highly accurate genotype
analysis technique and the computational pipeline for assessing genetic
provenance in crop plants. The commercial potential of the proposed products and
services is based on the need to increase crop yield and accelerate breeding
programs. The proposed technology will revolutionize the field of plant
selection by enabling breeders to analyze genotypes of individual plants and
optimize crosses. Provided that most of ancestry data on major crops are not
publicly available, the platform opens up a range of opportunities for
researchers and practitioners. Since it is organism-independent, the software
will be applied for analysis of biodiversity and adaptation of species to
climate change. These species include, for example, fruit fly, Arabidopsis,
Medicago, rat, mouse, as well as endangered plant and animal species such as
pandas, bonobos, or whales. Organism-specific pipelines for predicting phenotype
using a whole-genome prediction and modeling approach will be established. Free
educational versions of the solution will be provided to academic institutions.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop and test a novel software modeling
solution that will be the first-in-class commercial "whole genome" tool in the
booming agro-genomics segment, designed to deduce the exact percentages of
genetic lines that went into given organism solely based on its genotype. This
tool will help farmers to effectively select plants with required traits, and
also will automatically identify possible genetic contamination that is a common
problem in plant species. The solution will be cloud based with a friendly front
end enabling breeders and biologists to easily operate and gain insights from
complex plant datasets. This visualization tool will be customizable for various
species and types of geographical/climate data. Visual integration of
geographical, phenotypical, and genomic data will help breeders deducing
relationship among individual plants, strains, and variants. The phenotypes will
include yield, height, photosynthetic performances, metabolites concentrations,
fitness, drought tolerance, cold tolerance, and quantitative disease resistance.
The software will be a revolutionary discovery tool enabling agro-companies to
significantly reduce number of breeding experiments, and make the breeding
process predictable and efficient.