* 1622894
* STTR Phase I:  Synchronizing Video Imagery with Wearable Sensor Data and Side-by-Side Modeling Software to Develop Healthy Habits in Children Who Participate in Sports
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Reuben Kraft, CoachSafe PlaySafe LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will develop Android and Apple iPhone apps to allow
for mobile-enabled, rapid correction of improper or dangerous techniques in
sports activities. The project goal is to eliminate dangerous, unhealthy
behaviors in young athletes and replace them with non-damaging skills and
techniques. In its simplest form, the technology presents a player with a video
clip of their own behavior, paired with head impact data measured using worn
sensors and physics-based simulations showing what occurs in the brain during
dangerous hits. The quantitative biomechanical data is used to predict possible
functional brain deficits and presented to the user in an age-appropriate
manner. By combining a mouth guards with sensors, sideline video replay
technology, physics-based brain simulations, on-line instruction and
observational learning, coaches and trainers will be able to correct dangerous
techniques and behaviors in sports activity as they occur. Coaches and trainers
will also be able to show players video of their own technique following a
significant impact to the head next to a synchronized clip of an athlete
completing the same movements, but with no head impact. As a result, children
and adolescents will learn there is never an acceptable level of head contact.
Whether applied to football, hockey, lacrosse, soccer or one of any number of
physical activities, this coaching tool will provide immediate instruction and
self-reinforcing behavior modification. The proposed technology enables
unprecedented resolution of the biomechanical response during sports activities
by combining synchronized video, wearable impact sensors and physics-based
simulations that will identify dangerous incidents, with the goal of obtaining
real time technique modification and therefore a dramatic reduction in the
occurrence of injury. It is important to note that while sensor technology and
analytical methods have advanced dramatically in the last several years, the
integration of synchronized video technology would be a critical tool in helping
players understand and prevent dangerous head impacts from occurring in contact
sports. The mobile apps will be an innovative approach to reducing the number
and severity of concussive and sub concussive blows to the head. Integrating
sensor data, synchronized with video technology and physics-based impact
simulations showing what occurs in the brain during dangerous impacts into a
mobile app is innovative to the sporting industry and offers an opportunity to
improve player safety in sports. The broader impact of the system is to show
students and athletes dangerous techniques as soon as they occur along side of
how their behavior could be modified, which will reduce the occurrence of
serious injuries in sports and fitness pursuits causing health-enhancing
activities to be rendered much safer.