* 1622389
* EAGER: Novel techniques for the selective collection and separation of highly-oxidized organic compounds through the application of CO2-triggered "switchable" polarity surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Drew Gentner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 100,000.00

1622389&lt;br/&gt;Gentner, Drew&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses an
important aspect of the chemistry of air pollutants. The research will develop
novel tools and methods that overcome present analytical barriers. The principal
investigator (PI) will develop new technologies to address future problems
related to the environment or other challenges relevant to society. This
proposal has clear broad impacts on society and well-being via addressing the
environmental health risk of air pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this proposal is to demonstrate the efficacy of "switchable"
polarity materials for the collection and/or chromatographic separation of the
most elusive components of the atmosphere that have high polarity and
hydrophilicity due to their highly oxidized state. The PI will explore and
evaluate methods that use switchable surfaces to alter the polarity of sample
collection media and/or sample analysis with changes in the stationary phase of
gas or liquid chromatography systems. The polarity of switchable materials is
increased via reversible reactions with added carbon dioxide (CO2). Subsequent
purging with an inert gas or solvent removes the CO2 and returns the material to
its low-polarity precursor. This provides a novel and potentially transformative
way to selectively collect/separate polar chemical species that are thermally-
degraded or lost in other analytical instrumentation. The techniques proposed
would seed a new generation of chromatography methods (with Liquid and Gas
Chromatography) where the polarity of the stationary phase can be changed rather
than the mobile phase, opening new avenues of analysis and potentially reducing
solvent needs. There are many applications to gas- and aerosol-phase compounds
relevant to the atmosphere, but also to other laboratory methods where polar
analytes require collection/separation from a fluid or chromatographic
separation without solvents. This includes novel air sampling inlets of minimal
size with coupled collection and separation of polar compounds on the same
device. There is also the potential for sampling systems that are directly
applicable to the study of water-soluble compounds and their aqueous chemistry
in the atmosphere. The results of these methods will seed a new understanding of
atmospheric oxidation chemistry that will improve models and enable
comprehensive air quality management plans. The anticipated results will aid in
sustainability science by providing new usable knowledge to model future air
quality, formulate policy, and inform the public. The proposal also contributes
to training and career development for a postdoctoral scholar. The results will
be quickly disseminated to the public via a potential high-impact journal
publication and publically available papers and information on the group
website.