* 1622340
* STTR Phase I:  Affinity Chromatographic Cell Sorting (AFFICS) System for Simultaneous Multiple Cell Separation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Shashi Murthy, QT Holdings Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a cell sorting system to
allow separation of two or more cell types to be used in cell therapies for
treatment of cancer and other diseases. Purification of specific cell
populations from complex materials such as blood is a critical component of cell
therapy manufacturing. However, since most protocols for clinical-grade cell
purification rely on binding of magnetic particles to cells, promising cell
therapies face the risk of transplanting residual and potentially toxic magnetic
particles to human subjects. The steps currently required to eliminate this risk
add complexity, time and cost to cell therapy manufacturing, limiting the wide-
scale usefulness of promising new cell therapies. This project will develop a
novel cell separation technology, free of magnetic particles, that can be
readily scaled to levels required to enable clinical-scale manufacturing of
highly pure and highly viable cell-based therapeutics. The aim is to perform
multi-target cell sorting while simultaneously leaving cells free from
contaminating tags.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel affinity chromatographic
cell sorting (AFFICS) system, based on proprietary dissolvable hydrogel
microbeads, for efficient simultaneous separation of two and more cell types
directly from heterogeneous cell environments without requiring magnetic or
fluorescent tagging of cells. To achieve this, the objectives are to 1) Design a
column-based affinity chromatographic system with functionalized dissolvable
hydrogel microbeads for single surface marker-based cell isolation from complex
cell suspensions, leading to cell capture and target cell populations with >85%
purity and viability. 2) Develop tandem connection of multiple columns for
sequential cell separation based on two or more surface markers on a large
scale. 3) Optimize the rapid release mechanism required for efficient
simultaneous separation of two and more cell subpopulations while maintaining
cell phenotype and viability. The proposed system will provide multi-target cell
sorting at clinical scale while simultaneously leaving cells free of residual
magnetic or fluorescent affinity tags.