* 1622071
* SBIR Phase I:  Modular ozonation technology for improved quality and reduced spoilage from farm to retail
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* David Maneval, SurfPlasma, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to conserve food supply and reduce waste from farm
to consumer. According to a Natural Resources Defense Council report, 40% of US
food goes uneaten, roughly $165 billion in wasted food/year, much of it due to
produce spoilage. Reducing food losses by just 15 percent could feed over 25
million Americans per year when 1/6th lack a secure food supply and many,
especially children, lack affordable sources of healthy foods like fresh fruits
and vegetables. Through diminished spoilage losses and extended shelf life, the
proposed ozonation evice could improve quality, nutritional value, and
accessibility of healthy foods and thereby help reduce obesity. Minimizing
losses while maintaining safety and quality may promote agricultural production
through elimination of spoilage organisms and premature ripening, yielding
higher profits. Potential markets include produce supply chain harvest,
transport, storage, and distribution businesses that use shipping and storage
containers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I
research project are fabrication and development of a prototype APM (Active
Packaging Module) to reduce fresh fruit and vegetable spoilage losses during
storage and transit using patented and patent pending ozonation technologies.
Activities will include: 1) Design and construction of small (~ 1 inch cube)
modular self-contained battery powered units designed to go inside shipping
containers containing perishable produce; 2) Determination of electrical and
operational (exposure time, temperature, humidity, placement in container)
parameters required to initiate and maintain different levels of spoilage
control within industry standard containers of different sizes; 3) Correlation
of these parameters with effective log reductions in viable counts of known
inoculated or natural spoilage and pathogenic microorganism when utilizing the
APM as compared to baseline; 4) Repetition of activities iteratively (design
considerations, lifetime and efficacy testing) to optimize the desired outcomes.