* 1622585
* Workshop: Recent Advances in Computational Methods for Nanoscale Phenomena; Ann Arbor, Michigan; August 29-31, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Dennis Kochmann, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 04/30/2017
* USD 19,500.00

This grant provides financial support for the workshop entitled "Recent Advances
in Computational Methods for Nanoscale Phenomena" to be held on the campus of
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan, August 29-31, 2016. This
workshop will bring together researchers from a variety of disciplines
(including theoretical and computational mechanics, applied mathematics,
materials science and physics) to discuss recent advances in computational
methods to elucidate nanoscale mechanics, nanoscale transport and material
behavior at the nanoscale, along with its influence on macroscopic material
properties. The grant will support junior scientific participants to prepare the
next generation of scientific leaders in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due
to the small time and length scales involved, predicting mechanics and physics
at the nanoscale is extremely challenging, particularly as relevant experiments
are often not available. This workshop is a step towards developing reliable,
efficient, accurate and predictive computational techniques across the relevant
time and length scales. The development of such techniques will enable
researchers not only to understand and predict the behavior of currently-
available materials but also drive the development and creation of novel
materials through bottom-up design strategies, aligning well with the Materials
Genome Initiative and the grand challenge of materials by design. The workshop
will consist of 36 oral presentations, poster presentations, and time for
discussions and individual interactions.