* 1622136
* SBIR Phase I:  Low friction and high durability PTFE nanoparticle composite coating for bearings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Samuel Beckford, SurfTec, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is a comprehensive
investigation into the feasibility of using a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
nanoparticle composite coating as a lubricant in ball bearings for washdown duty
electric motors. The successful transition from traditional lubricants to solid
lubricants in manufacturing has tremendous implications for the US economy and
the environment. Currently, annual lubrication-related maintenance costs are as
high as $1 trillion, and consumption of petroleum-based lubricants is estimated
to reach 43.78 million metric tons by the end of 2016. The effective
implementation of this technology will reduce maintenance costs and downtime by
eliminating premature bearing failure. This project will serve as a proof point
for the adoption of nano-coating technologies for reducing friction and wear in
manufacturing equipment. It will also reduce barriers to entry for these
coatings in industries dominated by outdated lubrication practices. The total
applicable market size for washdown duty electric motors is estimated to be $50
million, and a substantial near-term revenue opportunity for the proposed
technology in this sector will be the focus of this effort. This beachhead
opportunity serves as an industry validation point for the proposed technology
and an entry point to other industrial and manufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
based on improving the mechanical properties and adhesion of PTFE coatings
through the use of an adhesive polymer basecoat and a nanoparticle filler within
a PTFE topcoat. This reduces friction and increases wear-life, allowing PTFE
coatings to be used in applications from which they have historically been
precluded due to high wear and delamination. Preliminary results show that the
proposed coating exhibits a two thousand-fold improvement in wear-life over
virgin PTFE. The goal of the proposed research and development work is the
optimization of the coating chemical composition and deposition parameters to
maximize the performance in rolling element applications. These parameters play
a critical role in the wear, vibration, and friction that occurs in coated
bearings. Benchtop tribological tests will be performed to measure these
properties under accelerated wear testing conditions and provide feedback during
the optimization process. A thorough understanding of the process-structure-
property relationship of the proposed coating will lead to new scientific
knowledge which will be disseminated through applicable journals and trade
publications. The successful completion of the proposed work will result in
PTFE-lubricated ball bearings with a wear-life which is more than 50% improved
as compared to grease-lubricated bearings.