* 1622560
* Collaborative Research: GeoGONAF: Analysis of active deformation and strain transfer along the Izmit Bay-Marmara Sea segment of the North Anatolian Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Michael Floyd, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2018
* USD 122,735.00

There are few places in the world that more closely match the seismic hazard
potential of the San Francisco Bay Area of California than the Marmara Sea area
of Turkey. In both places a magnitude 7 earthquake threatens to shake a maritime
megacity. The current population of Istanbul is approaching 15 million, with an
annual tourist population of 3 million, and the probability of an M7.1
earthquake in the next 20 years estimated as 35-70%. In 1766 a previous
earthquake, similar to the one anticipated, destroyed Istanbul when its
population was less than 0.5M. Some believe that a repeat of this earthquake is
imminent. GeoGONAF is an acronym for an international collaborative project to
monitor the subterranean and submarine strain changes that will precede the
earthquake. Its scientific team does not expect to predict the precise time of
this future earthquake, but they are optimistic that the dense array of
monitoring instruments now listening closely to the approaching rupture will
capture a rich harvest of signals that will indicate which of the several
branches of the North Anatolian fault is most likely to rupture. It has taken
the better part of decade to install these instruments around the city and on
offshore islands, but now a stream of data flows into laboratories in Turkey,
Germany and the US, that in principle permit the scientific teams of these
collaborating nations to identify signals characteristic of approaching rupture.
Lessons learned in Turkey will have direct application in the interpretation of
similar precursory processes occurring beneath the Hayward fault located in the
San Francisco Bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six strain-meters were installed in
boreholes during the final phase of GeoGONAF (the Geodetic component of the
Geophysical Observatory to study the North Anatolian Fault near Istanbul). The
strain-meters can detect strain changes of 10e-12 (1 picostrain), equivalent to
a change in the diameter of the Earth of one fifth of the diameter of a human
hair. The stabilization phase following inserting these ultra-sensitive
instruments at depths of 30 m to 100 m underground is almost over (1-3 years)
and six streams of strain data at 100 Hz sampling rate (as of June 2016) now
complement data from the borehole seismometers and GPS instruments installed by
the German, US and Turkish collaborators of GeoGONAF. The current project plans
first to calibrate the strain-meters using tides and inbound seismic waves, and
then to monitor episodic and continuous signals occurring in the Marmara region.
Specifically a search for slow slip events on the submarine faults south and
southeast of Istanbul is planned. These slow creep events are invisible to
seismometers but are seen as increments on GPS data and as distinctive time-
evolving signals on strain-meters with durations of minutes to days. On 18 March
2016 a large slow slip events on the first of the six strain-meters to be
commissioned was captured in remarkable detail, its importance being that such
events incrementally advance rocks already poised for imminent rupture towards a
future earthquake. Although each increment brings an earthquake closer, it is
too early to know on which of three faults south of Istanbul this will occur.
The proposed project will examine incoming strain and GPS data on a daily basis
to search for coherent signals occurring synchronously on the array of sensors,
in order to identify slipping patches of faults and the area and extent of their
slip. Preliminary interpretations indicate that large creep events cannot occur
more than once per year on any given patch of a fault but that creep events may
be quite frequent throughout the interconnected network of faults beneath and
near the Sea of Marmara. As part of a larger study of the fault system
additional surface creep-meters will be installed specifically to identify the
propagation characteristics of 2-16 mm amplitude creep-events along the North
Anatolian fault to the east of Marmara.