* 1622160
* SBIR Phase I:  Onsite production of CO from carbon dioxide using modified PEM Electolyzers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Etosha Cave, Opus 12 Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing a
new CO2 utilization technology to recycle carbon dioxide back into fuels and
chemicals. By utilizing CO2 as a feedstock instead of fossil fuels, this
technology could reduce U.S. industry?s dependence on imported energy and reduce
the nation?s greenhouse gas emissions. By commercializing the electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide, revenue could be generated from industrial
emissions, which are currently discarded as waste. This project could lead to
the generation of new U.S. advanced manufacturing jobs in order to build
electrolysis equipment. The initial application of the technology is the
production of carbon monoxide from CO2. Carbon monoxide is a valuable synthesis
gas for producing specialty chemicals, and at the large scale, it can be used to
synthesize transportation fuels. By scaling up electrochemical CO2 reduction
technology, the commercialization of the project innovation would broadly
promote CO2 utilization and decrease the nation?s total CO2 emissions from
industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key barrier to the widespread
deployment of electrochemical carbon dioxide utilization technology has been the
lack of an electrolyzer design capable CO2 reduction with high production rates
and high energy efficiency. This project will use a novel reactor design to
carry out the conversion of CO2 to CO. The specific reactor design in this
project has high energy efficiency and high reaction rates necessary to make the
process of CO2 utilization cost competitive. There are other advantages to the
proposed electrolyzer design: years of optimization have lowered capital costs,
and it is modular and scalable. By utilizing an existing reactor design, it will
be possible to scale CO2 conversion quickly to reach larger markets and decrease
emissions through the use of CO2. The goal of this project is to prove the
feasibility of cost-competitive CO2 reduction in the proposed reactor design.
Rapid iteration and testing will be used to determine whether key performance
indicators can be achieved.