* 1622678
* SCH: INT: Anesthesiology Control Tower: Forecasting Algorithms to Support Treatment (ACTFAST)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Avidan, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 589,998.00

There is a significant public health concern in the United States regarding
major complications and death following surgery. Forty million Americans undergo
surgery yearly. Approximately five percent die within a year of their operation,
and roughly ten percent suffer major in-hospital morbidity (e.g., stroke, heart
attack, pneumonia, renal failure, wound infection). Early recognition of risk
and appropriate management could often prevent or modify these adverse outcomes.
We believe that this represents an exciting scientific opportunity. Modern
intraoperative monitoring yields a wealth of data from thousands of operating
rooms across the US. Integration and real-time analysis of these data streams
has the potential to revolutionize perioperative care. We propose to develop,
validate and assess machine-learning, forecasting algorithms that predict
adverse outcomes for individual patients. The forecasting algorithms will be
based on data derived from various sources, including the patient's electronic
medical record, the array of physiological monitors in the operating room, and
evidence-based scientific literature. These algorithms will facilitate patient-
specific clinical decision support, utilizing an innovative approach of an
anesthesiology control tower. The anesthesiology control tower for the operating
room will be conceptually similar to an air traffic control tower for a busy
airport. We are optimistic that the ambitious goal of developing forecasting
algorithms for individual surgical patients can be realized, since members of
our team have already developed and validated similar forecasting algorithms for
critically ill hospital patients. Modifiable risk factors for adverse events
could be detected early during surgery, allowing targeted interventions and
preventive measures. The ACTFAST study will provide important information on the
potential utility of incorporating forecasting algorithms into routine surgical
care, including in under-resourced healthcare settings. This project will also
yield important educational benefits. There will be tremendous learning for the
students who help to develop and validate the forecasting algorithms.
Furthermore, the control tower concept is a disruptive educational innovation,
which will equip anesthesiology trainees with a new ability to provide
simultaneous care to multiple surgical patients. It is notoriously difficult to
construct high fidelity scientific models for individual humans, as we are
complex biological systems. Ultimately, the success of this ambitious project,
which engages interdisciplinary perspectives and applies sophisticated
forecasting algorithms to clinical decision support, will have substantial
scientific and clinical impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern intraoperative
monitoring yields a wealth of data from thousands of operating rooms across the
United States. Integration and real-time analysis of these data streams has the
potential to revolutionize perioperative care. The objective for this
investigation is to exploit our experience in running innovative machine
learning algorithms, including filtering and outcome-related models, in order to
build forecasting algorithms tailored to individual surgical patients. Our
central hypothesis is that with sufficient knowledge of patient characteristics
coupled with repeated, high-fidelity time series data from the intraoperative
electronic medical record, advanced models can be constructed for individual
patients that will forecast risk for adverse postoperative outcomes. First,
using a training dataset, we will apply data mining and machine-learning methods
that we have previously validated to extract useful information from electronic
health records and real-time physiological variables. We will develop algorithms
using hybrid-learning techniques to combine the strength of non-parametric
(generative) models, such as histogram and kernel density estimation, and
parametric (discriminative) models, such as support vector machines, logistic
regressions, and kernel machines to improve predictions of adverse perioperative
outcomes. The goal is to deliver superior prediction quality, with good
interpretability and high computational efficiency, that supports fast
processing of big data. Second, using a testing dataset, we will validate the
predictive accuracy of the developed algorithms, by determining the reliability
in forecasting adverse outcomes. The developed algorithms will be tested for
accuracy of their predictive performance. These evaluation methods include hold-
out sampling, cross-validation, and bootstrap sampling. After being trained and
tested, the performance of the developed algorithms will be additionally
validated prospectively (out-of-sample performance), using standard measures of
accuracy, precision and robustness. We envision that the developed algorithms
will facilitate patient-specific clinical decision support, utilizing an
innovative approach of an anesthesiology control tower, which will be
conceptually similar to an air traffic control tower for a busy airport. The
main contributions of this project will include: (1) new machine-learning
algorithms for forecasting perioperative adverse events from heterogeneous,
multi-scale, and high-dimensional data streams; (2) a clinical decision support
system that identifies prognostic factors and suggests interventions based on
novel feature ranking algorithms; and (3) a transformative approach to the
education of the anesthesiology team and the paradigm of perioperative care.
Successfully advancing real-time analytic methods and modeling for individual
surgical patients, using heterogeneous and sparse data, would have tremendous
scientific and societal impact.