* 1622019
* SBIR Phase I:    Production Optimization of Piezoelectric Fibers to Power Smart Garments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Scott Gaboury, Dipole Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,590.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of a piezoelectric energy harvesting fiber to autonomously power
sensors and other low-power electronics in smart garments. This technology will
allow the fabrication of garments with seamlessly integrated energy harvesting
systems, as opposed to today's rigid electronics, to enable smart garments to
move toward the same breathability, fit and comfort as normal clothing. The
smart garments market is forecast to continue growing at nearly 20% per year
over the next several years, reaching $2 billion by 2018. While there has been
significant publicity around the development of smart garments for measuring
various physiological conditions of athletes, the broader impact of this
technology includes applications for monitoring soldiers, emergency responders
and patients where the loss of sensor power (e.g. for body function monitoring
or environmental sensing) could be dire. While this project will focus on one
particular fiber chemistry, the expected learning that will result in terms of
fiber processing and integration into fabric structures will also be applicable
to other fiber technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is associated with understanding the behavior of fiber-based
piezoelectrics as they are processed into yarns and fabrics. Historically,
ceramic and polymer piezoelectric materials are used in rigid or flexible film
forms, which are not suitable for the development of wearable textile-based
technologies. This effort focuses on a new class of piezoelectric polymer fiber,
poly(gamma-benzyl-alpha,L-glutamate) (ePBLG), than can be produced in a single
electrospinning process and without the need for physical or chemical post-
processing to yield its piezo-activity. The three primary goals of the work will
be: understanding the effect of polymer and process conditions on fiber
dielectric properties, assessing and optimizing the mechanical and dielectric
properties of ePBLG yarns, and evaluating the electrical output of a variety of
orthogonal electrodes, as would be appropriate for woven fabric constructions.
Through this work we will determine the effects on power output when
transforming the ePBLG material into structures required for seamless
incorporation into smart garments. With this knowledge, the piezoelectric power
supply can be properly sized for the balance-of-system within a specific smart
garment design.