* 1622257
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an ultrasensitive, high-throughput autoantibody discovery platform using agglutination-PCR
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* David Seftel, Enable Biosciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,772.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a tool to accelerate the discovery
of new autoantibody biomarkers for the early detection and personalized
treatment of human diseases. Autoantibody biomarkers are broadly used to
diagnose a variety of conditions, such as autoimmune disorders, infectious
diseases and cancers. However, the limited reproducibility, cost and sensitivity
of current autoantibody profiling methods frustrate the discovery of new
biomarkers to improve management of these diseases. A cost-effective
autoantibody profiling platform that is highly sensitive and robust could reveal
changes in the autoantibody repertoire that might have been missed by current
methods. Such a tool would serve as an invaluable pipeline for the discovery of
new biomarkers, augmenting the ability to detect, treat and understand numerous
diseases. In the $7.4 Billion/yr biomarker discovery array market, the proposed
tool, sold as a service or as micro-arrays kits for client use, meets must-have
needs of several customers, including biopharmaceutical companies seeking for
new disease targets, improving clinical trials and academic groups pursuing
better understanding of human biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop a highly multiplexed and sensitive autoantibody
biomarker profiling tool to expedite biomarker discovery. The proposed approach
uses agglutination-PCR, a novel technique developed at UC Berkeley and Stanford.
Agglutination-PCR detects autoantibodies in the solution-phase to ensure proper
folding of antigen probes while leveraging the sensitivity and multiplex power
of standard qPCR instruments. This project employs an innovative synthetic
strategy to prepare and optimize a large panel of probes at low cost. While a
traditional synthetic route would take up to 3 months, the proposed strategy
could reduce the time down to one week. In addition, the probe library for
autoantibody detection will be validated using banked serum/plasma from healthy
patients or patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This experiment
will serve as a powerful proof-of-principle, as SLE displays many distinct
autoantibodies that are challenging to detect with other methods. The analytical
sensitivity and reproducibility of the proposed product will be compared to
standard protein microarrays. The platform will be tested to ensure
reproducibility and ease-of-use. The probe library and protocols will function
as a minimum viable product and the prototype for applications in other
diseases.