* 1622018
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Continuous Flow Manufacturing of Recombinant Proteins Secreted Through the Bacterial Type-III Secretion System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Daniel Wee, T3S Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to streamline and reduce the cost of manufacturing
biopharmaceuticals by developing a heterologous protein expression system for
large scale batch and continuous flow fermentation systems. Currently, many
large molecule therapeutics, such as insulin, are made using bacterial host
organisms. These cells are genetically engineered to produce large quantities of
a desired product, known as a recombinant protein, in the cellular compartments
of these single-celled organisms. However, due to the small size of bacteria and
its unfavorable physiology, these products often end up interfering with
production and require additional costs and effort to then extract, purify and
activate the product. The T3S system is the most efficient known protein
secretion system in bacteria, and could enable rapid export of recombinant
proteins, allowing for these products to be produced in a favorable environment
and negate the need for extraction, exhaustive purification, and costly
reactivation of the product.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop the a protein expression system
based on the bacterial Type-III Secretion (T3S) system for use in scalable
fermenters to maximize the yield output. The goal is to test different media
types as well as different growth and expression conditions, and then quantify
the amount of secreted protein through various techniques. Additionally, this
Phase I project will develop for the first time a continuous flow manufacturing
process with a bacterial production system for greater efficiency, and further
reduce the cost and effort associated with recombinant protein production. Due
to the T3S systems' rapid and direct secretion of products directly into the
supernatant a new filtration system to continually harvest the spent media for
product will be employed. In addition, the purity of the secreted products
directly from the spent media will be characterized to determine what additional
purification steps are required. Finally, the T3S system unfolds proteins as
they are secreted into the oxidative media lead by their N-terminus, in the same
manner that they are translated by the ribosome. This maximizes the possibility
for proteins to form into their native and active confirmation, which will be
verified using LC-MS techniques.