* 1622341
* SHINE:  Prediction of Solar Activity Using Non-linear Dynamo Models and Data Assimilation Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Irina Kitiashvili, Bay Area Environmental Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 343,501.00

This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at developing data assimilation techniques
for physics-based predictions of the solar activity on the scale of the solar
cycle. The project is expected to improve our modeling capabilities to predict
the solar cycle, and to advance our knowledge about the solar dynamo and the
nature of the solar cycle. The data assimilation techniques applied to the
sophisticated dynamo models would benefit the broad solar physics community. The
scientific outcome of this project would be important for the studies in the
heliosphere, the Earth's upper atmosphere, and possibly climate in the long-
term, and it would be beneficial for current and future space missions and
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan of this 3-year SHINE project
includes the following tasks: (i) investigate the sensitivity of model
predictions to uncertainties in observational data for various data assimilation
methods and various reduced dynamo models in a dynamical system formulation;
(ii) develop procedures to estimate the model parameters, system state, and
their uncertainties; verify and test data assimilation procedures by applying
them to simulated data and previous solar cycle observations; (iii) using
current observational data, calculate predictions of the sunspot number and
total poloidal and toroidal magnetic field components for Cycle 25, and provide
uncertainties and confidence intervals; and (iv) develop a data assimilation
procedure for long-term synoptic forecasts of solar activity by using 2D dynamo
models, synoptic magnetograms, and meridional flow measurements from the Solar
Dynamics Observatory and ground-based synoptic networks such as GONG and SOLIS.
The project is directly relevant to the NSF's SHINE program, because it will
provide important knowledge about the global solar activity, which is the major
source of high-energy disturbances in the solar, heliospheric, and
interplanetary environment. Such knowledge is critical for accurate modeling and
prediction of space weather conditions from the solar surface to the Earth and
beyond. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.