* 1622031
* SBIR Phase I:  AirLoom Investigation -- Modular, Scalable Wind Turbine at 23x Mass Savings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Robert Lumley, KiteFarms LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to reduce the capital cost of wind turbines by
an astounding 15x. Its patented, remarkably simple design also reduces
transportation, maintenance, and land costs, and provides greater location and
altitude flexibility. It uses the same aerodynamics as today's dominant wind
technology, the horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT), but with innovations based
on recent research into airborne wind energy generation. Multiple, 6-meter
airfoils (they look like model airplanes) behave exactly like the outer tips of
a conventional wind turbine blade, which is where most of the power is generated
in a HAWT. The airfoils run along a rail- as if you captured kites and put them
on short leashes - and a linear generator makes the power. The proposed research
is based on a proof-of-concept demonstrating that these principles are
scientifically sound. If successful, the project would drastically reduce the
cost of wind-generated electricity, making it competitive with fossil fuels. It
would thus be a completely self-sustaining commercially viable entity, creating
jobs and generating tax revenues. By out-competing fossil fuels, it would use
market forces to encourage renewable energy development, thus reducing energy-
related emissions and improving national health, prosperity, and welfare. The
project's light weight, low profile, and easy, flexible set-up may also have
military applications that would help secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology captures energy through
translational rather than rotational motion in the tips of the airfoils as they
run along a rail tethered by bridles. Its major innovation is a patented
bridling system that handles downwind forces (aerodynamic tip-over forces),
which are the primary cause of the HAWT's mass and cost. Another major
innovation is to run airfoils in an oval rather than a circle. This alters the
math behind swept area, the key input for generation capacity. Because the
oval's swept area is a function of length and height, rather than radius
squared, this project can add capacity in many different ways, escaping the
tyranny of building ever-bigger and -taller circles. The first objective is to
design, test, build, measure, and refine a 100 kilowatt (kW) alpha device. A
meaningful-scale alpha device will demonstrate the project's ability to meet
performance, weight, and cost targets, while facilitating decisions about how to
build far larger devices, and modeling their costs. The methods and approaches
will conquer challenges in five subsystems: structures, aerodynamics, power
generation, control, and grid integration. The team, which includes leading
experts in both academia and industry, will design subsystem options. It will
convene to find the best system-wide design and construct the device, with many
refinements along the way.