* 1622978
* EAGER: Networked Aerial Base Stations for Enabling Emergency Communications During Disaster Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Simon Andrew, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2018
* USD 213,583.00

This Smart and Connected Communities research project focuses on developing an
innovative solution for enabling emergency communications during disaster
recovery. An aerial base station can substitute for a damaged cell tower and
provide cellular connectivity among the first responders and citizens who were
impacted by a natural or manmade disaster until the damaged cell tower is
restored. The project will lead to fundamental understanding of the science and
engineering aspects of the design and deployment of aerial base stations. It
will result in a proof-of-concept for a deployable communication system. Aerial
base stations have the advantage of higher altitude compared to regular cell
towers. They provide better coverage and connectivity to the users. They can be
deployed more quickly after a disaster when compared to Cells on Wheels which
are traditionally deployed by cellular providers during disaster
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the capability to quick
deploy a communication system, which is a technology gap in today's emergency
communication systems. The proposed research investigates efficient strategies
for providing cellular coverage in areas where the coverage is not available or
lost due to loss of cell towers. It brings the network closer to the disaster
victims and relays the voice calls and data between the first responders and
victims. The immediate need for quickly deployable communication systems during
disaster recovery times makes this project a high-risk and high-reward project.
Graduate and undergraduate students, who are participating in this research
project will gain hands-on experience in developing innovative solutions for
communities effected by disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This smart and
connected community project engages local communities including the Fire
Department and the Civil Air Patrol in the City of Denton, Texas, as well as
private organizations in Telecommunications and Aviation industry. The project
will be demonstrated in two phases during the Global City Team Challenge
Exhibitions (2016 and 2017) organized jointly by the U.S. Ignite and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology.