* 1622866
* STTR Phase I:  Effective Treatment of Groundwater Pollution Using a System Utilizing Controlled Release Polymer Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Stephanie Luster-Teasley, AxNano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,934.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop a technology for remediating contaminated
water. These new materials that called controlled release polymer structures
(CRPS) are being developed for In Situ Chemical Oxidation (ISCO). ISCO is an
advanced remediation technology that has proven efficacy in reducing groundwater
pollution. There are currently 1,322 sites on the EPA's National Priorities List
where hazardous contaminants have or are expected to be released into the
environment. CRPS serves this large $60 billion market with a low-cost, flexible
remediation material. This proprietary technology offsets growing water scarcity
and aging infrastructure that leads to compromised water sources. Current ISCO
methods require using hazardous liquid oxidizers that pose significant worker
safety risk and are not effective in all environments. CRPS can be delivered as
a solid designed to treat specific contaminated zones over the course of months
to years. It is expected that CRPS can transform the remediation industry by: 1)
ensuring worker safety, 2) reducing labor costs, 3) allowing sustained, long
term treatment decreasing redeployment cost, 3) providing tunability to meet
specific site characteristics or toxins, and 4) allowing ISCO to be a more
attractive remediation approach due to increased ease of
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I research
project are to support scale-up manufacturing and efficacy testing in
preparation for field-testing at a contaminated groundwater site. This program
will develop and optimize material formulation including active ingredient
loading, stability, and handling / transport for commercial use. Likewise,
methods amendable to large-scale manufacturing will be investigated as well as
performance testing in dynamic flow contaminated water studies. Work will
investigate the ability of CRPS to be tuned for controlled release rates under
multiple environmental simulations to determine contaminant degradation such as
methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). MTBE is used as a fuel additive and is a common
groundwater contaminant that results from leaking underground storage tanks.
MTBE is particularly problematic due to its solubility and mobility in water as
well as environmental persistence. Contaminant degradation by CRPS will be
tested over a range of concentrations to yield dose response curves.
Collectively, this Phase I program will result in a clear understanding of CRPS
performance guiding future pilot scale field studies. Cost and deployment
strategies of the CRPS compared to current ISCO remediation technologies will be
evaluated in preparation for commercialization