* 1622877
* STTR Phase I:  A Fast and Efficient Power System Dynamic Simulator
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Amin Kargarian Marvasti, Endeavor Power Technologies Llc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project includes a significant impact on the electric
power contingency analysis conducted by industries around the globe. The
proposed algorithm can be used by power system planning units, operators,
utility companies, universities, and research centers and provides designers,
engineers, and scientists with the opportunity of a considerable reduction in
computation efforts in performing power grid dynamic simulations, especially in
the grids with high penetration of renewable and small-scale generators. It
allows conducting more studies in shorter time and leads to significant
personnel and equipment cost reduction. In addition, the proposed algorithm is a
significant step forward towards realizing a real-time power system analyzer,
which can be used to alleviate the adverse effects of faults and disturbances in
small and large electric power systems. Thus, the proposed algorithm potentially
helps enhance modern power system reliability and resiliency by providing a fast
and accurate analysis of the system under various possible contingencies. As the
power grid is one of the most important and fundamental infrastructures in each
society, the proposed project will directly enhance social
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will develop a software program for dynamic analysis of power
grids. In electric power industries, grid simulators are vital tools to evaluate
and analyze dynamic behavior of the grid. Power grids are large-scale networks
that are mathematically modeled by thousands of variables and equations.
Analysis of such a large number of variables and equations is very time-
consuming. Integration of intermittent renewable energy resources as well as
small-scale low-inertia generators to modern power grids make the network
analysis even more challenging. In the proposed algorithm (to become a software
program) a novel mathematical solver is proposed that significantly reduces the
computations required to solve the well-known differential-algebraic equations
describing power systems. The proposed algorithm contributes to the reduction of
the size of the Jacobian matrix and removal of the error loop in the power grid
dynamic simulations. These improvements significantly increase the speed of the
proposed software program in analyzing dynamic behavior of power grids when
compared to the available methods. Preliminary studies show that the proposed
power grid simulator can perform at least 30 times faster than the standard
Newton-Raphson algorithm when simulating large grids with significant number of
generators.