* 1622083
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Skeletal Visualization Technology for Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology (DART) Studies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Thomas Villani, Visikol, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop technology to improve skeletal
visualization for developmental and reproductive toxicology (DART) studies.
Every year over $4 billion is spent in the US on toxicology studies for new
pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, pesticides, and industrial chemicals. Any reduction
in testing times or costs could create significant benefits to these industries
by bringing safer chemical products to market more quickly and at lower costs.
Using this technology would reduce both researcher time and the number of
laboratory animals needed to complete common studies, leading to faster and more
efficient safety screening for new chemicals. The aim is to enable contract
research organizations (CRO's) to conduct 30% more studies per year while
reducing costs. These studies are required to ensure that chemicals that make it
into the market place are safe. CRO's that conduct these studies currently have
a very challenging time meeting customer demand. The demand for DART studies has
risen quickly due to the recent REACH legislation in the European Union, and the
back-log has resulted in chemicals and life-saving therapeutics being available
to consumers more slowly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to develop a clearing agent for the visualization of bone structures in
rodents. The goal is to demonstrate the proposed technology can rapidly clear
tissue without causing damage to the specimens. The major problem with the
currently used method, diaphonization, is its tendency to destroy specimens
beyond usability, and the time required to complete the process. Currently, the
longest step is processing the animals to evaluate their skeletons, which is
conducted using a process requiring 14-21 days where the soft tissue is digested
with a strong base and the bones are stained so they can be more easily
visualized. The proposed technology is able to render the soft tissue
transparent so that the bones can be easily visualized in 2-6 days. Through this
project the technology will be optimized for replacing the current approach to
skeletal visualization in DART studies, and then compared in a side-by-side
study to determine if the same end point is reached without damage to the
specimens while reducing overall study time by over 30% and reducing costs. This
project will lead directly to a technology that can be sold to CRO's to replace
their current skeletal visualization technology with an approach that enables
them to drastically increase study throughput and quality.