* 1622985
* Collaborative Research: Using a Hierarchy of Models to Constrain the Temperature Dependence of Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2019
* USD 104,651.00

Climate sensitivity is typically defined as the increase in global temperature
that would result from a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) starting
from the pre-industrial level. Climate sensitivity is the most important factor
in determining the risk posed by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, and
high values of sensitivity with severe consequences cannot be ruled
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate sensitivity is generally assumed to be
constant over the range of climate states relevant to global warming, but this
assumption may not hold if climate sensitivity is high or if greenhouse gas
concentrations rise to a level equivalent to several CO2 doublings (possibly
over several centuries). Recent work by the PIs and others suggests that climate
sensitivity could increase with global temperature, and this increase could
influence the risk of large warming. Work performed here uses a simplified
climate model, the Community Atmosphere Model version 5 (CAM5) coupled to a slab
mixed layer ocean, to examine the temperature dependence of climate sensitivity
over one, two, and three CO2 doublings. The model is used to generate a
perturbed physics ensemble (PPE), in which parameters controlling the behavior
of cloud and convection (for example the fractional mass entrainment rate for
convection) are perturbed as a means of varying the strength of climate
feedbacks. Further work uses a cloud resolving model (the System for Atmospheric
Modeling, or SAM) on an idealized domain to identify reasonable choices of
parameter values. The work also considers the possibility that the parameter
values themselves could change as climate warms, thereby yielding a temperature
dependence in sensitivity. Additional work looks at climate sensitivity in
greenhouse warming simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
version 5 (CMIP5), to determine if the simulations exhibit temperature dependent
climate sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to
the substantial societal consequences by high climate sensitivity and the
desirability of constraints on how much warming can result from anthropogenic
emissions. Temperature-dependent sensitivity may also help to interpret proxy
records of past warm climates and climate change, thus the work has scientific
as well as societal broader impacts. In addition, the project supports a
graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate, so that workforce
development is ensured in this research area.