* 1622789
* Enforcing Cooperation in Networked Societies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2016
* S Nageeb Ali, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 19,265.00

This award funds research on how groups of individuals can encourage honesty and
cooperation. The foundation of economic activity and growth is in the ability of
individuals to trust and trade with each other over time. Throughout human
history, much of economic activity occurs in realms where formal legal
institutions are unwilling or unsuited to enforce cooperative behavior. In such
circumstances, more informal kinds of enforcement can encourage cooperation and
honest dealing. Past research suggests that the networked pattern of social
relationships plays a key role in this kind of informal enforcement. Suppose
someone cheats on an agreement. The cheater will be punished not just by his
partners in the agreement but by others who learn about the cheating through
friends, colleagues, and business partners. This specific research program uses
economic theory and laboratory experiments to study how communities enforce
cooperation through their social networks.

The modeling framework is a novel synthesis of repeated games and social
networks: the PIs study a society of long-lived individuals whose connection in
a social network embodies an ongoing productive relationship with moral hazard.
The research team is developing a new modeling framerwork that permits
individuals to set the stakes of their partnerships: higher stakes lead to
higher cooperation payoffs but increase the temptation to shirk even more. Over
time, each player observes only the behavior in her own partnerships.

The first part of this project develops a theory of network-based contagion
equilibria in which deviations from a cooperative arrangement spread
contagiously in a community. The researchers extend previous results on
contagion to our network setting, and show that contagion equilibria generally
exist, and in certain cases are efficient. They are able to use their
construction of contagion equilibria to analyze how the demands of cooperation
shape social architecture: which social network delivers the greatest
cooperation?

The second part of this project studies an alternative form of informal
enforcement in which individuals who deviate are ostracized by others, but
innocent players are not punished. Towards understanding ostracism, the PIs
develop a theory of community enforcement with communication. Peliminary results
indicate that permanent ostracism is ineffective, as it fails to provide
appropriate communication incentives, but that that temporary ostracism?in which
a guilty player is readmitted to cooperative society on paying a fine?is more
effective. Similarly, ostracism may be effective if players have a particular
form of interdependent preferences: they feel sympathetic towards a player
cheated by another, and are willing to make a transfer to the victim. Finally,
the PIs will conduct laboratory decision experiments to test whether or not
actual people do have this particular kind of sympathy for others.

Broader impacts: This work will help shed light on the arrangements and
institutions seen in developing and transitional economies, as well as
historically. By rigorously studying the limits of cooperation in a networked
society, our work will illuminate the role that informational intermediaries
(services like notarization, credit reporting, and auditing) play in supporting
cooperation. Understanding the significance of social networks in informal
governance will help social scientists and policymakers understand how
communities build social capital and trust.