* 1622451
* SCH: INT: Novel Textile Based Sensors for Inner Prosthetic Socket Environment Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Tushar Ghosh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,662,849.00

Amputation is one of the major causes of disability. Sockets are the important
prosthesis components and physical interface to integrate the prosthetic limbs
mechanically with the amputee's residual limb to replace lost function.
Objective monitoring of the inner socket environment (i.e. pressure,
temperature, and humidity) and residual muscle activity during daily prosthesis
use requires flexible, unobtrusive and multi-modal sensors that can be
integrated into the socket structure without causing subject discomfort. The
lack of such an inner-socket sensor technology has been a long-standing problem
for evaluating the prosthesis socket, preventing the complications elicited by
poor socket design and fit, and advancing the socket technologies. Therefore,
advanced socket technologies are urgently needed and will be developed under
this project to significantly reduce the number of clinic visits, lower the
healthcare costs for amputees, and ultimately improve their quality of life. The
impacts of this project will reach far beyond the immediate scientific and
engineering contributions that result from it. The use of technologies to
further understand the capability of textiles as sensing elements; to design
novel systems to monitor the health; and to increase comfort and gait function
of amputees in new ways, all provide priceless opportunities to motivate and
educate younger generations, their educators and the public-at-large towards the
future advancements in manufacturing and biomedical sensing innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a novel Flexible InneR-socket
Sensing Technology (FIRST) to be seamlessly, unobtrusively, and elegantly
integrated into the lower-limb prosthesis socket. FIRST is based on an
electronic-fabric structure where the fibers of the fabric act as sensory
elements and could simultaneously track tactile forces, moisture/wetness,
electromyography and body temperature at multiple sensing points around the
residual limb. In particular, the focus of this project is to enable these soft
textile-based sensors to address the relevant challenges in the context of
wireless inner socket environment monitoring.The major challenge and overarching
objective of this research is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
coupling and interaction between multi-component fiber cross-sectional
architecture, fabric structure, and its electro-mechanical response to achieve a
multimodal sensor that can be unobtrusively integrated into 'textile-based'
sensory devices in general. We will evaluate the multiple sensing capabilities
of FIRST on patients with lower limb amputations inside and outside of a
laboratory environment. The interpretation of FIRST data would identify
locations of skin problems to enable patient-self management and allow for a
more objective clinical evaluation to avoid the occurrence of potential skin
breakdown and the resulting complications.