* 1622811
* Implementation Project: STEM Center for Research and Development - Increasing Minority Students in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Freddie Dixon, University of the District of Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,099,529.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) seeks to build
on previous successful efforts to increase participation of African-American
students in STEM disciplines. A STEM Center will be established and focus on the
recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of STEM students, as well as
provide additional pedagogical training and upgrading of research skills to
faculty. The goals of the project are to: provide STEM students with active
support designed to highlight learning as an active and ongoing process and with
enrichment as a complement to heighten students' academic performance beyond
their current level of achievement; and provide faculty with activities that
will expand their teaching and research skills so they will be better prepared
to impart knowledge and assist in the development of students' skills as they
forge successful mentor/mentee relationships and productive collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following activities and strategies are designed to
meet the project's goals: development of a discipline-specific Journal Club;
workshops focusing on critical thinking skills to aid students in understanding
the principles involved in the theory and practice of reasoned decision-making;
STEM career explorations through activities that create opportunities for
internships and employment; development of an Individual Development Plan to
assist each student in determining educational paths that will eventually lead
to her or his long-term career goal; a program for "Near Completers" for STEM
students returning to the university requiring thirty or fewer credits to
graduate; establishment of Academic Advancement Partnerships to create
interactions between students and faculty at UDC and faculty and administrators
at PhD granting institutions; utilization of the Advance Research Techniques
Corp to teach research techniques; creation of a paradigm shift in pedagogy by
utilizing the flipped classroom and collaborative learning; empowerment of
faculty through mentor training; and support for faculty to conduct individual
and collaborative research. The project strategies supporting these objectives
are evidence-based and will be monitored and evaluated for effectiveness.