* 1622369
* Collaborative Research:   CDS&amp;E:  Applied Algebraic Statistics through R
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ruriko Yoshida, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2019
* USD 0.00

The interface of applied algebraic geometry and statistics known as algebraic
statistics abounds with fresh insight into old and new problems in practical
data analysis. The fundamental connection stems from the realization that many
statistical models are or can be identified with geometric structures amenable
to algebraic investigation, enabling statisticians to draw from the great wealth
of algebraic tools when solving statistical problems. Since this recognition,
algebraic tools have found applications all over statistics, especially in
contexts involving cross-classified data. Despite these advances, the use of
algebraic methods in traditionally statistical areas of data analysis is still
not mainstream, mostly because the methods involve kinds of mathematical
computations previously unnecessary for data analyses and, consequently, not
available in standard software. This work confronts this problem head-on by 1)
fortifying connections between a free statistical computing environment popular
among data analysts (R) and various software in the mathematics community
through add-on packages created by the PIs and 2) implementing user-friendly
interfaces to cutting-edge algebraic statistical methods enabled by the external
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R package algstat and supporting packages
will be further developed, strengthening connections to software used in
algebraic statistics and providing functions and data structures for algebraic
statistical methods that leverage those software. In year one of the project,
the PIs and their teams will work on LattE and 4ti2, and Markov bases techniques
for exact inference in loglinear, logistic, and Poisson regression models will
be created and improved. In year two, the PIs and their teams will work on
Bertini. Functions and data structures related to the numerical solution of
systems of polynomial equations will be improved and expanded, and applications
to phylogenetics will be considered. In year three, the PIs and their teams will
work on Macaulay2, fortifying its connection to R and using it to enhance the
mpoly package and adaptively inform the MCMC routines for exact inference in
exponential family models enabled by the LattE and 4ti2 connections.