* 1622260
* SBIR Phase I:  A Radically Efficient Search and Visual Mapping Tool for the Social Sciences
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Gratiana Pol, Hyperthesis, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop a working prototype for an interactive
search and visualization tool that redefines how social scientists and business
practitioners interested in scholarly research findings identify such findings.
Instead of reading through numerous, unstructured, and often irrelevant text
results (such as those produced by traditional academic search engines), users
get to (a) instantly view and easily navigate research findings via intuitively-
structured, clickable visual maps, and (b) accurately identify those papers most
relevant to them, thanks to semantically intelligent indexing and visual
reconciliation. This efficiency-enhancing tool makes research findings
substantially easier to understand and explore, while drastically cutting down
search times for such findings (to half or even less) which will ultimately
enhance the efficiency of research endeavors at U.S. universities. Moreover,
various inquiries have shown that practitioners in applied fields such as
marketing or management place high value on academic research in the social
sciences, yet often find such research difficult to understand. The proposed
solution distills social science findings into an easily digestible format,
hence facilitating the knowledge transfer between academia and businesses, and
enhancing the value of academic research to society. Finally, by being marketed
as a subscription-based service to both academics and business practitioners,
the proposed tool has the potential to generate substantial commercial value in
the long term (up to $50 million in annual revenue).

The proposed tool fundamentally alters the existing search paradigm in the
social sciences, by changing both the way in which research findings from
academic papers are indexed, and how such findings are visually presented. It
combines an innovation on the back-end (i.e., using Natural Language
Understanding (NLU) to automatically extract concepts and causal relationships
from academic research papers, and semantically categorize those concepts
against a set of discipline-specific thesauri) with an innovation on the front-
end (i.e., using aggregate causal mapping to represent the academic literature
in the form of interactive maps that can be visually explored and narrowed down
in order to precisely locate relevant papers). The main research objective is to
test the feasibility of (1) using NLU for accurately identifying and extracting
the underlying concepts/variables and causal structure of the studies described
in a large set of social science research papers (approximately 1,000 published
papers), and of (2) automatically rendering the extracted information in the
form of causal maps that both academic and non-academic users can intuitively
understand and navigate. This research objective has been reached if a group of
test users employ the proposed tool to successfully identify research papers
examining particular concepts and relationships, and do so in about half the
time needed when using a traditional academic search engine for the same task.