* 1622856
* STTR Phase I:  MSM uPump: Precision Dosing for Laboratory Research
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Aaron Smith, Shaw Mountain Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will enable biomolecular
research by developing a high precision micropump utilizing a magnetic shape
memory (MSM) mechanism. The MSM mechanism translates magnetic energy into
mechanical work through an MSM alloy. The MSM material replaces many of the
mechanical parts found in other micropump technologies and can precisely
manipulate the very small fluid volumes handled by many researchers, such as
biomolecular physicists and electro-neurophysiologists. Precision micro-dosing
will decrease the costs of such research by decreasing the volume of reagents
consumed and by increasing the efficacy and efficiency of experiments. This
project will develop laboratory instrumentation for the institutional research
market and will later expand to enter the nearly $3 billion microfluidic devices
market. It will further develop MSM technology that will translate to multiple
markets including healthcare. The broader impacts range from improvements in
personalized medicine through point-of-care diagnostics, to the development of
more efficient drugs, for example in cancer treatment, through enhanced
pharmaceutical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project focuses on increasing the pumping resolution of the MSM micropump for
precision micro-dosing for laboratory research. The pump design is biomimetic
and works similarly to how mammals swallow. By applying a magnetic field, a
peristaltic motion is generated in the MSM material which can be used to
repeatedly pump precise quantities of fluid. This technology boasts a unique
combination of features including (1) contact-free magnetic actuation, (2) no
mechanical parts, (3) combination of the pumping mechanism and valve into a
single element, (4) reversibility of the flow direction, (5) operation even with
a high back pressure, (6) applicability to gases and viscous liquids, and (7)
high precision at small volumes. Reducing the size of the MSM magneto-mechanical
transducer will increase the pumping resolution. Since the surface-area-to-
volume ratio is larger for smaller MSM transducers, surface stresses must be
controlled more delicately. One key outcome of this work will be the development
of surface treatment methods to improve magneto-mechanical fatigue life and the
performance of the device. Through systematic experiments, this project will
establish fundamental processing-structure-properties-performance relationships
for MSM transducers, and will also demonstrate prototype devices for
biomolecular research.