* 1622991
* Understanding the role of cultural and career purpose orientations in underrepresented minority science student success
* EDU,DRL
* 01/14/2016,08/31/2018
* Dustin Thoman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 665,647.00

One explanation for the underrepresentation of some ethnic minority groups in
STEM education and STEM careers is that cultural barriers are perceived to exist
that render integration of a cultural identity incompatible with an emerging
identity as a scientist. In particular STEM careers appear to be disconnected
from being able to serve one's community or give back to the place where one
grew up. This research will examine how this "communal cultural orientation"
along with some perceptions of science in general might influence how engaged
students are in STEM courses and how interested they are in STEM careers. The
researchers propose a mixed methods study including interviews, focus groups, a
longitudinal survey study and randomized experimental classroom activities to
examine how underrepresented minority students' cultural and career purpose
orientations influence their perceptions of science careers and whether that
perception could be altered through targeted activities. Such activities, if
proven effective, might have the potential to be more broadly included in STEM
curricula and pedagogy to encourage greater participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM. Student participants will be recruited from the California State
University, Long Beach campus which is a Hispanic Serving Institution (the
Hispanic population on the campus is approximately 33%). About 46% of incoming
freshmen indicating an interest in the physical or life sciences are identified
as underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical framework
includes goal congruity theory (person-environment fit) and interest theory. The
main hypothesis is that underrepresented minority students struggle to maintain
an interest in and develop a strong identity with science if they do not see a
career in science that would allow them to fulfill culturally connected communal
purpose goals. The researchers' model emphasizes the critical role of goal
congruence (or "fit") in predicting interest in and motivation for science
careers, with mediating roles for science class interest and engagement and
science identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will engage three phases
of work: interviews and focus groups; longitudinal survey study; and a large
randomized experimental classroom study. Interviews will commence in year one
and include 100 undergraduate freshman students with declared STEM majors and 50
additional students recruited in year two. Data analysis will be done using
qualitative content analysis and descriptive analysis of demographic data. The
longitudinal survey phase will involve recruiting a sample of freshmen and
sophomore students (approximately 250 of each) followed for the three years of
the study. Six categories of variables will be included in the data gathering
beginning with background variables and moving on to communal goal endorsement,
science and communal goal affordance perceptions, science class interest and
engagement, science identity, and science career interest and motivation. Data
analysis will follow linear growth curve modeling with multivariate repeated
measures. Finally, the randomized experimental study will be administered across
six classes over three academic semesters to a total of about 6,000 students in
experimental and control groups. The intervention is a writing assignment
administered for credit approximately every four weeks in the semester with
different foci for experimental and control groups. Data analysis will include
multilevel linear regression.