* 1622239
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Interview Trait Estimation Combining Speech and Touch
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jared Bernstein, Analytic Measures Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in improved efficiency in labor markets by
enabling faster, more accurate assessments of the interpersonal traits ("soft
skills") of job candidates, employees, and students. The project develops
methods for accurate automated screening interviews that can save time, effort,
and money for both employers and job seekers - delivering a more efficient
candidate selection process for U.S. companies and public agencies that conduct
hundreds of millions of screening interviews with job candidates each year. This
project is focused on performance assessments of attitude, energy and social
communication, specifically as these qualities are needed for selection of
people for cooperative roles in employment settings. The project's applied
research will refine (and may reconceive) the behavioral definitions of traits
that are valued in employee selection because they are held to be predictive of
success in work settings and in occupational training. Resultant refined
measurement tools may enable advances in applied fields like industrial
psychology and provide more precise variables for use in basic studies of the
neurological correlates of emotion, social perception, personality, and mental
disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project designs, develops and fields a prototype app that conducts an
automated Virtual Screening Interview (VSI). The VSI app is an experimental
instrument that probes job-relevant traits in speech and touch responses. In
recent decades, algorithms have estimated people's affect, sentiment, and
emotions as observed in facial expression, text content, tone of voice, speech
rate, gestures, posture and other body language. Among these, speech prosody,
linguistic content, and facial expression have proven to be strong indicators of
emotional valence (attitude) and psychomotor activation (energy level). VSI
system research will identify measurable traits that support rapid learning and
successful performance in activities and occupations that require teamwork or
social skill. The VSI app collects performance data (voice and screen-touch
tracks) on mobile devices to investigate novel combinations of features from
speech and motion that accelerate and improve trait measurement. The project
will generate new knowledge about how the relationships between speech and
movement can match expert evaluations of people in work groups and in social
settings. Measurement technologies developed in the project may also be applied
in education and industry to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
instruction and training.