* 1622917
* STTR Phase I:  Corrosion Inhibition of Stainless Steel Alloys in High Temperature Chloride Salts for Concentrated Solar Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Sreya Dutta, Dynalene Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is through the development of cost effective, high
temperature molten salt heat transfer fluids for concentrated solar power plants
that would make solar power an economical and viable source of renewable energy
for mass consumption. With the worldwide growing need for energy, alternative
sources of energy have been the primary focus of research over the past few
decades. Molten salt heat transfer fluid used in concentrated solar power plants
are one sub-area of such research. Molten salts have excellent stability at high
temperature (&gt;650C) and can be mined and easily manufactured into solar heat
transfer fluids at a reasonable cost. Additionally, the developed molten salt
heat transfer fluid would increase the efficiency of energy generation in solar
power plants and provide potential cost savings by utilizing ubiquitous
economical metals such as stainless steel. The heat transfer fluid could
potentially bring the subsidy-free installed system price at the utility scale
to a competitive price of 5-6 cents per kilowatt-hour.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to (i) develop a
fundamental understanding of interfacial corrosion of 316L stainless steel in
molten chloride salt compositions and (ii) inhibit this corrosion by utilizing
suitable additives. It is known that chloride salts could potentially increase
the operating temperatures (to 900 Celcius) and hence enhance the energy
efficiency of solar power plants. However, the extreme corrosive behavior of
molten chlorides towards the stainless steel pipes utilized in solar plants has
prevented their usage for practical applications. With the fundamental corrosion
insight gained through this research project, Dynalene intends to develop
proprietary inhibitor compositions that can be added to the chloride salt in-
situ during the operation of a solar power plant. These additives would minimize
corrosion by forming a continuous and inert ceramic layer at the operating
temperature on the stainless steel surface, and simultaneo usly strengthen the
grain boundaries. Dynalene had some initial success in growing a few micron-
thick inert, continuous ceramic layer on a stainless steel surface. In this
project, Dynalene will develop a corrosion package that would reduce
dechromatization in steel and restrict the corrosion rate of 316L stainless
steel to 10 micro-meters/year