* 1622134
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Recovery of High-Dimensional Structured Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Simon Foucart, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,535.00

Many scientific problems of crucial importance for the United States involve a
very large number of parameters. This high dimensionality has long been a
challenge for the numerical treatment of physical, chemical, and biological
processes, and now it also represents an obstacle in data science, especially
for the task of extracting useful information from only a limited amount of
observations. Propitiously, the high-dimensional objects prevailing in real-life
problems often possess some underlying structure simplifying their manipulation.
The purpose of this project is to exploit this structure in order to develop a
consistent theoretical framework and to conceive novel computational methods for
the exact recovery (or good approximation) of the high-dimensional objects
sketchily acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the objects
considered in this project are functions of very many variables. Handling them
via traditional numerical methods is doomed by the so-called curse of
dimensionality. But modern ideas such as sparsity and variable reduction make it
possible to bypass the curse and thus are revolutionizing the approach to high-
dimensional problems. Building upon the fundamentals from the theory of
compressive sensing, the project will consider sparse recovery and
simultaneously structured recovery as part of the more general recovery of high-
dimensional functions depending on few reduced variables. The research strategy
starts by investigating the theoretical limitations of any recovery method
within a model, then continues by refining the model through confrontation with
real-life problems, and finishes by implementing the algorithms proven to
perform optimally. Since the project features interactions with several applied
fields (in particular, Engineering and Bioinformatics), the novel numerical
methods are to be tested in these areas, which will in turn provide fresh
mathematical insight. A final part of the project is devoted to the integration
of emerging concepts into the culture of the next scientific generation and in
particular to the training of mathematicians in computational and data-related
aspects.