* 1622842
* STTR Phase I:  Automated system for creating custom three-dimensional radiofrequency ablation lesion geometries in post-lumpectomy margin ablation breast cancer treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Robert Rioux, Innoblative Designs
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to provide early stage breast cancer
patients with a comprehensive treatment option that completely eliminates all
cancer during a patient's first surgery. Currently, &gt;20% of the ~200,000
breast cancer patients who are treated with lumpectomy surgery annually in the
US must have a re-operation because of a lack of clear margins in the initial
surgery. Furthermore, most breast cancer patients who are treated with
lumpectomy must also undergo expensive ($17,000+) radiation therapy that can
last up to 7 weeks. Furthermore, due to the need for adjuvant radiation therapy,
lumpectomy is not an option for many breast cancer patients globally. However,
intraoperatively destroying a thin rim of tissue around the tumor with
radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has been shown to decrease the need for re-
operations and radiation therapy. RFA is a thermal ablation therapy used
commonly in liver and kidney cancer treatment. However, no RFA devices have been
designed for the post-lumpectomy breast cavity. Development of such a device
will allow for early stage breast cancer patients worldwide to receive local
therapy in minutes for a fraction of the cost of radiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop
technologies for post-lumpectomy radiofrequency ablation therapy. The proposed
RFA device is designed such that it will mechanically fit the surgical cavity
uniformly for optimal treatment. However, a uniform ablation depth around the
device will not always be desired due to the location of the tumor and skin.
This project, therefore, also proposes an automated system that can be pre-
programmed by a surgeon to control the three-dimensional ablation shape produced
by the RFA device. The following intellectual merits are in the proposed
project: (1) a system that can create three-dimensional maps of ablation status
of tissue (unablated vs. undergoing ablation vs. ablated); (2) a system that can
create three-dimensional ablation shapes using the proposed RFA device. These
control systems will be developed and validated with benchtop experiments in
animal tissues. In the future, this will allow early-stage breast cancer
patients to receive optimal customized treatment with post-lumpectomy RFA to
reduce the risk of re-operation and future cancer recurrence.