* 1622352
* SHINE:  Multi-Spacecraft Observational Study and Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) Modeling of Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections (ICMEs) Observed in Conjunction
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Reka Winslow, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2020
* USD 357,841.00

Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) are a complex and fundamental component of space
weather. They have the potential to do significant damage to satellites, power
grids, and humans in space. CMEs change in significant ways as they propagate
through the interplanetary medium. There are only a few locations between the
Sun and the Earth where measurements of the ICMEs (Interplanetary Coronal Mass
Ejections) have been made. As such, this 3-year SHINE project is potentially
transformative as it plans to use data and models to examine ICMEs that hit
Mercury and Earth. The goals are to determine how their properties evolve, how
solar wind interactions change them, and what critical factors affect the
direction of the magnetic field in them. This last point is particularly
important as the direction of the field when it hits Earth plays a very large
role in the effect that the CME has on electric and telecommunications systems.
The outcomes of this study have the potential to vastly improve the science
behind prediction models used in space hazard early warning systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this SHINE project is to develop the
physical understanding of interplanetary coronal mass ejection (ICME)
propagation and evolution in the inner heliosphere inside 1 AU. To accomplish
this goal, the project will use multi-spacecraft observations of the same ICME
events at Mercury (MESSENGER) and at 1 AU (ACE, WIND, STEREO), in conjunction
with magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models of these events to focus on ICME magnetic
field (strength and direction), speed, and shock structure evolution from 0.3 AU
to 1 AU. The main efforts of the analyses include force-free field fitting of
the magnetic ejecta to determine the flux rope orientation and axial magnetic
field strength at Mercury and at 1 AU, ICME shock shape determination at both
distances, solar wind velocity estimation at Mercury (from proxies as well as
models), and MHD simulations of real ICME events in order to discern global
structure and changes during propagation. MESSENGER has now amassed a large
dataset of ICMEs from years of observations at Mercury's heliocentric distances,
and so this project is very timely and will lay the groundwork in mapping ICME
evolution in preparation for the upcoming Solar Orbiter and Solar Probe Plus
missions. The three key scientific questions addressed in this project are: (1)
how do ICME properties (e.g., magnetic field, speed, shock structure) evolve
from Mercury to 1 AU; (2) does the global magnetic field structure inside ejecta
change significantly on average from Mercury to 1 AU; and, (3) what are the
critical factors that affect change in flux rope orientation during
propagation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is highly relevant to
the NSF's SHINE program, and it will have a strong impact on the SHINE
community. SHINE and the broader scientific community will be served through the
following avenues. First, databases and results from the project will be made
freely available to the scientific community. Second, the project team will
engage the SHINE community through the SHINE workshop to take part in a
challenge to use the observed ICME events as campaign events to test models.
Third, the project will support an early career, female scientist, thereby
contributing towards retaining highly qualified young scientists in academic
research and promoting the advancement of women in science. Fourth, the Co-Is
will teach undergraduate and graduate classes related to space science, and the
research results will be incorporated, when possible, into advanced
undergraduate and graduate classes. The project team will utilize the scientific
outcome of this project to motivate and educate students, teachers, and the
public with an appreciation of the importance of solar physics and STEM fields
in general by leveraging the special initiatives of the Institute for the Study
of Earth, Oceans, and Space (EOS) at UNH. Therefore, the research and EPO agenda
of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.