* 1622060
* SBIR Phase I:  Phantom Head for Testing and Standardizing Transcranial Magnetic and Direct Current Stimulation Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Elizabeth Mirowski, High Precision Devices, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to understand how conductivity in the brain
is affected by anatomical variability between patients and, more importantly, to
enable precise treatment of neurological diseases using transcranial Direct
Current Stimulation (tDCS) and Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)
techniques. A number of studies have shown these techniques may be used, cost-
effectively, to improve learning, working memory, as well as relieve chronic
pain and the symptoms of depression, fibromyalgia, Parkinson's, and
schizophrenia. However, current understanding of electromagnetic (EM)
characteristics for the human head and state-of-the-art TMS and tDCS techniques
suffer from the inability to precisely control the most appropriate excitation
pathways in the brain to support a specified clinical objective. This can result
in unexpected and sometimes ineffective or even detrimental outcomes. Models and
TMS/tDCS treatment systems for implementation of excitation techniques are not
validated to standards. A thorough understanding of pathways and development of
validated mimics and phantom structures will enable development and clinical
implementation of precisely controlled analytical models and protocols for
effective, widely accessible, reliable and safe TMS/tDCS
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address gaps in
current knowledge of intracranial electromagnetic characteristics and materials
performance to develop reproducible head phantoms for clinical implementation of
more precise, quantifiable tDCS and TMS techniques. This research will
characterize solid, liquid and gel materials selected to comply with biomedical
and commercialization criteria. Analyses will be used to develop formulations of
combinations of materials that address the range of conductivity and anisotropy
of the parts and interfaces of the human brain. These formulations will be
experimentally evaluated and refined for producibility and accuracy. This will
provide a database of materials solutions which will be used in Phase II and
beyond. Traditional brain conductivity mimics are simple spherical shells
consisting of a single agar based conductivity mimic, which lacks the complexity
of the human brain. The challenges of developing an EM brain phantom include
fabrication of the various materials for controlled and reproducible anisotropic
conductivity values, shaping these materials to mimic anatomical features, and
combining them to represent boundary interfaces and control gaps for accurate
pathway performance. The proposed effort includes development of a shell mimic
that incorporates applicable material formulations to validate extensibility to
more sophisticated prototype phantoms during Phase II.