* 1622770
* Workshop for Developing Evaluation Metrics to Advance a National Water Resource Recovery Facility Test Bed Network
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* James Mihelcic, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,598.00

1622770&lt;br/&gt;Mihelcic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewater is considered a
valuable resource that can provide sources of water, energy, and nutrients.
However, innovators in the water sectors commonly cite a lack of access to test
facilities as an impediment to the development of innovative technologies that
can help address water infrastructure challenges. Recent workshop reports,
including the Energy-Positive Water Resource Recovery Workshop and the
Intensification in Resource Recovery Workshop recommended that government,
academia, nongovernmental organizations, technology vendors, and municipal
treatment facilities collaborate to form a national network of test bed
facilities to advance the pace of innovation in this area. Achieving the vision
of an impactful National Water Resource Recovery Facility Test Bed Network will
support efforts to translate innovative technologies to practice that promote
sustainability and resource recovery from wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will help advance the creation of an impactful national test bed
network that promotes the translation of innovative technologies for resource
recovery from wastewater into a national research space that engages academic,
industrial, and municipal partners. A national test bed network is expected to
attract creative ideas and talents by engaging a wide range of partners for the
progression of basic research into new innovations. The test bed network will
also foster innovation among faculty and students, promote regional coordination
and linkages, and develop technology-based networks of researchers. A test bed
network should also serve as an "engine of innovation" and help to extend the
Nation's historical reputation for ingenuity. To successfully encourage
innovation, a test bed network should make a meaningful difference in shortening
the timeline of moving products into the marketplace. It should also reduce
costs of product development. This workshop's primary objective is to define key
metrics that new technologies evaluated at the national test bed network should
measure and report. A second workshop objective is to determine whether or not a
central reporting system to share data on innovative technologies in a national
test bed network is necessary and achievable. If so, the participants will set
the preliminary design conditions for such a reporting system. The workshop will
consist of approximately 50 professionals that can include researchers from
universities, utility research programs, and national laboratories. In addition,
it will also host technology providers, entrepreneurs, and water sector venture
capitalists, members of WERF's LIFT program, NSF's SBIR program, and other
utility managers interested in fostering innovation, engineering consultants,
and federal officials from EPA, DOE, NSF, USDA, and other interested agencies.
It is expected that a national test bed network devoted to recovering valuable
resources from wastewater will lead to environmental, economic, and social
benefits from enhanced innovation capacity. Four supported positions are set
aside for early career scientists (senior doctoral students and post-doctoral
research associates) and the program committee has plans to achieve appropriate
representation of under-represented groups.