* 1622459
* Collaborative Research:   Towards an Accurate, High-Fidelity Modeling System for Multiphysics and Multiscale Coastal Ocean Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Hansong Tang, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2022
* USD 131,324.00

In correspondence with global warming and fast expansion of human activities in
coastal waters, it is now becoming urgently needed to advance our modeling
capabilities to a level of direct, high-fidelity simulation of many emerging,
real-world, multiphysics, multiscale coastal ocean flow problems. Examples of
these problems include oil spill at bottom of oceans, tidal energy extraction in
coastal waters, etc. Currently, essentially there is no model at this level of
simulation. The objective of this project is to develop computational methods
and an unprecedented computer modeling system, which will be not only applicable
to such problems but also a new platform to study many other
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, a geophysical fluid dynamics model
and a fully 3D fluid dynamics model are integrated via domain decomposition and
two-way coupling into a single modeling system, in which the former captures
mesoscale [O(10) km - O(10,000) km], background ocean currents and the latter
resolves sub-mesoscale [O(1) m - O(10) km], complicated, local phenomena. The
objective will be realized via three tasks: 1) Methods and algorithms with
regard to solution accuracy, computational efficiency, and transmission
condition. 2) Numerical experiments on the methods and algorithms, their
validation in test problems, and a showcase application. 3) Development of a
robust, efficient software package of the modeling system. The educational
component aims at increasing awareness of students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, on new computational problems and necessity for new
methods of their solution, stimulating their interest in numerical algorithms
and model development. The activities of this component include a series of
seminars, teaching material development, etc.