* 1622034
* SBIR Phase I:  Effective Test Generation for Mobile Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Shauvik Roy-Choudhary, MoQuality Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the quality of mobile applications
by providing developers with better tools for quality assurance of such
applications. The results from these tools will enable the developers to take
actionable steps to improve and evolve their applications before releasing to
customers. This process will also increase developers' confidence in the
reliability of their app and will allow them to ship high-quality apps faster.
As a result, the average mobile user will have a better mobile experience, thus
benefiting all segments of society that rely on mobile computing for their daily
activities. From a research perspective, the proposed project will help us
understand the practical issues in effectively applying and scaling test
generation for mobile applications. Based on the findings, the company will
define improved techniques to address such issues and disseminate its results
broadly through publications and interactions with industry. Finally, the work
will positively influence the next generation of mobile computing development
tools by making automated testing more integrated with the development
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project directly addresses the stated goals of the "Information
Technologies" topic; it promises to provide fundamental scientific advances by
developing both solid theoretical foundations and practical tools that help in
improving the functionality and performance of mobile software. Bugs in mobile
applications are dependent on the multiple contexts such as user, location,
platform etc., leading to several challenges in testing under realistic user
conditions. Thus, despite recent research advances in software engineering, app
testing is still done by humans, resulting in a tedious and error prone process.
This project will lead to the development of novel techniques and a tool
(product) that enables, supports and automates the generation of test cases for
mobile applications under various conditions. Upon completion, this project will
provide unprecedented advantages to developers for reducing their testing costs
while effectively finding and addressing app issues. The results of the
company's preliminary evaluation are encouraging and motivate further research
and development in this area. The company will leverage relationships built
during its initial customer discovery to empirically validate the proposed
techniques on real world mobile applications.