* 1622211
* SBIR Phase I:  Luminescent Solar Concentrating Glass Windows Quantum Dot Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Hunter McDaniel, UbiQD, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project develops a technology called luminescent solar
concentration that will extend the function of windows by turning them into
daytime sources of electricity. The target market for this technology is tall
buildings in urban areas, where electricity demand is the highest and the
available space for installing solar cells is smallest. This technology utilizes
a window tint that can absorb sunlight and remit light of a certain color
through the window's glass to small solar cells located at the edges. This
technology hasn't been commercialized yet because previous tint materials
typically absorb their own emitted light, limiting efficiency. This project aims
to provide a solutions to these problems with a novel low-cost window tint
material made from quantum dots. The work conducted in this project focuses on
discovering new improvements in efficiency and cost reduction of the quantum
dots. With this technology, tall buildings will approach net-zero energy
consumption or even supply electricity to the grid. This would reduce the city's
carbon footprint as well as save money for the companies/individuals occupying
these buildings, which would increase their prosperity and welfare. This
technology would also reduce pollution by limiting the amount of burned coal
needed to generate electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
innovation in this project is the development of an ideal window-tint material
that will be used to transform windows into electricity generating components of
urban buildings. Luminescent solar concentrators are made by tinting a window
with a fluorophore material that partially absorbs sunlight and then converts it
to fluorescence, preferably in the near-infrared. The fluorescence is trapped
inside the window by total internal reflection and is concentrated to the edges
where small solar cells efficiently convert that light into electricity.
Utilizing this technology in windows to generate electricity has not been
commercialized due to unsuitable fluorophores. The fluorophore used in this
project are quantum dots composed of CuInSeS/ZnS, which solves the problems of
previous materials. Traditional fluorophores like photoluminescent dyes
typically have strong self-absorption, narrow spectral absorption, and poor
stability. Quantum dots, which are interesting due to their easily tunable light
emission, are more stable, but are expensive, toxic (due to heavy metals), and
also suffer from self-absorption. The breakthrough in CuInSeS/ZnS quantum dots
is that they are significantly cheaper, avoid toxic elements, have near-infrared
fluorescence optimized for low-cost commercial solar cells, and do not self-
absorb. In this SBIR Phase I project CuInSeS/ZnS quantum dots will be optimized
for higher photoluminescence efficiency &gt;50% and applied as industry-
compatible coatings to glass substrates for higher performance.