* 1622487
* Collaborative Research:  SHINE:  What is Causing the Deficit of High-Energy Solar Particles in Cycle 24?
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Christina Cohen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 06/30/2019
* USD 245,538.00

This 3-year collaborative SHINE project is aimed at exploring and modeling a key
under-appreciated aspect of the shock acceleration mechanism of solar energetic
particles (SEPs) in the heliosphere, namely the role of the proton seed
population in initiating and amplifying the shock acceleration process. This is
one of the most important mechanisms in solar and heliospheric physics. The
project will also explore how the maximum energy of SEPs can be limited by pre-
existing suprathermal seed-particle densities and by the strength and turbulence
level of the interplanetary magnetic field, which has been gradually declining
over the past several solar cycles. Knowledge of suprathermal seed particle
densities can aid in forecasting the maximum intensity of SEP events and in
forecasting all-clear periods, providing a valuable space-weather tool. The PATH
acceleration and transport model to be employed during this project will be put
online, where it can be used by students and researchers to model SEP spectra,
time profiles, maximum energies, and composition. This research project is
especially relevant to the Solar Probe Plus and Solar Orbiter missions. The
project will also employ a student and involve an under-represented
minority.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE project aims to understand the
behavior of our Sun, which has dramatically changed in the last decade. The
solar wind ram pressure and the solar magnetic field strength fell to a historic
low. While solar cycles 22 and 23 were active with large SEP events, solar cycle
24 brought significantly fewer large events. The difference is particularly
striking at the high-energy part (tens of MeV/n and up). This change, which has
far reaching implications, puzzles the scientific community. This SHINE project
aims at identifying the cause of this deficit. The project teams suggest that
the two main causes are the reduced IMF strength and associated turbulence
level, and reduced density of suprathermal seed particles. They will use the
PATH model to understand how the maximum particle energy depends on: (i) the
seed population; (ii) the background magnetic field; (iii) the upstream
turbulence level; and, (iv) the shock speed and compression ratio. The
investigators will also look at how changes in the seed population from solar
cycle 23 to solar cycle 24 affect the accelerated spectra. The project is
directly relevant to the NSF's SHINE program, because it will provide important
knowledge about the acceleration and transport of SEPs during solar eruptive
events. Such knowledge is critical for accurate modeling and prediction of space
weather conditions from the solar surface to the Earth and beyond. The research
and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division
in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.