* 1622687
* RAPID: A real-world opportunity to study responsibility, social identity, signaling, and collective mobilization
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Brian Lickel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 124,975.00

Recent revelations regarding car manufacturers' use of so-called "defeat
devices" to skirt U.S. and other nations' diesel vehicle emissions standards
have revealed a previously unanticipated threat to public health and the
environment. By some estimates, the increased pollutants being emitted by these
vehicles are causing in excess of $100 million in avoidable health care costs
and as many as 40-100 extra deaths per year in the U.S. alone. The solution to
the problem appears straightforward at first glance: fix the roughly 500,000
vehicles currently on the roads and thus address the environmental and health
impacts. The challenge is that those vehicles are owned by private citizens for
whom the fix will likely incur significant personal cost, including increased
costs of ownership, reduced resale values, degraded vehicle performance and
reduced personal enjoyment. Thus, the "defeat device" issue is a collective
action problem in which many individuals must act independently to resolve the
threat to public health and the environment. This project explores the
behavioral and psychological responses of these vehicle owners to this
unanticipated collective action problem in an effort to answer three key
questions. First, what are the key factors that influence individuals'
willingness to take action to confront a problem caused by someone else? Second,
what are the emotional and behavioral implications for people who are personally
affected by an event that challenges their personal and social identities?
Third, if people are given an opportunity to publicly let others know that they
are taking action, does that promote behavior change and affect their emotional
well-being?

To answer these questions, the research team will reach out to owners of the
affected vehicles and conduct two surveys across a year. The surveys will
examine owners' reactions and responses to the issue, including their decisions
about whether and when to have their vehicles repaired. In addition, the project
explores how people's intentions might change if a behavior that is otherwise
invisible-- whether one's car has been repaired or still polluting--could become
visible, by providing some "signal" to other drivers such as a car sticker. By
examining these psychological processes this project may produce practical
insights about human decision-making that could be used to address this and
future collective action problems. Knowledge gained by this longitudinal study
will shed light on how people make decisions that carry personal costs but also
produce societal benefits, and possibly lead to the development of more
effective strategies to help support people in making decisions that are
beneficial both for themselves and for society.