* 1622947
* STTR Phase I:  High-flux nanoporous calcium-silicate membranes for high efficiency Carbon dioxide separation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Mahesh Bhatt, C-crete Technologies Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project is cost-effective, eco-friendly membranes that
significantly benefit fossil-fuel power plants and gas separation technologies
by reducing energy consumption and membrane cost. The proposed disruptive
technology has a direct impact on one of our key centennial societal challenges,
i.e. reducing greenhouse gas emissions by separating and capturing carbon
dioxide. This project will help enable new approaches for manufacturing new
cost-effective, high performance, and durable membranes with wide applicability
due to the abundance of the raw materials and ease of manufacturing processes.
Broadly, the project can impact various separation technologies such as
separation and storage of hydrogen for fuel cells, water desalination and
filtration, and separation of biomolecules and radioactive
waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective in this Phase I research
project is developing a facile but disruptive technology to synthesize novel
nanoporous membrane products capable of efficient separation of CO2 gas
molecules from fossil-fuel power plants. The core technology relies on coupling
size-exclusion separation mechanisms and affinity-based adsorption to provide
superior performance. The proposed novel technology will mitigate the existing
challenges in current membrane technologies such as high-temperature
instability, low-flux, high-cost, and manufacturing difficulties. The final
membrane product can be employed by various energy sectors and industrial gases
and will provide a low-cost solution that is more energy-efficient, durable, and
demonstrates exceptional CO2 selectivity, as compared to existing technologies.