* 1622413
* SHINE:  Using the Solar Wind as a Turbulence Laboratory to Investigate the Role of Intermittency and Shear
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Charles Smith, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 370,649.00

A range of interplanetary studies, including energetic particle acceleration and
modulation, are hindered by an incomplete, or misleading understanding of the
spectrum of interplanetary turbulence. In this regard, the main purpose of this
3-year SHINE project is to gain a deeper understanding of the nonlinear dynamics
that distribute energy throughout the interplanetary spectrum, and the use of
the solar wind as a wind tunnel to ask fundamental physics questions pertaining
to magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence. Thus, the main goal of the project is
to provide an improved understanding of MHD turbulence, in general, seeding the
future application of the project results to other space plasmas. The project
will support an undergraduate student at the UNH, and it will promote strong
international collaborations for the benefit of advancing space weather research
both in the USA and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE project is
aimed at continuing the productive and successful research of the project team
on the third-moment theory of the turbulence. The third-moment theory of the
turbulence in the solar wind provides a tool, which is highly model-independent
and can serve as benchmark for modelers. The investigators will continue to
expand their research in this area by including wind tunnel data, the anisotropy
of the energy-cascade, turbulence between 0.3 and 1 AU, intermittent structures,
shear flows, turbulence in downstream shock regions, and expansion effects. The
project is directly relevant to the NSF's SHINE program, because it will provide
important knowledge about the nature of turbulence in space and astrophysical
plasmas. Such knowledge is critical for accurate modeling and prediction of the
space weather conditions from the solar surface to the Earth and beyond. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.