* 1622498
* SHINE:  Connecting Electron Thermodynamics and Microphysical Processes:  A Puzzle for the Evolution of the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Chadi Salem, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

For a long time, it has been unclear and a matter of debate to what degree
electron-kinetic effects play a role for the acceleration and the evolution of
the solar wind compared to other processes, such as the dissipation of turbulent
fluctuations. For the first time, our observational capabilities, with the
unprecedented quality of the solar cycle worth of Wind electron data that we are
producing, combined with a theoretical analysis will allow us to quantitatively
connect electron thermodynamics in the solar wind and microphysical processes
and better determine the role of electrons for the evolution of the solar wind.
This 3-year SHINE project is expected to improve present understanding of the
physical processes that are relevant for the generation and evolution of the
solar wind from a very fundamental plasma-physical perspective based on first
principles. It will also provide much needed input for the development of
predictive physics-based solar-wind models. Including more accurate description
of electron physics in such models will lead to major improvements of our
understanding of space-weather processes, the propagation of energetic-particle
events, as well as the propagation of cosmic rays throughout the
heliosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE project describes an
integrated research program to study the microphysical processes that regulate
the kinetic and non-thermal features of solar wind electrons, like the electron
core and halo drifts, and the electron strahl structure. It will investigate the
micro-instabilities generated by drifts, heat flux and temperature anisotropy,
as well as their contributions to solar wind turbulence. The research will be
based on in-situ observations of solar wind electron distribution functions,
proton measurements, as well as magnetic field and plasma wave data from the
Wind spacecraft. A hot plasma dispersion solver will be used to determine the
theoretical thresholds and growth rates of electron-driven micro-
instabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electron microphysical processes
addressed in this proposal have a broader application than the interplanetary
medium, as they occur in the solar corona, the coronae of other stars and
compact astrophysical objects, and in other more exotic environments in the
universe such as jets and supernova blast waves. Furthermore, the topic of
electron microphysics in the solar wind and in space plasma is one of the
primary science focus topics by the heliophysics community in the USA, in
particular SHINE. In the past, the project team has convened dedicated sessions
at the NSF-funded SHINE Workshops in 2014 and 2015, which have received very
positive feedback from the heliophysics community. The investigators plan to
continue to lead the focus group and the science discussions to foster more,
multi-disciplinary, collaborations within the space physics community, involving
theory, numerical simulations, observations and data analysis. As part of this
project, they propose a follow-up session at the 2016 SHINE Workshop. This
science topic is also of great importance in the preparation of the upcoming
NASA mission Solar Probe Plus and ESA mission Solar Orbiter, one of their key
science goals being to explore in-situ the fundamental microphysical plasma
processes at the origin of the heating of the solar corona, acceleration of the
solar wind and the evolution of the heliosphere including CMEs and transients.
This research project will foster a close work collaboration between the UC
Berkeley and the UNH. It will support two young researchers in early phases of
their scientific careers and a graduate student at UC Berkeley. The research and
EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.