* 1622676
* Line Shape for Collision Systems Important in Earth's, Planetary, and Exoplanet Atmospheres
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Robert Gamache, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 290,304.00

Infrared and solar radiation absorbed by atmospheric water and trace gases
drives atmospheric chemistry and climate. Individual species absorb radiation in
unique spectral bands and windows and the amounts vary with pressure and
temperature for each molecule. In order to accurately compute the energy
absorbed by our atmosphere and to use remote sensing to detect these molecules
accurate line by line spectral absorption parameters including their variation
with environmental parameters is needed. This research uses fundamental physics
to construct accurate line shape parameters of key atmospheric species that will
be used in atmospheric radiation and remote sensing retrieval models to advance
our knowledge of atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a unified theoretical framework to calculate pressure-broadened half-
widths and pressure-induced line shifts, their velocity and temperature
dependences for gases important in the Earth's atmosphere. The improved
formalism will go beyond the current Voigt profile approximation to enhance
remote sensing retrievals and line-by-line computations of radiative forcing of
climate. The research will develop the new Hartmann-Tran profiles that require
velocity dependent line shape parameters that will be estimated from thousands
of ro-vibronic transitions that will be computed using ab initio and Modified
Complex Robert-Bonamy codes. It will target H2O, CO2, O3 and CH4 line broadening
in collision with N2, O2, and self-collisions at atmospherically relevant
temperatures and pressures. Specifically, the effects of line coupling and
mixing on half-widths will be rigorously treated and calibrated using available
observations. In addition to advancing the U.S. community HITRAN database
focused studies will enrich remote sensing retrievals and radiative forcing by
trace gases to advance atmospheric chemistry and climate.