* 1622292
* CAREER: Towards Scalable Error Detection for Parallel Software Systems on Emerging Computing Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Liqiang Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 262,848.00

Extreme scale computing introduces many new challenges to parallel program
design, where a computation may involve hundreds of thousands of processes with
multiple-level parallelism. It is very difficult to debug such large-scale
parallel programs. Scalable and light-weight correctness tools are critical to
combat this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to design
innovative algorithms and develop a scalable toolkit to efficiently and
effectively analyze parallel programs and detect potential errors on the
emerging heterogeneous and extreme scale computing platforms. Specifically, the
objectives of the research are to: (1) develop instrumentation tools and
optimized monitoring systems to support building tools for error detection, (2)
design various optimization strategies and techniques to improve scalability and
reduce overhead, (3) integrate static and dynamic program analyses to improve
reporting accuracy and code coverage, (4) design more accurate and efficient
detection techniques on large-scale parallel systems, and (5) investigate
domain-specific techniques for error detection and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will greatly help the
development of extreme scale parallel programs for scientific computing and
discover hard-to-find errors in early stage. It will significantly reduce the
burden of tedious debugging activities, so researchers can focus on scientific
problems. The toolkit is targeted for general computing platforms, from local
clusters to extreme scale supercomputers. In the education thrust, the research
results will facilitate the development of new courses and enhance existing
ones. High-school, undergraduate, and graduate students will have opportunities
to get involved in the research.