* 1622398
* Collaborative Research:   Arbor:   Comparative Analysis Workflows for the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Robert Thacker, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 145,146.00

Our understanding of the tree of life, a tree that summarizes the evolutionary
relationships of living organisms, has grown rapidly in recent years. However,
interpreting and analyzing large evolutionary trees has proven difficult. This
project will create visual workflow software, "Arbor", to help scientists and
the general public understand the growing tree of life. Arbor will be easy to
use: anyone will be able to carry out analyses by creating a specific workflow
of their methods. Users will be able to easily obtain data over the internet and
share their Arbor workflows with others, promoting collaborative efforts.
Finally, Arbor will be easily expandable and able to grow as new methods are
invented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arbor will enable "tree-thinking" to permeate
scientific research, while also providing extensive educational outreach to
classrooms and museums. Students and the general public benefit tremendously
from a better understanding of the relationships among all species. Likewise,
the visual workflows and user interfaces we develop will be freely available to
the programming community, stimulating additional software development. Finally,
enabling the scientific community to analyze the dynamic tree of life will
enable new research across a tremendous range of fields, including medicine,
public health, agriculture, ecology, and genetics.