* 1622168
* SBIR Phase I:  Aggressive Maneuvering of Small Autonomous Robots in Home Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2017
* David Jun, Petronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable mobile
robots to coexist harmoniously with people in their homes and offices. The
market for consumer and office robots is projected to grow 17% annually, seven
times faster than the market for manufacturing robots, reaching $1.5B by 2019.
An important step toward market growth is creating autonomous robots that are
unobtrusive, intelligent, and highly agile. Accomplishing this requires robots
to be small enough to stay out of the way and fast enough to elegantly avoid
humans and environmental obstacles. Inappropriate noise levels and safety
concerns make it unlikely that airborne vehicles will be prevalent in indoor
environments, whereas wheeled mobile robots can achieve near-silent operation.
Tiny, fast robots are unobtrusive enough to use as a low-cost surveillance tool
in home or office security, and portable enough for covertly investigating
hostile situations. People with severe disabilities could travel vicariously by
combining a virtual reality headset with a telepresence robot. Fast maneuvering
robots could be used as a compelling educational or entertainment platform for
kids and adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to prove the feasibility of enabling small wheeled
robots to maneuver aggressively and predictably in varied operating conditions
using consumer-affordable hardware components. While this project develops
algorithms using a low-cost camera solution for localization, the methodology
developed in Phase I will only improve performance as the technology for
localization and navigation matures. The key challenges in creating a robot that
can quickly navigate varied environments, as demonstrated during rigorous
testing of early prototypes in real homes, involve understanding how a small
robot moves on varied surfaces in the presence of slip, and correspondingly, how
to accurately and efficiently plan predictable maneuvers on these surfaces.
Three key Phase I objectives will address these challenges: 1) automatically
learning surface models in unknown environments, 2) planning and executing
aggressive maneuvers on learned surfaces, and 3) integrating a robot and a low-
cost computer vision based localization system for autonomous control.