* 1622178
* SBIR Phase I:  High efficient microcavity OLED for automobile lighting applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* kody Klimes, K2 OLED LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this small business innovative
research (SBIR) Phase I Project is the further commercialization of the highly
efficient and unique technology organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). This
panel technology has the potential to strongly impact the automotive industry by
replacing the current tail light technology. The benefits offered by OLED
taillights include low cost manufacturing, space and weight saving, reduction in
material consumption, energy efficiency, and freedom of form factors for design.
The broader impacts of this technology coming to the commercial market are,
reduced environment impact in the automotive industry and the furthering of OLED
panel technology. This innovation offers a future potential to be used in
residential general-purpose lighting. The demonstration and adoption of this
technology in the lighting market can lead to a large national or global
reduction in energy demand.

This Small Business innovation research (SBIR) Phase I Project contains
intellectual merit across chemistry, materials science, optics, semiconductor
physics, and device engineering. In their initial phases traditional light
emitting diodes (LEDs) were very efficient and converting energy into light, but
it was a very difficult task to extract the light from the device for
illumination. Once this problem was solved LEDs took on the well-known dome
shape and immediately gained commercial traction. Currently organic light
emitting diodes (OLEDs) suffer a similar issue. OLEDs are very efficient at
converting energy into light; however, much of the light is trapped within the
device and is unable to be used for illumination. The research targets this
issue with microcavity structures in hopes of creating a solution to OLEDs,
allowing them to become widely available in the commercial market.