* 1622854
* STTR Phase I:  Next Generation high sensitivity, rapid immunoassays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jonathan Posner, Soros, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a highly sensitive, accurate,
disposable, and affordable point-of-care diagnostic for detecting protein
biomarkers. The transformational aspects of the technology are in enabling
health care workers, or even consumers directly, to receive diagnoses in less
than 10 minutes with an inexpensive, simple to operate diagnostic test that
operate similar to over the counter pregnancy tests. We are focusing on the
diagnosis of Chlamydia Trachomitis (CT). There is not point-of-care test
available for CT which infects more than 300 million people each year. CT is
asymptomatic and can have long term repercussions including pelvic inflammatory
disease (PID), an infection that can damage the uterus, cervix, and ovaries,
potentially causing women to become infertile. For this reason, the Center for
Diseases Control recommends all women younger than 25 receive yearly screening.
Once demonstrated, the LID technology will be broadly applied to other illnesses
and indications that would also benefit from immediate diagnoses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate the feasibility of
utilizing lateral flow isotachophoresis diagnostic (LID) technology for
chlamydia, which currently does not have a POC test available in the US. The
proposed technology applies an electric field across a lateral flow test to
perform isotachophoresis (ITP), a powerful method for extracting and
concentrating target biomolecules. LID improves assay sensitivity by more than
100x, making it suitable for a variety of indications that are currently not
practical for existing lateral flow assays. The increased sensitivity is
expected to allow clinicians to make confident diagnoses using these tests. This
STTR will address key technical hurdles by developing the required chemistry and
protocols for high accuracy chlamydia diagnostics using LID. The ultimate
objective of the project is to show that the required electronics can be made at
low cost and meet regulatory guidelines such as FCC emissions.