* 1622799
* STTR Phase I: Production of aromatic commodity chemicals via the coumalic acid platform using the catalyzed Diels-Â­&amp;#8208;Alder reaction in a continuous flow reactor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Robert Johnson, SusTerea Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project is the accelerated utilization of crop materials for
the manufacture of biobased aromatic chemicals such as terephthalic acid and
benzoic acid, which currently have global market value of $60 billion and $200
million, respectfully. This project focusses on benzoic acid (applications
ranging from food additives to plasticizers) as the first commercial target to
gain a market foothold and develop this technology. This technology will provide
a biobased source for benzoic acid, which is currently produced almost
exclusively from the oxidation of petrochemical toluene. Situated in Iowa, the
epicenter of biomass production in the United States, SusTerea Biorenewables LLC
can impact the rural economy, expand the utilization of crop materials beyond
ethanol into the production of biobased chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project is development of the
biobased coumalic acid platform, for producing an array of industrially
important aromatic molecules. The technological basis for the project began with
the identification by researcehers at the NSF Engineering Research Center,
Center for Biorenewable Chemicals (CBiRC) of a chemical catalysis pathway to
transform an industrially optimized fermentation product (malic acid) into
coumalic acid and the discovery that coumalic acid could be used to produce an
array of aromatics such as benzoic acid, terephthalic acid, and dimethyl
terephthalate. Thus, coumalic acid has the potential to become a platform
chemical opportunity in the burgeoning biorenewable chemical industry. First,
the reaction conditions including temperature, pressure and solvent using an
industrially relevant bench scale continuous flow reactor will be optimized.
Second, new catalysts to substitute noble metals will be explored for the key
aromatization step. Third, this experimental data will be used to construct a
preliminary process design and a techno- economic model towards developing a
scalable production technology.