* 1622922
* STTR Phase I:  Sub-circuit Energy Monitoring and Performance ReAction Software (SEMPRA Software)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* John Sweet, Silicon Ribbon, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,989.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on increasing
the efficiency of computer power utilization even as transistors continue to
shrink in size. The energy density requirements of modern computing devices are
higher than ever before, leading to strict power constraints in mobile devices,
high operating costs for fixed infrastructure computing, and incredibly low
yields for the highest-density microchips. Mobile device manufacturers fiercely
compete on battery life. Cloud service providers consume, and pay for, the
energy equivalent of small cities. Meanwhile, the competitiveness of American
manufacturers hangs in the balance. The present project will have wide ranging
impacts in Energy and Power Management in microchips, electronic devices, and
smart power demand-response management systems that utilize them, by increasing
IC performance without increasing power ? opening the door to a new era of
computer power utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project expands upon both industry and academic research
concerning in-situ power measurement and power management of integrated chips.
For the most part, to date both industry and academic research has produced a
striking paucity of practical solutions for in-situ power measurement. This
project, however, builds upon prior NSF-funded research which has pointed toward
novel practical applications. By removing significant technical risks in an
industry-class testbed, this STTR project will demonstrate the viability of one
of these applications, which will provide accurate sub-component level power and
temperature monitoring, run-time hotspot detection on a fully packaged chip, and
intelligent power management based on accurate power/temperature measurements.
Until this is project is complete, no one can predict whether it is possible to
operate with overheads that are low enough to justify commercial adoption.