* 1622473
* 2016 NSF-Germany IoT Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2018
* USD 99,901.00

The workshop brings together R&amp;D experts from the German and U.S. academic,
government, and&lt;br/&gt;industry sectors to help spur discussion on research
gaps, opportunities, and potential international&lt;br/&gt;collaborations and
deployments in the areas of IoT (Internet of Things) and CPS. More specifically,
the workshop&lt;br/&gt;will explore ongoing research and development activities
in IoT/CPS, seek to identify future&lt;br/&gt;joint research opportunities, and
establish a foundation for cooperative strategic progress&lt;br/&gt;in this
important and rapidly growing area. The magnitude of research challenges and the
urgency of addressing them require a strategic&lt;br/&gt;approach. Combining the
specific strengths from the United States and from Germany is
synergistic&lt;br/&gt;with the goal of accelerating progress in all aspects of
research. The program of the meeting includes invited academic research and
industry presentations about prospective research synergistic collaborations in
the areas of IoT and CPS between the United&lt;br/&gt;States and Germany. Some
topics that will be discussed are: 1) Architectures; 2) Development
environments; 3) Foundations; 4) Inter-operability and Standardization. Funds
from the workshop will support US researchers participating in the workshop.
Significant efforts will be made to attract women and other under-represented
minorities as workshop participants from both US and German sides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing fusion of information and communication
technologies with engineering of physical&lt;br/&gt;systems has triggered
tremendous changes in private and public sectors. These changes
deeply&lt;br/&gt;influence the nature of systems we build, the technologies we
use for development and manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;and the way we teach
engineering. The resulting new generations of Cyber-Physical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;(CPS) and their emerging platforms such as the Internet of
Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet&lt;br/&gt;(II) require bringing together
competences both from the information technologies and the&lt;br/&gt;engineering
disciplines. As a result, academia, industry, and society will need to
expand&lt;br/&gt;capacity in the area of creating CPS in a dependable way.