* 1622893
* Conference Title:   Research Integration of Early Findings from Institution Transformation Projects
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Geoffrey Herman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 45,808.00

The adoption and sustained use of research-based instructional strategies are
more likely to occur when institutions create environments and structures to
support faculty efforts to switch to them. The Division of Undergraduate
Education has created several grant opportunities to support institutional
transformation in STEM instruction by providing institutional grants under the
WIDER program during 2012 and 2013 and thereafter in the IUSE: EHR program in
the Institutional and Community Transformation track. (WIDER stood for Widening
the Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence-Based Reforms. IUSE: EHR stands
for Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in the EHR Directorate.) This
conference will assemble Principal Investigators and co-Principal Investigators
on projects supported by those two programs, as well as allied NSF programs
under the NSF-wide IUSE framework, e.g. IUSE: GEOPATHS, IUSE: RED, and IUSE:
POLAR. To save transportation costs, it will piggyback on a national meeting of
NSF grant recipients in an array of the aforementioned programs past and
present. This meeting is scheduled for the spring, 2016. Following NSF's 4-year
focus on transforming institutions through grants in order to overcome intra-
institutional barriers to adopting research-based instructional strategies,
there is now a substantial number of institutions engaged in spreading the use
of evidence-based teaching approaches and associated efforts in assessment and
evaluation. Each institution is engaged in a partly unique set of activities to
increase and support the spread of research-based practices. The structure of
the conference is designed to determine how different approaches are working in
different institutional contexts in order to identify those that are robust to
institutional setting and those that are more idiosyncratic to the host
institution. In a single institution there is a tendency for the research team
in each institution to be heavily influenced by the idiosyncrasies of their
institution. By connecting across institutions, teams will be able to develop a
broader perspective on the effectiveness of various strategies that can be
deployed in service of the main goal of spreading effective teaching practices
across the instructional faculty.

The primary purpose of this project is to conduct a research integration study
of the preliminary findings of the projects supported by WIDER and IUSE: EHR.
This integration study will provide a venue for research teams to compare
results and share their understandings of what is working. The conference will
lead to three outcomes: identification of successful strategies across a variety
of institutional contexts, a synthesis of findings, and a network of sponsored
projects for further follow-up. This conference will use the experience and
expertise of the Principal Investigators through research integration by
dialogue, using the approaches of a consensus conference and a consensus
development panel through use of break-out sessions. A 7-step meta-ethnographic
approach will be used.