* 1622801
* I-Corps:  Improved Skeletal Visualization Process for Developmental Toxicology and a Novel 3-D Histology Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Michael Johnson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

When a patient goes in for a cancer biopsy, the doctor removes a piece of tissue
from the patient and sends it to a pathologist. The pathologist takes a few very
thin slices of this biopsy, places them on a glass microscope slides, stains
them and visualizes them on a microscope. From these thin slices the pathologist
makes the diagnosis of the disease. The problem with this approach is that these
thin slices do not tell the full story of what is going on with the biopsy and
do not give a complete picture of what is going on with the disease. Because of
this, cancer is frequently misdiagnosed and patients receive inadequate
treatment for their disease. This I-Corps team has invented a patent-pending
chemical formula called Visikol that is able to render biological tissues like
biopsies transparent so that they can be imaged in their entirety instead of
thin slices. Using the Visikol core technology this team has developed numerous
bio-imaging platforms which it intends to license to pharmaceutical companies
and contract research organizations (CROs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has
already used the Visikol core technology to develop bio-imaging platforms for
the visualization of skeletal tissues by CROs and for the 3-D histological
visualization of tissues by pathologists. There are many technologies that this
group has developed using the Visikol technology, but the scope of this project
will be these two bio-imaging platforms. While these platforms are currently
market-ready, this group will work directly with potential customers to
understand how they will fit into their current processes so that they can be
easily adopted. The primary goal for this project over a 6-month period of time
is to license the use of each one of these technology platforms to at least one
company. During the I-Corps program, the group will reach potential customers
through having a table at the Society of Toxicology Trade Show and attending the
BIO International partnering sessions. Through these conversations the team will
setup material transfer agreements to demonstrate the advantages of our
platforms in their labs and transition these pilot studies into licenses.