* 1622444
* Expanding the Computational Statistics Toolbox for General Hierarchical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Perry de Valpine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,920.00

Hierarchical statistical models allow analysis of patterns in complex data while
accounting for relationships such as temporal or spatial patterns or shared
sampling units. A great variety of analysis algorithms for hierarchical models
have been developed by statistical researchers but are unavailable to
practitioners such as social scientists and biologists. The NIMBLE software
platform was developed to bridge this gap and make it easier for scientists to
use a variety of algorithms on their specific datasets. In particular NIMBLE
provides a programming environment in which researchers can implement algorithms
that can then be easily used by others in the context of specific datasets. The
work under this project will extend NIMBLE to provide computational methods for
working with very flexible statistical methods known as Bayesian nonparametric
methods. These methods allow researchers to summarize variables and quantify
relationships between different variables in an analysis while making fewer
assumptions than standard statistical approaches. While Bayesian nonparametric
methods have developed substantially in the last 10-15 years, many of these
methods are hard or time-consuming for those working with data to implement on
their own. This project will implement many such methods in the NIMBLE software,
thereby providing them to practitioners to use in their day-to-day analyses.
Moreover, it will provide a foundation for ongoing development and sharing of
new and improved such methods in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large amount
of research aims to improve the intertwined statistical and computational
methods for analysis of hierarchical statistical models. Such research is
important because problem-specific hierarchical models facilitate rapid advances
in many scientific fields. However, statistical researchers have lacked a
flexible software platform designed for programming and disseminating the many
varieties of algorithms such as Markov chain Monte Carlo, sequential Monte
Carlo, and methods that build upon them. The NIMBLE system provides such a
software platform. This project helps to further fill that gap by extending the
NIMBLE system to enable use of Bayesian nonparametric methods, with a focus on
nonparametric mixture models, of which the Dirichlet process model and related
models are widely-known. This extension will allow routine application of these
nonparametric mixture models as prior distributions for parts of arbitrary
hierarchical models. The project will implement a variety of techniques for
fitting Bayesian nonparametric mixtures, focusing on both collapsed and blocked
samplers in Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms. Such techniques methods have
been highly developed by specialists but are limited in their research and
scientific applications by lack of general implementation.