* 1622946
* STTR Phase I:  A robotic system for performing biopsies and therapeutic interventions while the patient is inside an MRI scanner
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Michael Heffernan, GuidaBot, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is that it will benefit healthcare by improving
patient outcome and procedural efficiency. While Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) is increasingly used to guide interventions, this is challenged by the
limited access to the patient inside the scanners. Current practices - either
removing the patient and manually inserting the tools or moving the patient to
another modality - lengthen the procedures, reduce accuracy, and increase
possible trauma. The proposed novel robotic and MRI technologies will address
those limitations, enabling performing procedures with the patient inside the
MRI scanner. Thus continuous MRI images can be used for diagnostic and
therapeutic interventions offering more accurate lesion targeting, shorter
procedure times, reduced patient trauma, faster recovery, lower cost, and
improved patient outcome. This would transform interventional medicine by
improving diagnostic and therapeutic interventions with high impact to patients,
their families, and society. With faster patient recovery, this technology will
reduce the overall cost of healthcare and enable faster return of patients to
the workforce. The novel robotic technologies will generate new positions in R&D
and production in medical industries, as well as economic benefits from
employing highly skilled personnel.

The proposed project will develop novel technologies at the intersection of
robotics and imaging. The solid-media transmission (SMT) mechanism offers the
flexibility of fluidic lines but in a system that is leak-free and less complex
and has a more compact power take-off arrangement. The SMT mechanism enables the
development of an MRI-compatible manipulator that is adaptable and scalable for
use in a wide range of medical interventions, carrying and maneuvering virtually
any tool. The proposed research will elucidate the effect of geometric and
material parameters on the operation of the SMT mechanism. A prototype SMT-
actuated manipulator will be used to demonstrate the functionality of this
technology in real-time MRI-guided procedures in-situ and disseminate it with
on-site and hands-on demonstrations to clinical venues. Beyond the merit in
medical applications, this research enhances scientific and technological
understanding by demonstrating an alternative mechanism of remote actuation or
local distribution of actuation within a manipulator, which creates the
potential to generate novel mechatronic assemblies with applications in
automation, oil/gas industries, and aerospace.