* 1622741
* SCH: INT: Reducing Traumatic Brain Injury Risk with Impact Compensation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* David Carrier, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,827,425.00

Traumatic brain injury is a leading cause of death and disability in the United
States. Over 1.7&lt;br/&gt;million people sustain a brain injury each year and
make up one-third of all injuries seen in the&lt;br/&gt;emergency room.
Developing rehabilitation and treatment strategies to manage this disease
are&lt;br/&gt;important, but preventing the occurrence of brain trauma is also
critical component to the solution.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
reduce the risk of traumatic brain injury through smart
technology&lt;br/&gt;that collects sensory data to predict and characterize head
impact in real-time, optimizes protective&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms based on those
impact characteristics, and sends impact trauma attributes to a
clinical&lt;br/&gt;database for further analysis and injury risk prediction.
This technology will substantially improve&lt;br/&gt;traumatic brain injury
prevention and diagnosis in motor vehicle crashes, sports, and
industrial&lt;br/&gt;accidents. To accomplish this goal, fundamental research
efforts include (1) real-time situational&lt;br/&gt;monitoring to predict when
and how dangerous impacts are about to occur and (2) active&lt;br/&gt;prevention
mechanisms to reduce the risk of brain injury impact. Initial evaluation of
the&lt;br/&gt;technology is in a sports setting, but the system components can
be widely adaptive for&lt;br/&gt;implementation in motor vehicles, industrial
safety helmets, and living environments for the&lt;br/&gt;elderly.&lt;br/&gt;The
research goals of this proposal are to (1) reduce the risk of traumatic brain
injury through&lt;br/&gt;advanced situational monitoring, musculoskeletal
activation, and impact-specific force reduction;&lt;br/&gt;and (2) to improve
potential identification of head injury risk based on multiscale
brain&lt;br/&gt;deformation modeling. These goals are accomplished by
integrating four fundamental research&lt;br/&gt;efforts. First, tracking and
collision detection algorithms are developed based on radio
frequency&lt;br/&gt;(RF) sensing, processing, and flexible antenna design. When
used in conjunction with triaxial&lt;br/&gt;accelerometers, gyroscopes, and
magnetometers, these algorithms provide the sensing
capabilities&lt;br/&gt;required to detect objects, capture directional velocity
data of surrounding objects, and process&lt;br/&gt;data in real-time to
determine probabilities and characteristics of impending collision.
Second,&lt;br/&gt;musculoskeletal clenching following auditory warning is
investigated as a means of minimizing&lt;br/&gt;head angular acceleration
following head or body impact. The development of auditory
warning&lt;br/&gt;cues and muscle clench strategies utilizes kinematic
musculoskeletal modeling and human subject&lt;br/&gt;studies to identify
required auditory cues and response times as well as muscle
activation&lt;br/&gt;parameters that best mitigate head angular acceleration
during a collision. Third, active force&lt;br/&gt;reduction specific to
impending impact characteristics are implemented using a unique
controllable&lt;br/&gt;air-filled bladder. Optimal pressure and deflection
characteristics of the bladder are based on&lt;br/&gt;impact velocity and
direction, and evaluated with a novel three-dimensional multiscale
finite&lt;br/&gt;element model of the human head. This model incorporates
anatomical variability in the&lt;br/&gt;microstructures at the brain-skull
interface, a region that is critical to predictions of head
injury.&lt;br/&gt;The fourth fundamental research area uses the multiscale model
to investigate the relationship of&lt;br/&gt;head impact force and acceleration
to regional deformation of brain tissue upon impact. These&lt;br/&gt;studies
will be used to improve predictions of TBI risk from impact kinematics.