* 1622490
* Theory and practice for exploiting the underlying structure of probability models in big data analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Streets, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,964.00

Ever-increasing use of data-intensive methods in scientific discoveries has led
to a paradigm shift in science in recent years. High throughput scientific
experiments, routine use of digital sensors, and intensive computer simulations
have created a data deluge imposing new challenges on scientific communities to
find effective and computationally feasible methods for processing and analyzing
very large datasets. Despite many attempts, however, the necessary development
of theoretical and computational foundations for big data analysis is lagging
far behind. Many existing statistical methods are not capable of handling such
data-intensive problems in terms of theoretical foundation as well as
computational complexity and scalability. For analyzing high dimensional data
with possibly complex structures, this research will offer a set of fundamental
solutions using principled statistical methods. The resulting methods will
provide a robust framework for big data analysis and allow scientists to use
statistical models beyond their current limited applicability. The techniques
developed in this project are likely to gain widespread acceptance across a
broad spectrum of scientific disciplines, as well as in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is mainly on Bayesian
statistics. Many recent methods aim to improve computational efficiency of
Bayesian models by approximating the likelihood function using a small subset of
data. In contrast, the objective of this research is to explore underlying
structures of probability models and exploit these features to design efficient
and scalable computational methods and algorithms for Bayesian inference in big
data analysis. To this end, (1) the PIs will define and study the structure of
probability distributions in order to develop novel geometrically motivated
methods for statistical inference; (2) the PIs will develop efficient and
scalable computational methods that accurately approximate probability
distributions by exploiting their geometric properties; (3) finally, the PIs
will apply these methods to real computationally-intensive problems from
biological sciences. Due to its interdisciplinary nature, this research is
expected to contribute to several fields, including statistics, machine
learning, applied mathematics, and data-intensive computing.