* 1622345
* Collaborative Research: DarkSide-20k
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Emilija Pantic, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 04/30/2023
* USD 155,000.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award is to support the NSF-funded DarkSide (DS)
groups for the construction of DarkSide-20k (DS-20k), a direct WIMP search using
a Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LAr TPC) with an active (fiducial) mass
of 23 tons (20 tons).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DarkSide collaborators have proposed
a technology for separation of He-3 at large He-4 production plants that could
alleviate future shortages of the rare helium isotope. The Urania project will
establish a long-term facility that will be able to produce hundreds of tons of
low-radioactivity underground argon (UAr), and will supply UAr for several
programs beyond DarkSide-20k, such as for radiometry, Ar-39 age dating of ground
water, and National Security treaty verification. The DarkSide program will
advance technologies for detection of Ar-37, used for nuclear test ban
verification, and Ar-39, used for radiometric dating. The Aria project will
further reduce the Ar-39 in UAr by isotope separation, yielding as by-product
the ability to separate important stable isotopes such as O-18, N-15, and C-13.
These are used to produce radionuclides for medical positron emission tomography
(PET). Technologies for advanced gas purification, precision cleaning,
production of ultra-pure titanium, and reduction of radioactivity in silicon
chips will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant improvement
in sensitivity is made possible by technology developed within several world-
wide programs toward WIMP recoil detection with liquid argon as the target, and
in particular within the DarkSide-10 and DarkSide-50 programs, including
operation of the DarkSide-50 LAr TPC with both atmospheric argon (AAr) and
underground argon (UAr) fills. Liquid argon is an excellent medium for WIMP
detection due to its efficient conversion of energy from nuclear recoils into
both ionization and scintillation. The argon scintillation time profile ('pulse
shape') depends on the nature of the ionizing particle, providing powerful
particle discrimination to suppress background from natural radioactivity. Using
AAr in DarkSide-50, it was demonstrated that pulse shape analysis suppresses
beta/gamma backgrounds by a factor in excess of 1.5 x 10^7, one of the most
powerful background rejection factors among all dark matter
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.