* 1622993
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Geospatial Informatics to Enhance an  Undergraduate Biological Science Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Maruthi Sridhar Balaji Bhaskar, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,999.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to infuse the undergraduate biology curriculum at
Texas Southern University with geospatial informational science and technology
(GIST). This will help prepare students to address global challenges in the
fields of geospatial information, ecology, environmental science, and natural
resource management. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and
formative and summative evaluation are an integral part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the objectives to 1) promote
student interest in geospatial informatics thereby addressing the global need
for an increasingly diversified geospatial workforce, 2) foster critical
thinking and enhance problem solving skills to better prepare students for
future careers demanding geospatial skills in a range of fields, 3) equip
students with cutting edge geospatial technology skills to collect field data,
create and interpret geospatial maps, and 4) increase the number of
underrepresented students applying for graduate programs and internships in
geospatial-related STEM-fields. This will be accomplished by adding geospatial
content to modules in existing courses, creating a GIST-focused course,
developing a new undergraduate certificate in geospatial science, and
implementing a GIST undergraduate research program. Through a range of planned
dissemination activities, this project has the potential to affect the
implementation of GIST components at a range of institutions.