* 1622628
* III: Travel Fellowships for Students from U.S. Universities to Attend ISWC 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Amit Sheth, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 02/28/2017
* USD 20,000.00

This National Science Foundation award will fund Student Travel Fellowships for
US students attending the 15th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC
2016). The conference will be held on October 17-21, 2016 in Kobe, Japan. ISWC
is the premier international forum for state-of-the-art research on all aspects
of the Semantic Web - the next generation World Wide Web. The Student
Fellowships will help cover the travel costs for US students, making it possible
for them to attend the conference and discuss and disseminate their work. They
will also provide an opportunity for them to interact with future national and
international scientific collaborators.

The International Semantic Web Conference, which is now in its fifteenth year,
is an interdisciplinary conference that includes work on: Data Management,
Natural Language Processing, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Ontologies
and Ontology Languages, Semantic Web Engineering, Linked Data, User Interfaces
and Applications. It regularly has several hundred attendees. In addition to the
main technical tracks, the conference includes a variety of events that provide
opportunities for deeper interaction amongst researchers at different
institutions, at different stages of their research careers, and researchers who
are interested in many different aspects of Semantic Web Research. Students
benefit from the Doctoral Consortium - a full day event where students can get
critical, but encouraging, feedback on their work from senior members of the
community. They also benefit from the career mentoring lunch, where experienced
members of the community from both academia and industry answer questions in an
informal setting.

For further information see the conference web site at:
http://iswc2016.semanticweb.org/