* 1622488
* Mathematical Foundations of Future Turbulent Flow Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stefan Heinz, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,987.00

The use of computational simulation methods is a requirement to address many
challenging problems involving fluid flow. This is the case, for example, with
regard to research focused on the improved use of wind energy, the optimization
of aircraft flight, and the prediction of weather and climate. Basically all
flows of practical relevance are turbulent. Despite intense research of more
than fifty years, accurate and computationally feasible predictions of turbulent
flows are still one of our biggest challenges. Over the last decades it became
clear that significant progress is needed in particular in two directions.
First, with respect to moderately turbulent flows, the development of simulation
methods is needed that enable exact flow predictions. Second, with respect to
highly turbulent flows, the development of hybrid simulation methods (which
combine different simulation tools) is needed that enable optimal flow
predictions. Unfortunately, currently existing simulation methods of these two
types suffer from serious mathematical problems (computational instabilities,
the lack of control). A detailed research plan for solving these problems
combined with a carefully organized plan for demonstrating the benefits of new
simulation methods are presented. The new computational simulation methods to be
developed under this effort will enable, e.g., a much more efficient use of wind
energy and optimization of aircraft flight.

The project addresses one of the most pressing mathematical problems: the
development of accurate and computationally feasible simulation methods for
turbulent flows, which is highly relevant to a variety of technical problems.
Research will be performed in two main directions. The track 1 direction is the
development of dynamic Large Eddy Simulation (LES) methods that enable correct
predictions of low and moderate Reynolds number flows. The track 2 direction is
the development of hybrid methods involving LES and Reynolds-Averaged Navier-
Stokes (RANS) equations. The use of such hybrid RANS-LES methods is the most
promising way to optimally predict flows at high Reynolds numbers. The current
development of track 1 and track 2 methods suffers from serious mathematical
problems (the instability of dynamic LES, the lack of control of RANS and LES
modes in hybrid RANS-LES, the determination of the degree of flow resolution of
these methods). A detailed research plan for solving these problems and
demonstrating the advantages of novel simulation methods will be pursued. The
project will have significant broader impacts. The dissemination plan specifies
the broad and efficient distribution of project results and codes to the
community. In addition to the presentation of talks and journal papers, the
basic project results will be posted on the main web page of the turbulence
research community. The education plan specifies several educational impacts
including the organization of a summer school on the use of stochastic methods
in fluid dynamics for graduate students and faculty. Service to the society will
be provided by bringing project results to the attention of NSF, NASA, and DOE,
as well as other researchers pursuing questions in this field, to illustrate new
opportunities to deal with relevant turbulent flow predictions.