* 1622370
* Collaborative Research:  Topological Invariants for Enhanced Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yuliy Baryshnikov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 190,000.00

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) emerged over the past decade as a powerful
alternative to the mainstream tools of data analysis. Informally stated, the
main premise of the TDA is that the data in any given problem have a shape, and
this shape matters, describing what classes of models should be used. The shapes
of data often reveal otherwise hidden patterns which characterize the underlying
process, thus providing us with more insight into the phenomenon under
investigation. Most of the work in topological data analysis has been focused on
global properties of data. However, local structures permeating complex data
sets, and in particular the distribution of different local structures within
the data, can provide a wealth of additional information crucial to
understanding of the underlying process. The proposed work aims at creating a
collection of tools, together with theoretical guarantees and algorithmic
instruments, allowing one to define and compute local topological structure of
the datasets.

The theoretical results which the principal investigators aim to prove would
involve the estimates on the probability of correct local topology recovery for
random noisy samples from the underlying space, from non-uniform or irregular
distributions. The algorithms and software tools developed within this proposal
will be tested and honed on several problems of data analysis stemming from
topics at the forefront of modern science or engineering. More specifically, the
PIs intend to (1) develop mathematical tools for describing local topological
structures in data; (2) develop methods for understanding behavior of local
topological invariants across scales; (3) study local topological invariants of
random functions, which is an important step towards quantifying local
topological structure of pure noise; (4) develop robust, local topology based
methods for capturing transient behavior (e.g. phase transitions) in dynamical
systems. To illustrate and validate the obtained results, they will be employed
to (1) capture transient behavior in power networks, such as onset of dangerous
oscillations; (2) characterize complex networks, in particular, the Internet and
plant root systems; (3) investigate brain activity, with the focus on neural
characteristics of various tinnitus related conditions.