* 1622215
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Low Cost Agricultural Soil Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Manu Pillai, Waterbit, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,880.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a new low cost decision support
tool to help growers optimize resources and grow more crop per drop. The company
is developing extremely low cost environmental sensors that will enable growers
to capture highly granular environmental data in the field and derive optimal
irrigation strategies through the application of data science. Water is a major
contributor to crop yields and growers struggle to deal will water scarcity and
quality, coupled with variability in the soils and irrigation systems. Through
the use of a data driven, closed loop decision support tool, growers will be
better equipped to deal with variability, make better resource use decisions and
improve crop yields. This new approach has the potential to enable growers to
increase yields by as much as 15% while maintaining or reducing water use.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the
detection of moisture and soil texture in soils using a low cost soil moisture
sensor based on magnetics. Growers rely on field data, including soil moisture,
to make daily decisions that impact plant health. The most significant decision
is when to apply water and in what quantity. Current approaches to detecting
soil moisture (and other soil characteristics) in an automated fashion are
expensive and unreliable leaving growers searching for alternatives. The
objective of this project is to develop a sensitive, accurate, and reliable
sensor that measures soil moisture using a novel, magnetics based approach.
During the project the team will build prototype sensors, test them in lab and
field environments, develop algorithms for calibrating the sensor, and explore
new approaches to presenting multidimensional field data to growers in a manner
that facilitates understanding and decision making.