* 1622766
* STTR Phase I:  The use of wrist-worn devices and sensory stimulation for evaluating sleep
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Dmitry Gerashchenko, Mobile Sleep Technologies L.L.C
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve people's lives by creating the
first wrist-based device that can reliably assess sleep quality. A large pool of
undiagnosed patients and the growing population of the elderly point to a
massive end-user market for sleep disorder diagnostics devices. The market is
steadily increasing due to the visible tilt in preference from drugs to home
care sleep tests that are more convenient and lack side effects. This trend is
also due to improvements in consumer based sensor technology, limited number of
technicians or specialized physicians, and long wait times. In accordance with
these market needs, this project is designed to develop a system for assessing
sleep at home in a patient friendly and easy to environment. This technology is
expected to be especially attractive to elderly patients looking for
alternatives to medications and traditional sleep disorder tests. Because the
algorithm developed in this project will be tested and validated in a sleep
laboratory, it will be accepted in both clinical and non-clinical setting.

The proposed project is a research and development effort to create and test a
new system for detecting sleep stages. Because poor sleep is common in modern
society and has considerable consequences, including decreased work
productivity/abilities, increased rate of accidents and traffic fatalities, and
increased health care costs, there is a great need for a new system that can
provide an ambulatory assessment of sleep quality under real-world conditions.
Although there are many wrist-based devices on the market that are well-suited
for measuring sleep in both home and clinical settings, none of these devices
can currently allow reliable assessment of sleep quality. This project will
develop a new algorithm for a wrist-based device that will detect sleep quality
based on actigraphy, photoplethysomnography, and physiological responses to
sensory stimulation. This research will apply a multi-modal approach to assess
quality of sleep and advance the science of diagnosis and treatment of sleep
disorders.