* 1622971
* STTR Phase I:  Piezoelectric Fatigue Fuse Based Wireless Sensor Network
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Christopher Lynch, Metal Fatigue Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 223,906.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to establish a
precedence for remote, real time assessment of the safety and serviceability of
infrastructural assets through the development of a self-powered structural
health monitoring system. This piezoelectric fatigue fuse (PFF) will enable the
establishment of quantifiable metrics to discern the current state of life as
well as projected lifetimes and reparability criteria for assets ranging from
bridges, to oil platforms, to ship hulls, and optimistically to any steel
structures where fatigue is the primary mode of failure. With the remotely
accessible, real time metrics provided by the PFF, asset owners will be able to
make informed decisions regarding visual and other nondestructive inspection
frequency and thereby reduce overall cost of maintenance, inspection and
operation. Over the course of the design and evaluation of the sensors, an
assessment of the underlying effects of fatigue crack nucleation and propagation
through designed stress concentrations in coupled electromechanical systems will
be performed. This work will illuminate the material and geometric constraints
necessary to optimize piezoelectric transducers to provide adequate power and
robust signal to noise ratios for fatigue sensing under real world, dynamic
spectrum loading scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project to design and develop a piezoelectric fatigue
fuse aims to address the growing problem of transit asset management in the
United States. The recent series of bridge failures in the US exemplifies the
public safety risks of ageing infrastructure and without a method to inspect and
monitor fatigue in steel structures with improved accuracy and efficiency, the
safety and serviceability of these structures is at an ever-increasing risk. The
aim of developing and introducing PFF?s is to provide a measure of loading
history that correlates with fatigue crack growth to predict current state-of-
life and dictate economic options for future inspection and repair frequency.
This will be accomplished by developing a system which transduces the mechanical
loading of a structure into electrical energy which is simultaneously used to
charge low-power electronics and generate digital data corresponding to the
fatigue life of the asset. The key technical results of this program will be the
measured electrical response of optimized PFF sensors, an understanding of
signal modulation as the mechanical fuses accrue fatigue damage and the
requirements of the low power electronics and radios necessary to make these
systems truly self-powered.