* 1622772
* Workshop:   FutureProofing Natural History Collections: Creating Sustainable Models for Research Resources; Fall, 2016, New Haven, CT
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Christopher Norris, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 94,190.00

Natural history museums are a treasured resource for public education and
enjoyment. Less well-known to the general public, but critically for American
science, they house millions of specimens and large quantities of data that are
used by researchers to answer a range of questions relating to human health,
agriculture, land management, conservation, and national security. Collectively,
they form one of the largest scientific research facilities in the world, but
the majority of the operating expenses of this national system are born by
nonfederal organizations, both private and public, which in many cases struggle
to meet these costs. If museum collections are to rise to the challenges facing
society in the 21st Century, there is an urgent need to develop new economic
models of operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop brings together a
diverse, interdisciplinary group of natural history museum curators and
collections staff, collections users (both current and potential),
sustainability experts, management research specialists, and future studies
experts to discuss the potential for developing (1) quantitative measures of
collections value and (2) economic models for translating this value into
support for collections, based on tangible benefits. The agenda will foster an
entrepreneurial approach to sustainability, encouraging participants to develop
a variety of new business models in the context of long-term trends shaping
society in order to secure the future of natural history museums and
collections. The results of this project, including a white paper, will be
available at www.esa.org.