* 1622959
* STTR Phase I:  Biomanufacture of Novel Heparan Sulfate Glycosaminoglycans
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Charles Glass, TEGA Therapeutics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to commercialize novel sugar polymers known as
glycosaminoglycan (GAGs) for a variety of important medical applications. GAGs
are key components in a number of important physiologic and pathophysiologic
conditions (e.g., tumor angiogenesis, thrombosis); however, developing a
detailed understanding of these roles, which may significantly impact human
health, is challenging due to a lack of analytical techniques for glycan
analysis and the absence of high quality GAG samples available for research.
GAGs have precise functional roles in cell signaling cascades, which can vary
depending on the particular GAG structural composition. Particular GAG
compositions vary among different tissue types as well as among different
developmental and physiological states. Hence, to achieve the proper functional
characteristics and obtain reproducible experimental results, it is critical
that GAG samples are available with consistent and defined compositions.
Unfortunately, most commercially available GAG samples are from animal sources
with high inherent variability and are not well characterized. The potential for
contamination or adventitious agents makes the animal-derived GAG samples even
less desirable for human therapeutics.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop genetically engineered Chinese
Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells producing GAGs with defined compositions. Culture
conditions will be optimized to maintain GAG composition while providing product
yields at a level sufficient for commercialization. A series of engineered cell
lines will be produced in order to prepare GAGs with different compositions that
model the different compositions and different functional characteristics found
in nature. GAG samples will be characterized both structurally and functionally
to provide profiles for each type of sample, which will be reliable and
reproducible since the GAGs are prepared from cells grown under controlled
conditions. These samples will be a valuable resource for researchers in a
number of biological and medical fields. It is thought that the high quality
will command premium prices. However, to help reduce costs and promote
commercialization, this proposal will test growth conditions in bioreactors to
increase the capacity and efficiency of production. Research using these high
quality GAG samples will provide proof-of-principal for the use these GAGs in a
variety of important therapeutic applications such as oncology, lipid
metabolism, tissue regeneration, and hematology.