* 1622192
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Personalized Learning for Hands-on Lab Based Cybersecurity Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Chun-Jen Chung, Athena Network Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a cloud-based E-Learning platform
providing hands-on labs and personalized learning support for science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education. Hands-on labs have become an
indispensable part of curriculum components for STEM education. There is a high
demand for students to practice real-world problems through hands-on labs;
moreover, hands-on labs should provide adaptive and personalized learning
capability for students to adjust their learning paths and contents to achieve
desired study outcomes more effectively. However, the main issues of providing
hands-on labs are in two-fold: (1) high lab management overhead for instructors;
and (2) lack of user-behavior learning models that can be used for personalized
learning in an experimental setup. In this SBIR Phase I project, we will develop
a platform providing a cloud-based virtual laboratory solution that minimizes
the lab management overhead, and tracks users' hands-on learning behavior to
provide personalized learning support in order to improve students' learning
outcomes. The presented solution will have great impacts for a broader
population from K-12 to higher education.

The novelty of the proposed research lies in the technology innovations by
conducting research in the following areas: (1) a Software Defined Networking
(SDN)-based approach to support Private Network and Network Security as a
Service (PNaaS and NSaaS) model for cloud resource provisioning in a highly
dynamic virtualized learning environment; (2) a pure web-based service model to
guide students' lab experiments based on cybersecurity knowledge bases and
concept maps; (3) learning behavior tracking and modeling to collect and
represent students' diverse learning activities for cybersecurity learning based
on ICAP (Interactive, Constructive, Active and Passive) features which describe
student?s cognitive engagement to discern different levels of engagement as
overt behaviors; and (4) build-in self-assessment services to measure users'
learning outcomes. The research goal of this SBIR I project will address the
challenges on how to create a scalable E-Learning environment to provide
resources (computing, storage, networking, education contents, and personalized
learning guidance) to a large number of learners and educators who have
different system resources and learning setup requirements.