* 1622626
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Unobtrusive Sensing and Motivational Feedback for Family Wellness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Jina Huh-Yoo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 314,149.00

This project is to design, develop, and evaluate an innovative family routine
sensing and feedback system called FRESH (Family Routine, Education, and Sensing
Health), which empowers families to actively engage in preventing child obesity
and improving family wellness. We develop unobtrusive sensing system using
audio, motion, and light sensors from off-the-shelf mobile devices (e.g., Tablet
personal computer (PC), smartphone). Integrated with an off-the-shelf wearable
physical activity detection device, our system will detect screen viewing
duration, family dinner dynamic, sleep quality and duration, and physical
activity level of the child. The tablet PC will display collected sensor data
through virtual pet and visual metaphors such as a blossoming flower or a
growing plant. The family's progress toward improved routine will be reflected
through the virtual pet and visual metaphors, which will be available in the
periphery of the family's activities throughout the day (e.g., displayed in the
living room, parents' smartphone home screen). Families will receive automated
feedback and suggestions for improving their routine. Family members will also
see how other families are doing compared to them for encouragement and
insights. We plan to engage K-12 students during summer to play with the
demonstration of our project, increase motivation for scientific research, and
increase awareness of family wellness to the surrounding communities. Our
technology will be shared as an open-source after the completion of the project
for broader dissemination and development of the science we have developed from
our project. Overall, our project develops new methods and paradigms of clinical
support that engage all family members and a community of families in improving
child and family health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design and evaluate the FRESH system, which automatically senses family routine
and gives motivational feedback to help families improve daily routines for
child obesity prevention. Family routines, such as sleep, screen viewing, family
dinner, and physical activity, are critical predictors of child obesity. While
many mobile health devices focused on motivating individuals to pursue healthy
behaviors, systems that take a family- and sensor-based approach have been under
explored. No existing technologies sense family routines critical to child
obesity. With visual and textual feedback driven by sensor data on routines,
FRESH offers an engaging way for the children, the family, and the community to
involve in family wellness. The technical merits of the project includes: (1)
Develop and evaluate unobtrusive sensing technology for monitoring family
routines; (2) Formatively assess designing visual and textual feedback in the
FRESH system; (3) Evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of the system
deployment. To fulfill the objective, we will use participatory design,
interviews, diaries, field studies, experiments, and user log analysis.