* 1622159
* SBIR Phase I:  Database development for improved agricultural statistics &amp; analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Mitchell Minarick, Quo Vadis, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the areas of risk management, data
collection, and participation/growth in the agricultural sector. With the
proposed platform, individuals with investment capital will be paired with
individuals who have access to infrastructure and management expertise. This
will allow small-scale farmers to invest in other farmers to diversify their
operations, creating a more reliable income stream and consequently increasing
the stability and resilience of small farms, which will greatly benefit the
rural economy. Incentivizing these farmers to upload data to improve projection
accuracy will result in more robust datasets that can be used to compare and
optimize farming practices. The micro-consortia that will be formed will reduce
barriers to entry in the agricultural sector by facilitating remote
transactions, contracts, and management. This platform could eventually help
farmers in developing countries produce agricultural goods with the financial
help and expertise of more established farms in the developed world. By
increasing participation in agriculture and improving upon current farming
practices around the world, this platform can help feed the world's growing
population for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to generate better agricultural
decision making and implementation tools by improving upon existing data sets.
Massive amounts of data are being collected by farming operations, but that data
is often difficult to manage. This project can help farmers utilize this
information by providing visual tools to make advanced data analysis and
decision-making more intuitive and user-friendly. The feasibility depends on
developing an accurate decision support system as well as providing actionable
recommendations to incentivize the use of the tools. The goal of the project is
to develop the main simulation tool for a decision support platform, along with
easy-to-understand visualizations of different investment projections and their
impact on income. Finally, users will be given the ability to act upon the
recommendations from the analysis immediately and directly from the analysis
platform.