* 1622299
* Collaborative Research:  Revealing the Geometry of Spatio-temporal Chaos with Computational Topology: Theory, Numerics and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Mark Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 106,000.00

The weather we experience is driven by convection, sunlight warms the earth
which heats the atmosphere which is cooled by the cold temperatures of outer
space. Most people are not interested in microscopic behavior, for example the
behavior of the individual molecules in the air, nor macroscopic behavior, such
as worldwide average temperature. What is of interest are mesoscopic patterns,
for example weather fronts which result in local changes in temperature. This
interest in mesoscopic, as opposed to micro- or macroscopic features, of large
scale systems occurs in a wide variety of complex large scale physical phenomena
such as combustion in engines, dynamics of biomass in the oceans, ventricle
fibrillation in a human heart, etc. These mesoscopic patterns take on many
different shapes and sizes and change with time, sometimes slowly and sometimes
rapidly. The form of these patterns and how they evolve in time is often very
dependent on parameters. New technologies are greatly increasing our abilities
to measure and simulate these physical phenomena, resulting in enormous data
sets, but our ability to extract and quantify this information in a way that
leads to understanding, predictability, and control of these systems is not
keeping pace. We will explore the use of new mathematical tools to address this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial and temporal complexity of Rayleigh-
BÃ©nard convection produces high dimensional time series data. A relatively new
algebraic topological tool called Persistent Homology will be used to provide
new tools for nonlinear dimension reduction. To ensure the applicability of
these methods and that physically important mesoscopic features of the dynamics
are preserved they will be developed in conjunction with the further development
of carefully controlled high precision convection experiments and state-of-the-
art, large scale, high-resolution numerical simulations of the Boussinesq
equations. This includes the analysis of the geometry of covariant Lyapunov
exponents. The new computational tools developed in this work should find broad
application in a wide variety of problems involving complex nonequilibrium
systems in nature (oceanic and atmospheric flows, climate and weather
forecasting) and in technology (nonlinear optical systems, combustion and
chemical reactions) where understanding and prediction of complex behavior is
desired.