* 1622418
* Arctic Microbes: Population Abundance and the Effects of a Warming Environment
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Rebekah Hare, Ilisagvik College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2019
* USD 198,821.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge
on the impact of a warming environment on arctic
microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilisagvik College is the only U.S. college
located in the Arctic at this time, which provides an advantageous location to
collect data on microbial changes. Ilisagvik College will use DNA and RNA
extractions from soil samples to test the hypothesis that temperature changes in
the Arctic that affect microorganisms is followed by changes in arctic
vegetation, which will ultimately affect arctic animals and the subsistence
lifestyle of people in the Arctic. Undergraduate students will participate in
fieldwork and sample collection, learn about genomics and gene sequencing, soil
measurement techniques, and data analysis. In addition, students will experience
communicating science at scientific conferences. There will be pre-college
programming including presentations by the undergraduate researchers and summer
camps on microbiology, where secondary students can learn about STEM careers and
become involved with place-based research on topics that may affect their lives.