* 1622495
* SHINE: Using Two-Ribbon Flare Observations and Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) Simulations to Study Eruptive Flares and Their Relationship to Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Yan Li, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2019
* USD 373,401.00

Two-ribbon flares are the most powerful and potentially geoeffective type of
solar flares. This 3-year SHINE project aims to investigate the dynamics of
solar flare ribbons, and relate them to photospheric magnetic structures and
properties of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs). The team will develop an ensemble
database of the two-ribbon flares in combination with magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
simulations of CMEs to understand the relation between reconnection flux and CME
properties. The project addresses the question of how flare ribbons develop, and
how they are associated with CMEs, which is very important for understanding the
fundamental physics of solar eruptions. The ability to relate large-scale CME
properties to the source-region flare properties based on a much larger dataset
and supported by theoretical MHD context will allow for improved space weather
forecasts (e.g., more accurate CME arrival times at 1 AU) and methods,
addressing the main goal of the SHINE community and the ability to protect our
assets in Space. The scientific outcome of this project will enhance scientific
and technological understanding of solar flares, enabling readiness for the
Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) and application of more realistic and
computationally sophisticated data-driven MHD models. The research project will
be led by junior female scientist at UC Berkeley who will work with several
undergraduate students at the host institution. The research and EPO agenda of
this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.

This SHINE project aims to utilize the newly assembled database of flare-ribbon
maps (within 45 degrees of disk center) and reconnection fluxes of all two-
ribbon flares (C1.0 and above) observed during the Solar Dynamics Observatory
(SDO) era to investigate how ribbons properties are related to other flare and
CME properties, both from the observational and modeling points of view. For all
events, the project team will calculate vector magnetic field inclination, shear
and the vertical electric current evolution inside and outside flare ribbons.
Where CME observations permit, the team will quantify the relationship between
large-scale CME properties, including the CME speed, acceleration and the
magnetic flux from the in-situ observed interplanetary CME (ICME) and compare
those with the ribbon's properties above. For three distinct events of solar
eruptions associated with slow, moderate and fast CMEs, the investigators will
perform 3D MHD simulations and analyze their flare ribbons and CME/ICME
properties to provide the theoretical context and guidance to fully understand
the observations.