* 1622777
* STTR Phase I:  TeraLink - Next Generation Free Space Optical Communications System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Alan Willner, R-DEX Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2017
* USD 224,817.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of a high speed and reliable wireless technology that will enable
telecommunications and wireless network operators to keep up with society?s
bandwidth and information needs. The tremendous growth of multimedia users and
Internet traffic has placed a significant strain on existing communication
networks. Over three billion people are connected to the Internet globally and
the explosion of mobile devices will continue to accelerate the worldwide growth
of Internet connectivity. Mobile network operators and other commercial and
government entities with large transmission requirements for backhaul and access
network applications need low cost and reliable high speed data transmission
solutions. Whereas fiber is the preferred solution, it is often not practical
and sometimes even impossible to install. The proposed technology will provide
an ultra-high capacity wireless communications solution for advanced and
developing countries that will provide an unprecedented combination of bandwidth
and range to meet the next generation?s service needs of carriers, enterprises
and government agencies around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the
technical feasibility of a commercial Free Space Optical (FSO) communications
system that provides multi-Terabit per second data transmission capacity over
long ranges. Specifically, the team will build on its numerous refereed
publications for combining Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM), Polarization
Division Multiplexing (PDM), and Orbital Angular Momentum (OAM) multiplexing to
address the technical hurdles that must be overcome to transform the scientific
results into a commercial product for the wireless communications industry.
Leveraging both experiments and simulation, the team will demonstrate how to
achieve real-time performance within a price point and form factor suitable for
a commercial product. With the successful completion of Phase I, the team will
lay the foundation for Phase II by significantly advancing the readiness of the
proposed technology and strengthening and validating its commercial position.