* 1622248
* SBIR Phase I:  Entity recognition for enabling interactions among connected things
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Sang Duck Jung, Pulzze Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,953.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is providing better method for connected systems
and devices to interact with each other. Current solutions require many months
of development and cost of development and maintenance can be overwhelming. The
proposed technology offers a way for interaction between systems and devices to
be configured rather than programmed. The technology also provides a way for
services to be configured by the user, rather than relying on developers to
create nodes or connectors. This is made possible through abstracting out the
interaction layer of software stack and creating a generic algorithm for
interaction to be configured. Much like when routers first came out, technology
of abstracting out a portion of software stack opens up opportunity for market
to perform tasks that once were programmer dependent. Abstraction of router code
enabled growth of Internet. We believe abstraction of Interaction code will
enable IoT to be widely deployed. Societal impact is achieved through large
number of interactive solution being created, and exponentially growing number
of sensors and devices to be utilized in full.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to solve the problem of
creating interaction between services being programmer dependent. In order for
services to interact, they need to be able to connect, communicate, and then
interact. Industry has done a great job in abstracting out various components of
application layers to provide connectivity and communication between two
services. However, interaction logic has always been software developed. It is
the single largest bottleneck in Internet of Things (IoT) solution creation,
deployment, and operation. All available tools for integration are development
tools. New method of creating solutions is being proposed where a solution is
designed and deployed around configured interaction logic. This is different to
many development tools that allow communication between services through custom
service bus, messaging protocols, and APIs. Interaction logic sits on top of
communication and connectivity layers. Technology involves methods and apparatus
to enable interaction between all connected things, and for enabling dynamic
mapping of interactions through service elements. The technology will provide
easy, rapid, and cost effective proliferation of IoT solutions. Since IoT
solutions are mostly interaction between devices and applications, abstracted
out interaction logic allows entire solutions to be created through
configuration of interaction logic.