* 1622860
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Analysis Tools for Production of Higher Indican Yielding Plants for Bio-based Indigo
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Sarah Bellos, Stony Creek Colors, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 224,676.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project
relate to the increased viability of indigo as an agricultural crop competing
with synthetically manufactured indigo dye. Indigo was among the major global
cash crops of the 18th and 19th centuries and accounted for 100% of the indigo
dye consumed in the world. Since the beginning of the 20th century, nearly 100%
of the indigo dye consumed in the world has been synthetically manufactured from
petroleum derivatives and hazardous and toxic chemicals. A small amount of
plant-derived indigo dye is produced throughout the world using traditional
artisan methods largely unchanged for centuries, but this supply is highly
variable in purity and consistency and is far from cost competitive with
synthetically manufactured indigo dye. Stony Creek Colors in cooperation with
the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center seeks through this project to improve
the available indigo planting stock by creating a high-throughput handheld assay
device capable of rapid measurements of the chemical precursors for indigo which
exist naturally in the plant leaves. During this process the team will also
improve the understanding of the genetics of the existing indigo planting stock
through DNA analysis of specific high-yielding plant
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I
research project are to develop new tools, both genomic and phenomic, for
analyzing the indigo crop Persicaria tinctoria, to produce an improved bio-based
specialty chemical derived from renewable, abundant plant-material. The STTR
project will map existing genetic resources while developing a unique approach
for plant indican (indigo precursor) analysis which will enable non-destructive
analysis of plant leaves in breeding lines. Finally, a genetic mapping
population between high and low indican-producing parent plants will be
constructed for analysis and laboratory validation. Successful completion of the
Phase I tasks tied to these objectives will prove the feasibility of selecting
and maintaining high indigotin yielding strains of P. tinctoria. These
improvements will be commercialized through higher indigotin yielding breeders
seed stock and will be spread to over 26,000 acres of cropland in the Southeast
US within 6 years, resulting in a more reliable and cost-competitive bio-based
indigo dye extracted from U.S. grown plant material. This will allow plant-
derived indigo to be more cost-competitive with synthetic indigo dye and to meet
the immediate market demand for U.S. bio-based indigo by denim mills.