* 1622670
* Workshop:   Photocatalysis, Photoconversion, and Photoelectrochemistry: Fundamentals, Techniques, and Applications for the 21st Century
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Malcolm Forbes, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2017
* USD 22,500.00

Professor Malcolm D. E. Forbes of Bowling Green State University is supported by
the Chemical Catalysis program, Division of Chemistry, the Americas program,
Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division to organize an
international workshop entitled "Workshop: Photocatalysis, Photoconversion, and
Photoelectrochemistry: Fundamentals, Techniques, and Applications for the 21st
Century." The workshop will be held on May 22-23, 2016 on the campus of the
Universidad Andre√¨s Bello in Santiago, Chile, immediately preceding the 25th
Meeting of the Inter-American Photochemical Society in Santiago, Chile. Fifteen
early-career U.S. student and post-doctoral researchers of diverse background
meet with 10 students from different South and Central American countries and
jointly interact with senior US and South American faculty in a constructive
environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this workshop award is to
encourage international collaboration and to provide the US students and
postdoctoral researchers with an international experience. The workshop exposes
them to the current frontiers and future directions in fundamental and applied
research in photocatalysis. The workshop serves to provide much needed cross-
fertilization, and bonds are formed between US and South American participants
that could potentially last a scientific lifetime. Furthermore, the US
participants develop a broader perspective on international science at an early
stage in their careers.