* 1622479
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: DNA Analysis As A Tool For Understanding Population Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Anne Stone, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 25,038.00

Research on migration in Archaeology has largely focused on its role as an agent
of cultural change. However, migration and genetic admixture are also drivers of
biological change and adaptation. Consequently, characterizing how ancient
migrations shape genetic diversity is vital to inform understanding of
biological ancestry, cultural evolution, and health outcomes in admixed human
populations. But, because modern populations do not retain all the genomic
diversity of ancient groups, genetic research with contemporary individuals
provides limited resolution for reconstructing ancient demographic events. This
limitation can be addressed by combining archaeological questions with ancient
DNA. This investigation characterizes the genetic diversity of ancient human
groups and test hypotheses about their relationships to other ancient and modern
populations. Specifically, ancient DNA obtained from human skeletal remains in
three archaeological sites (Tibes, Punta Candelero and Paso del Indio) will be
analyzed to investigate the role of migration and genetic admixture in the
history of pre-Columbian populations from the Caribbean island of Puerto Rico.
The project incorporates training of undergraduate students in laboratory and
analytical methods and contributes to the participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences through training of a female, Puerto Rican doctoral
student. The researchers will engage the public by disseminating project
findings through Ask-A Biologist, an online resource for students, teachers and
the public, and by collaborating with archaeologists and the Ceremonial Center
of Tibes site museum to integrate findings in public site tours. A significant
aspect of this research is the optimization of protocols for DNA recovery from
degraded skeletal remains. This methodological development improves ancient DNA
recovery from remains in tropical environments, and can be extended to forensic
applications where DNA may be damaged due to corpse deposition in adverse
preservation contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debate remains about how many
migrants settled the island of Puerto Rico in antiquity, where they came from,
and how these processes influenced social interaction networks across the
ancient Caribbean basin. This investigation compares ancient mitochondrial and
nuclear DNA from skeletal remains dated A.D. 500-1300, with data from other
modern and ancient indigenous populations of the Americas to determine: (1) How
were ancient populations in Puerto Rico related to continental Native American
groups, and what may this indicate about their origins? (2) What was the extent
of gene flow in the pre-contact Caribbean, and what may this indicate about
local social interaction? Project findings reassess existing models for the
peopling of Puerto Rico and the Caribbean, and explore how migration and
admixture shaped the biocultural diversity of ancient Caribbean populations. By
also examining the extent of inter-island migration and genetic exchange, this
investigation elucidates the role of kinship, residence patterns and mobility in
the maintenance of interaction networks across the pre-Columbian Caribbean.
Lastly, this study also sheds light on the genetic relationships between pre-
Columbian populations and modern Puerto Ricans, the second largest Hispanic
group in the USA. Given the growing role that Native American ethnicity plays in
contemporary Puerto Rican culture, project results have implications for the
construction and experience of modern Puerto Rican identity.