* 1622492
* Assessing population size and structure of the longfin smelt (Spirinchus thaleichthys) in the Nooksack River
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Rachel Arnold, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2018
* USD 221,819.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the
population dynamics of longfin smelt (Spirinchus thaleichthys), an important
species of forage fish that is not protected nor its catch
monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College (NWIC) will conduct a
study that aims to (1) determine temporal genetic structure of the Nooksack
River longfin smelt population; (2) determine the existence of a genetic
bottleneck; (3) estimate the effective population size; and (4) consider the
conservation implications of these findings. At the local level, the data from
this study will aid management decisions by both state and tribal agencies. At
the national level, the genetic information acquired in this study will add to
the overall knowledge of distinct population segments of longfin smelt. These
data will aid multiple agencies that cross international and state lines in
assessing other populations of longfin smelt and whether they constitute
distinct population segments. In addition, the information collected during this
study will provide baseline data for the effective population size of the
Nooksack River longfin smelt population. These data can be used to assess future
trends in population size in the light of changing river conditions, development
of or near the Nooksack River riparian habitat, and in the face of climate
change and ocean acidification. And lastly, the information gained from this
study will add to the limited understanding of the basic biology of the longfin
smelt by making the data available to other researchers, management agencies,
and the general public.