* 1622788
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced analytics for health progression monitoring and fall detection in a novel home health monitoring system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Hsinchun Chen, Caduceus Intelligence Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project will include providing affordable connected home care
for senior citizens (often with severe chronic conditions and incurring
significant medical expenses) living independently at home, resulting in
significant improvements in healthcare quality and a reduced burden on existing
healthcare resources. This project will not only decrease the burden on family
caregivers, who often give up their jobs to provide free care for senior
citizens at home, but will also allow organizations such as retirement
communities, memory care units and assisted living facilities to monitor
multiple patients remotely, thus reducing the need for overworked professional
caregivers. This project also aims to overcome deficits present in current home
health monitoring technologies by taking a more holistic approach to providing
preventive care by using advanced analytics and cutting edge sensor technology
that is affordable and accessible to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to overcome a pressing societal challenge (the burgeoning aging
population) facing many developed and emerging countries, including the U.S.
(the aging baby boomers) and China (the reverse 4-2-1 family pyramid due to the
former one-child policy). Despite failing health, most senior citizens prefer to
live independently at home and hence the focus of current healthcare
technologies has shifted from traditional clinical care to "at-home" care for
senior citizens. The proposed project will develop a smart and connected home
monitoring system for senior care that is unique in its technology and service
model including: (1) affordable and non-invasive home-based mobile health
technology with wearable human and object activity sensors for monitoring
health-related motion and daily activities and a cost-effective pre-configured
home gateway using BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) and 3G communication; (2) advanced
mobile health analytics algorithms and alerts for fall detection, health
progression monitoring, and patient health anomaly detection; and (3) a
comprehensive patient health activity portal and support for reporting user
activity and health status and engaging with family members. The overall goal is
to make aging at home easier, less expensive, and safer for senior citizens.