* 1622824
* STTR Phase I:  Continuous Production and Collection of Magnesium via Carbothermal Reduction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Aaron Palumbo, Big Blue Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project addresses the problem of embedded energy in the
manufacture of magnesium metal for use in vehicle light-weighting. Improving
fuel economy by incorporation of light metals, especially magnesium, does not
save on total lifecycle energy consumed if the magnesium was produced using
conventional methods. The most energy efficient production method known is a
process technology that was commercially viable during the 2nd World War but not
at any other time in history. The project innovation is based on reinvestigation
and reinvention of this dated process, discovering and addressing the reasons
for technical and economic failure. Domestic magnesium production using the
proposed state-of-the-art energy-efficient practices will lead to opportunity
and growth for downstream manufacturing methods that support a wide range of
military, industrial, and consumer products such as car parts, electronic
devices, titanium production, and canned beverages. The economic and
environmental benefits of the innovation in the long term will be ever more
prescient given the unprecedented rise in use of magnesium metal over the past
100 years and expected continuance of this rate of adoption.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of magnesium using carbothermic chemistry can
be realized at temperatures below 1250 degree C using a combination of three
operational parameters: 1) reduced pressure atmosphere, 2) addition of a
catalytic material, and 3) extensive size reduction of the reactant materials.
In conjunction with a continuous condensation and collection system, magnesium
produced from this process entails at least a 50% reduction in energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions compared to the predominant Pidgeon
process. The project will employ a variety of high temperature experimental
systems and methods to investigate performance of pelletized reactant materials
and obtain recovered metal yields above 85%. An optimized composition will be
statistically determined and used in a low-temperature prototype reactor system
for continuous production of crude magnesium. The goal of the project is to
produce a casted magnesium product and prove the reduction of energy intensity
and economic feasibility with a techno-economic analysis.