* 1622402
* CAREER: Reasoning under Uncertainty in Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 08/07/2015,02/28/2017
* Xinming Ou, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 23,249.00

Cyber security, like security in the physical world, relies upon investigation
methodologies that piece together dispersed evidence spread across multiple
places, and come to a conclusion on what security breaches have happened and how
they happened. While effective evidential reasoning based on manual analysis are
used in the physical world by law-enforcement agencies, in the cyber world we
need automated reasoning methodologies to handle the automated cyber attacks
against our nation's information infrastructures every day. This research aims
at discovering and developing such automated reasoning methodologies. The
problem is difficult due to the uncertain nature of such reasoning, which is
compounded by the characteristics of cyber attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
uncertainty in cyber security comes from two sources. The first is the
uncertainty from not knowing the attacker's actions and choices. Since hackers
are essentially invisible in the cyberworld, we have to rely upon various types
of sensors that report symptoms of potential attacks. The second source of
uncertainty comes from these sensors. Since in most cases the symptoms of
cyber&lt;br/&gt;attacks significantly overlap with symptoms from benign network
activities, it is not possible to rely on a single sensor to give an absolutely
correct judgment on whether an attack has happened and succeeded. A key question
is how to use these imperfect sensors to conduct reasoning so that one can come
up with almost certain conclusions regarding a system's security status.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This challenge of reasoning under uncertainty is not new.
In the past four decades computer science researchers have developed an array of
reasoning models and methods for uncertainty, especially in the area of
artificial intelligence. However, the emergence of cyber threats poses a
new&lt;br/&gt;challenge to this problem. The existing methodologies typically
require a knowledge-engineering process to build a knowledge model for the
problem domain. This has worked reasonably well with the more static and well-
behaved problem domains such as disease diagnosis. A key difference between
these problem domains and cyber security is that the latter has to deal with an
active&lt;br/&gt;malicious attacker who will try to break whatever assumptions
made in the reasoning model. For this reason, the knowledge model for cyber
security cannot be static because then they can be easily evaded. What will be
an effective and practical knowledge engineering approach to handle the
uncertainty in cyber security is the biggest open problem that needs to be
answered from the&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research adopts
an empirical, bottom-up approach to tackle the above challenges. Instead of
starting from the existing theories, the PI will start from empirical study on
how a human security analysts would reason about cyber events and try to capture
the essence of the reasoning in the process. Then, the PI will carry out this
empirical study by running intrusion detection sensors on production networks
and work with system administrators to understand and reason about the alerts.
The next step is to develop a reasoning model that simulates the human reasoning
process, and apply the automated reasoning engine on fresh new data to see how
it fares. In this spiral theory development process the PI can always make sure
that the methodologies are applicable to real cyber-security analysis and
constantly find gaps in the model that reveal what will be the most appropriate
theories and how to apply them in this problem. The eventual goal is to find the
right theoretical framework for reasoning under uncertainty in cyber-security,
and validate such theories through repeatable experiments on data from
production systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is tightly integrated
into the PI?s education efforts both for students and targeted at the society at
large. The empirical nature of the research provides a valuable venue for
dialogue between security practitioners and researchers, which will result in a
two-way education process: students working on the project can acquire the
essential skills of applying advanced knowledge to a practical problem; and
security practitioners like system administrators can learn the state-of-the art
in cyber security technology through collaborative work with the research team.
The empirical study carried out from the research will provide endless data and
examples to refresh the materials of the cyber-security courses taught by the
PI. New courses with a focus on uncertainty in cyber security defense will be
developed. There will be a number of undergraduate students who take part in the
research efforts, which will provide a unique education experience for them.
Moreover, the test-bed infrastructure produced from the research will also be
used as an education platform for the general public about cyber-security
problems, with the help of the out-reach programs already established at Kansas
State University.