* 1622433
* Statistical Modeling and Computation of Extreme Values in Large Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Shuguang Cui, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Numerous problems in environmental, earth, and biological sciences nowadays
involve large amounts of spatial data, obtained from remote ground sensors,
satellite images, geographic information systems, and public health sources,
etc. Analysis of extreme values is of particular interests in many such
applications. For instance, natural hazardous events such as severe tides, heat
waves, heavy rainfalls, and extreme air pollution events can cause substantial
damages in our society. The goal of this project is to better understand
spatially dependent extreme events for efficient quantitative risk management.
The project has a broad impact on multiple interdisciplinary fields including
statistics, geoscience, environmental science, operations research, machine
learning, and risk management. The modeling and computational approaches for
extreme value analysis and prediction in big data can be applied to a wide range
of practical and important problems including extreme climate change studies,
environmental hazardous event analysis, insurance risk assessments, and
agriculture planning.

Extreme events are rare events by definition. Until recently, analysis of
spatial extreme values starts to become feasible, thanks to the availability of
big spatial data, which provides great opportunities to accurately quantify the
risk of extreme events, better understand the links among extreme events,
promptly monitor changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme events, and
reliably predict extreme values at unobserved locations. However, such big data
sizes also impose challenges for statistical modeling and computation. The
objective of this project is to combine theoretical methods and computational
approaches to develop novel models, along with inference and prediction
algorithms, to meet the increasing demand of efficient analytical tools for
extreme values in big data. In particular, the project will focus on the
following research thrusts. First, a new class of nonstationary max-stable
process models will be developed with flexible and desirable dependence
structures for high-dimensional spatial extreme values. Then new scalable and
parallelizable inference tools will be proposed for the estimation of the
proposed nonstationary max-stable process models. Afterwards, divide-and-conquer
conditional sampling algorithms will be studied for the prediction of extremes
over large spatial data, which provides both point estimations and uncertainty
measures for the predicted values at unobserved locations. Finally, the
developed method will be applied to solve real problems.