* 1622015
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Tailored Automated Laminate Production for Advanced Composite Infusions.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Neil Gupta, Green Dynamics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop an automated composite lamination kitting
and stitching machine. This demonstration machine will be capable of placing,
cutting and securing 6 layers of dry composite material in parallel. The
parallel nature of the process greatly improves manufacturing time, while the
reel-to-reel capable layout of the machine allows for manufacturing of long
continuous laminates using a comparatively small machine footprint. The key
technical hurdles will be software control and mechanical management of multiple
parallel plies. During this research project Green Dynamics will demonstrate the
proposed machine control proposal and mechanical system layout, which allows
multiple plies to spool in parallel and be cut on individual gantries
simultaneously. The Green Dynamics lamination kitting and stitching machine will
demonstrate the labor and cost savings that can be achieved through automated
manufacturing of a single piece laminate. These savings will enable the
continued reduction in cost for composite materials, and spur their growth into
new markets. Decreasing the cost and improving the quality of composite
structures such as wind turbine blades and automotive components is a key path
to lower carbon emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
manufacturing machine handles multiple fabric rolls in parallel and uses
proprietary control algorithms and fabric handling methods to cut and secure up
to 6 layers of material simultaneously. As individual layers are processed
independently the resulting laminate stack is highly tailored and places
material only where it is needed. The final product is transportable, and for
very long length parts, can be rolled up to minimize transport size. At the
manufacturing location this laminate is placed in the tool in a single step,
which greatly reduces the time to manufacture the part and the process time in
the tool. No other composite automation machine can provide a single piece
lamination which is tailored in multiple directions. The resulting laminate
effectively uses the orthotropic properties of composite materials to achieve
lower weights while enabling much lower touch labor rates. The multi-roll,
linear orientation of our machine allows for reel to reel processing of long
narrow laminates in a small machine footprint, and results in a rolled,
transportable laminate.