* 1622828
* STTR Phase I:  A Platform Reagent for the Intracellular Delivery of Positively Charged Peptide
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Cynthia Lander, Moerae Matrix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop an intracellular delivery technology
for positively charged peptides for use in cell experiments in basic laboratory
science and for delivery of peptide therapeutics for treatment of human disease.
Peptides hold many advantages over the small molecule drugs that dominate the
current healthcare market in terms of potency, specificity, and
biocompatibility, and they are faster and easier to implement than genetic
modifications for completion of hypothesis-driven studies. Peptides can inhibit
enzymes and alter protein-protein interactions to have profound effects on
cellular behavior. Despite these advantages, peptides suffer from poor
intracellular uptake and entrapment within intracellular compartments, thereby
preventing access to their intracellular target and limiting their potential as
research tools and therapeutics. Positively charged cell penetrating peptides
(CPPs) will be used to improve peptide uptake by cells. The proposed polyplex
peptide delivery technology is designed to be a user-friendly reagent that
further enhances CPP peptide uptake and dramatically improves potency and
durability of action by enabling escape from intracellular compartments. The
polyplex technology will fill this current gap in the delivery reagent market,
bolstering peptide use and accelerating scientific advancement, and also enable
peptide therapeutic approaches for intracellular targets.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to leverage the properties of an anionic pH-
responsive polymer to provide a more cost-effective, easy-to-use peptide
delivery reagent that increases peptide uptake and longevity of action without
cellular toxicity. The proposed work is focused on achieving the following aims:
1) Optimize a standardized formulation protocol that is effective for a broad
range of peptides modified with positively charged cell-penetrating peptides by
analyzing the physicochemical properties of a library of peptide-reagent
formulations. 2) Verify polyplex-mediated peptide delivery efficiency as
assessed by cellular peptide uptake across a broad spectrum of cell types,
including both adherent and suspension cells as well as hard-to-transfect
primary cell lines. 3) Establish advantages over competing delivery reagents in
terms of ease of use, potency, duration of intracellular retention, and activity
and biocompatibility. These aims will be achieved through the use of dynamic
light scattering analysis, flow cytometric analysis of peptide uptake and
retention, microscopy-based analysis of intracellular peptide localization, and
in vitro cytotoxicity assays. Successful completion of these studies will
establish the commercial viability of the peptide delivery reagent and enable
the subsequent development of a prototype reagent kit for field testing.