* 1622589
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Computer Guided Laparoscopy Training
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Allan Hamilton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,118,923.00

Laparoscopic surgery, when performed by a well-trained surgeon, is a remarkably
effective procedure that minimizes complications associated with open incisions,
blood loss and post-operative pain. It also reduces recovery time. However, the
procedure is more challenging than conventional surgery due to restricted
vision, hand-eye coordination problems, limited working space, and lack of
tactile sensation. Therefore, effective training and guidance methods are needed
to minimize the potential risks inherent in such procedures. The goal of this
project is to develop and validate techniques for computer-guided laparoscopic
surgical training in a simulated, non-patient based environment. A computer-
aided surgical trainer (CAST) will physically guide trainees' instruments during
surgical skills practice sessions by utilizing assistive force with augmented
reality displays. Guided training will be validated through a pilot experimental
study, in which the expertise of computer-guided trainees will be compared to
that of instructor-guided trainees. Data such as the time it takes a trainee to
execute a particular surgical task, how accurate he or she is, etc., will be
collected to analyze task performance precisely and objectively. New scientific
methods for motion trajectory planning and path following using assistive force
and augmented reality techniques will result from this work. It is anticipated
that computer-guided practice will speed up learning and reinforce appropriate
techniques, ultimately, leading to better surgical outcomes and improved patient
safety. The CAST system should serve as a sophisticated, yet still low-cost,
training solution for fundamental medical skills training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are a) to refine and implement a
memory- and time-efficient hybrid offline-online optimal path planner for
computer-guided training of basic laparoscopic skills. In this task, collision-
free trajectory planning methods (such as those used in robotics) will be
generated by incorporating offline-online hybrid techniques with memory and
computational time efficient path repository. Thus, basic laparoscopic tasks can
be planned and guided automatically, using haptic force and augmented reality
visualization; b) to design and implement an intelligent, adaptive guidance
controller for surgical space navigation, where a fuzzy logic and machine
learning-based methods will be developed that will take into account trainees'
skill levels so that optimal amount of training assistance can be provided in
mastering surgical tasks; c) to design and implement visual guidance techniques
through augmented reality overlays that provide 'navigational' cues,
supplementing force-based control of surgical instruments; and d) to validate
guided training through a pilot study. In this task, trainees' performance using
computer guidance methods will be compared, using statistical analysis, to that
of unguided trainees. The principal investigators will aim to increase the
participation of undergraduate students, and in particular of underrepresented
groups, through collaboration with the well-established programs at both PIs'
institutions and through sponsorship of senior projects and independent study
courses.