* 1623400
* EDU: A Capture-the-Flag Service for Computer Security Courses
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wu-chang Feng, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,310.00

Security games such as Capture-the-Flag (CTF) competitions tap into and
cultivate the intrinsic motivation in people to solve puzzles. Such games
provide a compelling experience for security practitioners looking to test their
skills. Given the level of engagement these games produce, there have been
efforts to bring the format into the classroom. While CTFs are ideal for
measuring the level of expertise of its participants, there are significant
issues that must be overcome before the format can be used in the classroom.
Specifically, CTF challenges are often targeted towards experts, consist of
static problems with static solutions, are difficult to customize, and require
significant time and resources to deploy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are currently
addressing these issues by building open CTF software and services to support
scaffolded, metamorphic challenges in a manner that is easily configured and
deployed by instructors across the country to teach their courses. Specifically,
the content and difficulty of our CTFs are carefully scaffolded in order to
quickly develop confidence and competence in students rather than boredom or
frustration. Challenges are generated metamorphically so that each student
receives a unique set of challenges in order to deter cheating and to better
ensure that every student learns the material. The CTFs are configurable to
allow instructors to add and remove challenges based on the topics they wish to
cover in their courses. Finally, the CTFs are freely available to instructors in
a variety of formats that can be deployed readily.