* 1623419
* EXP: Fostering Self-Correcting Reasoning with Reflection Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Richard Catrambone, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,958.00

This research project is exploring how to support reasoning about wicked
problems. These are societal important problems that are characterized by
incomplete or contradictory knowledge, have a large body of differing opinion on
the problem, have a large economic burden, and are intimately interconnected
with other problems. An example of such a problem is poverty. Poverty is linked
with education, nutrition to poverty, the economy with nutrition, etc. Reasoning
about such problems and coming up with partial solutions is an important
learning activity. One aspect of approaching wicked problems is through the use
of reflection to guide argumentation. This project explores supporting
reflection in undergraduate students with software that supports the reflection
process and software that aims to improve the quality of arguments. This
software builds upon both visualizations of arguments and a structured format,
known as the Vee diagram, that structures good argumentation through a process
of studying, questions synthesis, and finally analysis and reflection.

More specifically, the researchers analyze how experts approach wicked problems,
how they engage in reflection, and how they assess and improve the quality of
their arguments. Results of these experiments with experts will be incorporated
into Computer Supported Argument Visualization (CSAV) tools. The approaches
explored in this project are of two types: the use of templates to trigger
reflection and the use of scripts to provide a structure to reason about an
issue. As a starting point, the researchers build upon the argumentation Vee
diagram for the first approach and the AGORA software, which has been developed
by the PI, as an approach for a script-based approach. Results of the
experiments will contribute to an understanding of how reflective learning and
self-correcting reasoning can be fostered by assessing specific features of
reflection tools and interactions scripts. Research results enable known
obstacles to self-improvement, such as students' implicit assumptions about the
nature and certainty of knowledge and bias, to be addressed through educational
interventions.