* 1623525
* Improving the Pipeline: After-School Model for Preparing Cyber Defense and Information Assurance Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Sandra Gorka, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 438,391.00

The project addresses a need to educate more information assurance/cyber defense
(IA/CD) professionals to counteract the growing risk of cyber-attacks. The
project does so by developing and implementing an IA/CD after-school program for
high school students and assessing its effectiveness as a launchpad for IA/CD
careers. The program goals are to raise awareness of high school students about
IA/CD careers; generate their interest in those careers; and solidify and
enhance the preparation of participating students to pursue the education
required to succeed in one of those careers. Once fully implemented, the program
will annually enroll up to 50 students from five local rural high schools.
Because of high demand for IA/CD specialists, those who continue on to complete
the degree program will be able to secure well-paying jobs, which will have
economic impact not only on them, but also on their families and communities.
The program will also train teachers in participating schools to become more
knowledgeable and aware of information security issues. The teachers will pass
this knowledge on to their students and families, thereby improving information
security among the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
both knowledge and education in the field of cybersecurity by examining the
conditions that impact high school students' decisions to pursue IA/CD careers
and their success in an academic program that leads to these careers. The
evaluation will also examine the project's ability to attract students
underrepresented in the profession-female, first-generation, and low-income
students. The rigorous evaluation plan will gauge the effectiveness of specific
components, particularly the modular after-school academic program, the hands-on
cyber competitions, Penn College student mentoring and coaching provided by
professionals in the field. By documenting all project elements, publishing and
presenting program results and lessons learned, and making program information
available on the project website and via seminars and webinars, the Project Team
will make this model available to institutions interested in replicating or
adapting it. The specific objectives of the project are to: (1) develop an
after-school college credit-bearing program in IA/CD for high school students;
(2) provide the after-school program to 8-10 students in Year 1, 24-30 students
in Year 2, and 40-50 students in Year 3; and (3) research the impact of the
proposed model on students' educational and career choices/paths.