* 1623097
* Transatlantic Data Science Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Euan Ashley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 49,537.00

SCH: Workshop on Data Science, Learning, and Applications to Biomedical and
Health Sciences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the Transatlantic
Data Science Workshop. Due to advances in high throughput and connective
computing, medicine is at the cusp of a transformation that will accelerate
discovery, improve patient outcomes, decrease costs, and address the complexity
of challenging health problems. A main thrust of this transformation requires
the use of novel computing and statistical methods to model complex disease
trajectories using health data. Unfortunately, access to quality health data is
not obvious to non-health and medical science researchers. In addition to lack
of access, significant challenges exist in the analysis of 'big data' in the
health domain. Investigators in the fields of computer science, mathematics,
statistics, and computational sciences may offer expertise in addressing said
challenges. This workshop brings together members of multiple scientific
communities from the United States (NSF and National Institutes of Health: NIH)
and the United Kingdom (Research Council of the United Kingdom: RCUK) and has
two primary objectives: 1) to improve access to US and UK health data and to
expose challenges surrounding health data research to computer science,
mathematics, statistics, and computational science communities, and 2) to foster
the development of novel computational and mathematics methodologies in health
data science research by bringing together US and UK communities of health
domain experts and computational researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Transatlantic Data Science Workshop includes facilitating the development of
novel computational approaches in the health domain using data from two major
health data funding agencies (RCUK and NIH). The computational community will be
exposed to the challenges and needs in health data research, resulting in
opportunities to advance data science research. Analytics challenges surrounding
health data research may include data quality and provenance, search, query
processing, and visualization and modeling. The first day of the workshop will
be devoted to an in-depth exploration of the challenges that are experienced in
conducting health data research with six major health datasets. The second day
will offer an opportunity for researchers to work in small groups to discuss and
develop novel computational techniques and methodologies to tackle such
challenges in the health domain. The proposed workshop should aid in the
development of novel computational techniques to address challenges in health
data research.