* 1623110
* An Experimental Calibration of the Fractionation of Boron Isotopes among Granitic Melt, Aqueous Fluid, and Tourmaline
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,08/31/2020
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2020
* USD 314,562.00

Understanding how the Earth evolves in time is central to the geosciences.
Toward that end, there is always a need for analytical tools or methods that may
shed light on those processes of change and how these processes operate on the
natural environment. The relative abundance of stable isotopes of light elements
tend to be fractionated between coexisting phases (i.e., different minerals,
gas, magma, biota) by a number of organic and inorganic processes. These natural
interactions that fractionate stable isotopes are occurring constantly as the
earth and its biosphere evolve. For that reason, stable isotope distributions
have played a very large role in elucidating some of the processes operating
throughout the earth's chemical history. The stable isotope systematics of H, C,
and O are widely studied, calibrated, and utilized. Recent studies have heralded
the boron isotopic system, 10B and 11B, as potentially revolutionary. Boron is
concentrated in ocean waters, altered oceanic crust, in marine sediments, and in
silicate magmas and aqueous fluids that are derived from them. There is a hope
among researchers that the fractionation of 10B and 11B among minerals, melts,
and aqueous solutions may yield important insights into the chemical evolution
of the continental crust. So far, the laboratory analyses of boron isotopes in
natural samples have failed to provide an understandable and consistent picture
of their chemical behavior. One body of work cites little or no fractionation of
boron isotopic composition among coexisting aqueous solution, granitic liquid,
and tourmaline, the principal mineralogical carrier of boron in the earth, while
other analytical data point to very large ranges in the fractionation of boron
isotopes in tourmaline, even within a single geologic occurrence. The goal of
this research, therefore, is to complete an experimental program that yields an
internally consistent calibration of the partitioning of the boron isotopes
among granitic melt, aqueous solution, and tourmaline at elevated pressures and
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three series of experiments will measure the
fractionation of 10B and 11B between granitic melt and aqueous solution. The use
of multiple experimental methods, and reversals in the direction of diffusive
mixing of the isotopes, will provide robust tests of the attainment of
equilibrium distributions. The fractionation of boron isotopes between
tourmaline and melt will also be measured through synthesis experiments. These
latter experiments will test a hypothesis that the wide range in the isotopic
composition of tourmaline stems from diffusion-controlled fractionation of the
isotopes of boron attending the crystallization of tourmaline at states far from
the mineral-melt equilibrium.