* 1623727
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: Past Ocean-Atmosphere Variability from Spatiotemporal Patterns of North Atlantic Climate During the Common Era
* GEO,AGS
* 10/20/2015,06/30/2019
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 93,491.00

The climate of the North Atlantic profoundly impacts human populations and
ecosystems in adjacent North America and Europe. It is anticipated that this
project will help improve understanding of the nature and causes of decadal- and
multi-decadal scale climate variability and its spatiotemporal patterns for the
North Atlantic sector for modeling and predictive purposes. An enhanced
understanding of internal climate system variability at this time scale is
critical for decadal-scale prediction, as well as robust detection and
attribution of the anthropogenic component of regional and global temperature
trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support early research experiences
for students through an ongoing student internship program at Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory and co-operative and Guest student programs at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
utilize the newest version of the Old World Drought Atlas (OWDA, representing
Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East) and an updated and fully compatible
version of the North Atlantic Drought Atlas (NADA) in analyses designed to
identify coupled modes of summer hydro-climate variability between continents on
opposite sides of the North Atlantic Basin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be
accomplished using multivariate tools including singular value decomposition
(SVD) to identify simple time domain coupled modes. The existence of band-
limited phase-coherent modes will also be investigated using the Multiple Taper
Method with Singular Value Decomposition (MTM-SVD), a frequency domain
technique.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team seeks to identify the likely
causes of the identified coupled modes in the drought atlases by comparing the
projection coefficients of those modes against fields of climate data covering
the North Atlantic Basin and for more extensive global regions (e.g., sea-level
pressure or SLP, sea surface temperature or SST). The research team will project
the identified forcings back to medieval times using the extended records of
summer hydro-climate provided by the OWDA and NADA to produce first-order
estimates of how the identified climate forcings have varied and changed over
the past millennium; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the researchers will
compare the millennium-length climate forcing projections of the OWDA/NADA
coupled modes against relevant climate fields and their characteristic modes of
variability from the suite of CMIP3/CMIP5 coupled climate model runs to
determine the degree to which data and models agree.