* 1623811
* Support for GEC-24: The Twenty-Fourth GENI Engineering Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,627.00

This project supports hosting the 24th edition of the GENI Engineering
conference (GEC-24), including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be
held on March 8-9, 2016, on the Arizona State University's Tempe campus. The
Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) is a virtual instrument that
is emerging as a foundational experimental research platform across the United
States. GENI aims to transform experimental research in networking and
distributed systems, as well as emerging research in very large socio-technical
systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure for 'at scale' experiments in
future internets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GENI is an instrument designed to
address three issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Science Issues: We cannot
currently fully understand or predict the behavior of complex, large-scale
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Societal Issues: We increasingly rely on the
Internet but are unsure we can trust its security, privacy or
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Innovation Issues: Substantial barriers
exist to at-scale experimentation with new architectures, services, and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GENI addresses these issues via scale (from
federation) and support for two kinds of experiments: 1) controlled and
repeatable experiments, which will greatly help improve our scientific
understanding of complex, large-scale networks; and 2) in-the-wild trials of
experimental services that ride atop or connect to today's Internet and that
engage large numbers of human participants. The GEC meeting and Demo sessions
provide graduate students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and explain
their work to the GENI community prior to formal publication. It is a key part
of helping new graduate students understand what is being done with GENI and who
among their peers at other institutions might be valuable resources. It also
supports outreach to new community members, including the emerging US Ignite
community. GENI is already being used as an instrument for research. This
proposal supports the development and use of the research instrument.