* 1623684
* Continuity and Change in American Economic and Social Life: The PSID 2017-2020
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Katherine McGonagle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,370,423.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a cornerstone of data
infrastructure for social science research in the United States. The study has
used a series of surveys to gather information on US families since 1968.
Children and grandchildren from the original PSID families now participate as
well; the result is data that follows families through several generations. The
long time span allows scientific investigation of questions about how people and
families grow and change over time. This includes the study of economic outcomes
such as employment, income, and wealth, research on how early life experiences
affect employment and health in adulthood, research on how U.S. families cope
with the needs of aging family members, and work that examines how key economic
variables like consumption and employment are affected by broader businesses
cycles and unanticipated events. The research team will collect two new waves of
data, will expand data collection focused on young adults and on better measures
of internet use and employer characteristics, will evaluate pilot results of
using web-based tools to administer the survey, and will expand its data
collection efforts to include recent immigrant families to study questions about
how immigrant families assimilate into the United States. The project promotes
the national interest by maintaining U.S. leadership in science, by making data
available to a broad community of researchers interested in understanding
American families, and by providing necessary data to evaluate the long-term
impacts of past policy decisions at the federal, state and local levels of
government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSID is the world's longest running
household panel survey. Through its long-term measures of economic and social
well being, the study allows researchers and policy analysts to investigate the
dynamism inherent in social and behavioral process. The long panel, genealogical
design, and broad content provide scientists a unique and powerful opportunity
to study change within the same family over decades. Collecting additional waves
of data from the PSID families contributes to scientific understanding of the
dynamics of economic and social behavior. The extended time series of data
supports new and systematic investigation of a myriad of questions in the full
range of scientific disciplines that study how humans grow and change over the
life cycle. This includes the study of economic outcomes (for example, the
changes that occur across business cycles such as the Great Recession and
changes in response to increased international economic competition), the study
of intergenerational transmission of wealth and income, and the study of how
income and health in adulthood and old age depend on early-life experiences.
Consistent measures over time are important for accurately estimating the
dynamics of these behaviors. Gathering data from the same families over a long
time period improves the precision of the measurement as multiple measures are
collected within the same families as well as from multiple families over a
period of decades. The investigators will carry out numerous innovations and
enhancements while maintaining core data collection for comparability. This
includes new content on internet usage, job search behavior, characteristics of
daily employment and of employers and more data collection from young adults. It
also includes adding families to the study who have emigrated to the U.S. since
1997; linkages to valuable administrative data; and implementation and
evaluation of web-based delivery of the core survey. The PSID creates broader
impacts in many ways. It is used by an interdisciplinary community and is
increasingly important in health research. The data archive is used to inform
public policy; at least nine federal agencies use PSID data. The PSID is also an
important resource for teaching and learning. The data are free and publicly
available, and are widely used by graduate and undergraduate students. The award
funds a number of web-based outreach activities that will make the PSID an even
more valuable tool for teaching and learning.