* 1623505
* Drying Versus Wettening of the East African Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Bradfield Lyon, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2017
* USD 120,655.00

This project considers changes in East African precipitation during the March to
May "long rains" season, which has received less attention in the literature
than the October to December "short rains". While the short rains season has
stronger interannual variability and stronger links to El Nino, the long rains
have experienced a decline between the periods 1999-2009 and 1980-1998. This
decadal trend in rainfall has been linked to increasing SST in the Indian Ocean,
which in turn has been attributed to anthropogenic climate change. However,
climate change simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
version 3 (CMIP3) show a robust projection that East Africa will become wetter
over the 21st century. The climate processes which drive the long rains and
their interannual variability are not well understood, and a better
understanding of these processes could help to determine whether the model
projections are credible, and what factors lead to the dichotomy between long-
term model projections and the shorter-term observed trend. The research is
divided into three tasks: 1) Identifying the key features of the anomalous
large- and regional-scale atmospheric and sea surface temperature (SST) patterns
that are linked to observed seasonal rainfall variability and its recent decline
in East Africa; 2) Employing climate model simulations and idealized climate
model experiments to discern the main drivers of the observed features and
changes; and 3) Identifying dynamical and thermodynamical processes in climate
model projections associated with changes in long rains precipitation in East
Africa during the twenty-first century in the CMIP5 experiments, contrasting
results with those found in analysis of CMIP3 experiments.

East Africa is one of the most food-insecure regions of the globe, and a better
understanding of the causes of drought and the likelihood of future rainfall
change could play a critical role for the development of the region. Work under
this award will be highly relevant to organizations including the Famine Early
Warning Systems Network (FEWSNET) and the International Federation of the Red
Cross (IFRC), both of which have close ties to the PIs' home institution. The
work thus has important broader impacts in addition to its scientific merit.