* 1623038
* EAGER: Achieving Optoeletronically Perfect Monolayers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Ali Javey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 03/31/2017
* USD 99,999.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional semiconductors show
great promise for optoelectronic applications, due to a myriad of highly
attractive properties, however, to date they have shown tremendously poor
photoluminescence quantum yield. High quantum yield is a requirement for
materials used in optoelectronic devices such as light emitting diodes, lasers,
and solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project addresses the quantum yield issue
of transition metal chalcogenides (2D material). The PI has demonstrated that
the surface defects of MoS2 (2D material) can be repaired/passivated through
surface chemical treatments. As a result; the quantum yield can be enhanced from
less than 1% to over 95%. The work outlined in this EAGER will seek to
demonstrate a functional electro-optic device based on a high quantum yield 2D
monolayer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The figure of merit for
materials used in optoelectronic systems is their photoluminescence quantum
yield (QY). This determines the efficiency of light emission from a population
of optically or electrically generated electron hole-pairs and is critically
dependent on the defect density/type in the material. Final QY values dictate
key performance metrics such as the power consumption in LEDs, threshold
currents for semiconductor laser, and the upper limit of open circuit voltage in
solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional (2D) semiconductors, suffers from very
poor quantum yield (&lt;1%). Recently the PI?s group has addressed this problem
of low QY in 2D materials and developed a chemical treatment procedure using an
organic super acid which is able to enhance the QY in the most heavily studied
2D system: MoS2 from an initial value &lt;1% in the as exfoliated case to over
95%.&lt;br/&gt;This work shows that the procedure is stable in ambient and does
not change other key properties in the material (such as crystal structure, band
gap, electrical properties, etc.). The detailed mechanism of the treatment need
to be fully understood for this result to realize its full impact.
&lt;br/&gt;The PI will address many of these key questions, focusing on: (i)
obtaining high QY for additional 2D materials such as WS2, and ReS2 via
exploring and optimizing additional chemicals and optimizing the existing
treatment procedure for different materials. The demonstration of an
optoelectronic device using this technology, specifically a 2D LED, with a high
QY will be demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve one graduate and
one undergraduate student; the training and mentoring of the undergraduate
student in particular will be emphasized. The nature of the proposed work is
interdisciplinary and spans the fields of chemistry, materials science, and
device fabrication.