* 1623258
* Collaborative Research: Designing the Impact Studio -- Dynamic Visualizations in the Write4Change Networked Community
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Amy Stornaiuolo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 213,692.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging them in
quantitative data analysis to support their own communication skills. The amount
and variety of information generated and shared online requires young people to
be adept at effectively producing, analyzing, assessing, using, visualizing, and
circulating data. They must be data literate. This project investigates how
adolescents develop data literacy by teaching young people to analyze their own
online participation and to learn how to make their digital footprints have
greater impact. Specifically, researchers will build and test a suite of
visualization tools called the "Impact Studio" that will give students access to
data about their online interactions. The "Impact Studio" will be developed and
tested with students and educators who participate in a global online community
called "Write4Change" (W4C). In this virtual community, youth and their teachers
communicate online about issues of local and global concern -- for example,
climate change, immigration, peace and conflict -- and explore how their own
ideas and activities can contribute to solutions. Using the "Impact Studio,"
students will learn to deploy data visualizations as a means to test, revise,
and more clearly express their concepts and proposals. Designing, developing,
and testing digital tools that support students in becoming productive,
civically engaged 21st century citizens, this project will contribute to
scientific knowledge about how young people learn to strategically leverage data
in order to produce, assess, and circulate information in a global
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a design-based research study, the project
develops and tests theories about how youth engage in data literacy practices to
write for impact. Though the use of data is an essential part of analyzing,
producing, and circulating information in STEM fields, this study broadens that
focus to consider how the strategic use of data can inform digital writing.
Across four iterative design phases that focus on building, testing, enhancing,
and implementing the integrated visualization tools in the Impact Studio, the
researchers will study 1) how the Impact Studio's visualized data displays
influence student collaboration; 2) how students use data from the Impact Studio
in communicating cross-culturally; and 3) how the capacity to create, critique,
and manage multimodal representations allows students to leverage visualized
data in their writing process (including the content of what they write, how
they share and circulate their writing, and how they revise). The research team
will first conduct design workshops and user testing on a prototype to refine
the feature requirements for Version 1 of the Impact Studio. Researchers will
then collect quantitative and qualitative data that track network activity and
Impact Studio usage from W4C members (including interviews; participant
observation; content analysis; temporal, frequency, citation, and interaction
data from the network; surveys; digital competencies; skill inventories; and
knowledge measures). After a period of data analysis, tool redesign, and user
testing, the research team will undertake another period of data collection and
analysis. This project will develop key principles about how to support students
in generating and navigating vast amounts of data, critically interpreting and
creating visual and textual representations of those data, and measuring the
impact of their work on cross-cultural audiences.