* 1623446
* Collaborative Research: Building Cybersecurity Capacity in Pervasive Computing
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Karim Elish, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dongwon Lee
* 01/31/2017
* USD 143,306.00

This project aims to build cybersecurity capacity of the United States in
pervasive computing. Although significant efforts have been made in addressing
the security and privacy issues of pervasive computing in research community, a
strategic implementation that promotes workforce development from both academic
and experiential learning in cybersecurity education is still lacking in
pervasive computing. It is imperative to bring cybersecurity research results
into education, cultivate the well prepared cybersecurity workforce, and
strengthen the long-term collaboration among academic institutions, industry,
and government.

The project identifies five major objectives in security and privacy issues of
pervasive computing: 1) developing new courses and course modules; 2)
constructing hands-on virtual labs; 3) engaging students in research with timely
research topics; 4) establishing and strengthening relationships with partners;
and 5) developing career interest and professional capabilities in cybersecurity
with a focus on women and underrepresented students. Unified under the central
theme of security and privacy, the wide coverage of cyberspace facets in
pervasive computing will allow students to learn the state-of-the-art research
findings, gain hands-on experiences from the most up-to-date software,
platforms, and infrastructures, engage in scientific research in their best
interests, and obtain a comprehensive in-breadth appreciation of the overall
cybersecurity state-of-the-art through the new courses and labs, industry-
sponsored capstones, cooperative research projects, cybersecurity student
organizations, invited talks, and webinars held by the proposed project.