* 1623899
* Collaborative Research: Towards a mechanistic prediction of methane ebullition fluxes from northern peatlands
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ruth Varner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 151,246.00

Peatlands cover only about 3% of the Earth's land area, but are
disproportionately important in producing methane, a strong greenhouse gas.
Peatlands yield an estimated 5-10% of all methane to the atmosphere and are also
recognized as an important reservoir in the global carbon cycle, accounting for
about 33% of the global soil carbon. This project serves the national interest
and NSF's mission by promoting the progress of scientific understanding of the
mechanisms that regulate the release of this potent greenhouse gas to the
atmosphere. The fundamental issue addressed by this project relates to the
mechanisms and hydrological factors that regulate the sudden (episodic) release
of gaseous methane to the atmosphere. These releases are driven by changes in
water level and atmospheric pressure that encourages upward bubble
transport/release of methane. This project will generate new understanding of
how changes in water level, atmospheric pressure and peat fabric lead to sudden
releases of methane that far exceed previously held theories on methane release.
Although the project is focused on a boreal peatland it will impact our
understanding of methane dynamics in other climates, including sub-tropical
systems such as the Everglades, and Artic systems. The project includes summer
research experiences for the participation of minority students in field
geoscience research. Two full-time graduate students and one postdoctoral
scientist will be involved this project. Results of the work will be
disseminated through student led presentations at national/international
meetings and articles submitted to international
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of peatlands to the atmospheric
CH4 burden remains unclear in large part due to incomplete understanding of the
ebullition pathway. Oxidation of dissolved methane reduces the release of
methane by diffusion, but the transit time of bubbles released via ebullition is
too short for extensive oxidation to occur, i.e. ebullition releases increase
the greenhouse gas potential of peatlands. This project will advance
understanding of ebullition by coupling new, innovative measurement strategies
to physical model development. This integration of measurement and modeling will
permit a fundamental step forward towards a more quantitative understanding of
CH4 ebullition from peatlands. Two hypotheses will be tested: H1: The frequency
and size of ebullition events from peatlands can be predicted from CH4
production rates and pressure changes within the peat column when measurable
properties related to the peat structure (and strength) are incorporated into
model fitting parameters; H2: Ebullition from the peatland is regulated by a
threshold related to the accumulated gas volume, measurable physical properties
related to the peat strength, and how gas coalesces within the peat column (e.g.
dispersed bubbles versus a few large 'bubbles'). Measurements will be performed
in Caribou Bog, a multi-unit peatland located in Maine. Volumetric gas content
will be monitored using ground penetrating radar, whereas ebullition fluxes will
be monitored using a combination of acoustic ebullition sensors, time-lapse
imaging of gas traps, hydraulic heads in piezometers and chamber measurements
using a fast methane analyzer. Pore water CH4 samples will be acquired using
mini piezometer nests. An existing ebullition model describing gas bubble
expansion will be combined with an invasion percolation approach to describe the
transport of CH4 between multiple peat layers by both diffusion in the pore
water and ebullition between layers. Although the proposed model does not
explicitly incorporate the geomechanical properties of peat, model predictions
for maximum gas contents will be compared with key measurable geomechanical
properties that may control ebullition.