* 1623657
* Virtual Industrial Control Systems for Cybersecurity Engineering Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Krishnan Chittur, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The industrial control systems used throughout critical infrastructure are often
designed, built, operated, and maintained by engineers from domains related to
the physical process being controlled. For example, chemical engineers design
refineries, civil engineers design structures, and mechanical engineers design
industrial robotic industrial control system. Cybersecurity is a critical
concern for these systems. Exploited systems can cause financial and physical
harm to society. Engineers and cybersecurity analysts must work together to
securely provision, operate and maintain, and protect and defend critical
industrial control systems. Chemical, mechanical, and civil engineers design and
operate industrial control systems while cybersecurity personnel are tasked with
designing, maintaining, and operating cybersecurity controls for the industrial
control system. There is a lack of knowledge overlap among these two groups
which can lead to misunderstandings among the two groups and slow the adoption
of security controls for these critical systems. The objective of this project
is to develop educational tools and coursework to narrow the knowledge gap
between these groups and result in larger populations of domain engineers with
cybersecurity expertise, and likewise, larger populations of cybersecurity
analysts with domain engineering expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a set of building blocks and methodologies for designing virtual
industrial control system test beds. These reusable building blocks will be used
to develop 3 virtual industrial control system test beds from civil, mechanical,
and chemical engineering respectively; an active mass damper system, an
industrial robot, and a distillation tower. Cybersecurity lectures and
laboratory exercises will be designed for integration into existing classes in
civil, chemical, electrical and mechanical engineering. Also, a set of
industrial control system cybersecurity lectures and laboratory exercises will
be developed and added to an existing Intro to Cybersecurity Engineering course
offered to computer engineering and computer science students. We expect this
project to train approximately 125 students per year at The University of
Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) from the civil, chemical, computer, electrical, and
mechanical engineering programs and we expect large national impact due to
sharing of lecture materials, laboratory exercises, and the virtual control
system test beds with faculty at other universities.