* 1623236
* Targeted Infusion Project: Increasing Student Motivation and Engagement in STEM Courses through Gamification
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Elva Jones, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,742.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Winston Salem State University seeks to improve the
motivation, engagement, and academic performance of students by building
software that enables the organization of computer science and physics courses
using game design principles and mechanisms. This approach is about motivating
particular student behavior in a course through the use of game elements, such
as instant feedback, freedom to fail, freedom of choice, leveling, progress
bars, badges, and leaderboards. The activities and strategies are evidence-based
and a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the project.

This project has the objectives to: implement a course gamification platform
that can support the gamification of STEM courses; develop instructional
materials for gamifying modules of two computing courses, Data Structures and
Introduction to Database Systems, and one physics course, Principles of Physics;
and evaluate the developed software and created instructional materials to
assess their effect on student motivation, engagement, and academic performance.
Course gamification, which leverages extrinsic and intrinsic motivators for
engaging and motivating students to learn, has the potential to improve academic
performance and contribute to increased retention and graduation rates in STEM
disciplines. Therefore, the proposed gamification approach and supporting
software will be especially beneficial for institutions whose students have low
STEM graduation rates.