* 1623714
* Maritime Cybersecurity - Building Capacity in Critical Infrastructure Protection
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Susanne Wetzel, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,419.00

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security considers the Maritime Transportation
System (MTS) to be among the 16 most critical infrastructure sectors in the U.S.
whose assets, systems, and networks if disrupted or rendered incapacitated would
have crippling effects on the nation's economy and the safety and security of
its citizens. Over the past five years, an increasing number of reported
maritime cybersecurity incidents have highlighted the vulnerabilities of the MTS
to cyber threats, including vessel navigation, cargo scanning and port facility
operations. The evolving complexity of these occurrences, together with the many
components that comprise the maritime environment require that maritime
professionals must be well prepared in the emerging science and technologies
needed to inform, support, and implement maritime and critical infrastructure
security policies and directives. To effectively enhance the security of our
nation's maritime borders, ports and inland waterways, maritime professionals
must possess the skills needed to address cyber threats, must be well adept at
developing and evaluating new methods and tools for efficient and effective
response and system resilience, and must be able to define new strategies for
mitigating cyber threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to address this
challenge, Stevens---together with its collaborators from Rutgers University and
Texas Southern University (one of Historically Black Colleges and
Universities)---will develop two interdisciplinary programs in Maritime
Cybersecurity in order to bridge the current knowledge gap between the two
disciplines Maritime Systems and Cybersecurity. As such, this project will build
a common basis for Maritime Systems and Cybersecurity professionals to work
together effectively in addressing the unique cybersecurity challenges of the
MTS. Through workshops, the newly developed materials will be disseminated to
other academic institutions and the community at large. Dedicated seminars,
student internships, and maritime cybersecurity-focused research projects will
serve as additional mechanisms to enhance cyber awareness across the maritime
enterprise as part of this project.