* 1623802
* RAPID: Archaeological Investigation at Iita
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Genevieve LeMoine, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 02/28/2019
* USD 48,604.00

Recent warming has resulted in Arctic permafrost thaw, earlier spring sea ice
melt, and later fall sea ice formation. As a result, important coastal
archaeological sites that were once protected by ice are exposed to increased
damage and even complete loss due to a combination of melting permafrost and
wave erosion during the extended open water season. With this project the
research team will investigate significant prehistoric and historic
archaeological deposits at one such threatened site, Iita (Etah) in northwestern
Greenland. Research since 2006 has documented rapid erosion of the site and
revealed stratified deposits extending back 1000 years. These deposits represent
two different cultural groups, the Dorset, who lived there between AD 1050 and
1200, and the Thule (ancestors of the contemporary Inuit) who moved into the
area from their homeland in Alaska around 1200. The area around Iita is rich in
marine and terrestrial resources, including millions of dovekies, which nest in
nearby cliffs. The investigators expect to recover both artifacts and animal
bones that will increase our understanding of the different ways in which these
two groups used these resources. The research team may also be able to determine
whether they occupied the area at the same time, and if so, how they interacted.
The nature of contact between Dorset and Thule people, if it happened, is one of
the enduring questions in Arctic prehistory. The stratified deposits at Iita
provide a rare opportunity to investigate this question. The team will focus
their work on areas of the site most prone to erosion, recovering data before it
is lost forever. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of six researchers from Bowdoin,
UC Davis, and the National Museum of Greenland will excavate at the site of
Iita, Qaasuitsup Kommunia, Greenland. Due to increased ice-free periods in the
stormy fall season the site is experiencing rapid erosion, documented over the
course of work at this site between 2006 and 2012. Excavations in historic
contexts in 2006 revealed a buried early Thule component at the site and hinted
at earlier occupations. In 2012 testing by J. Darwent and H. Lange confirmed the
presence of a minimum of three discrete stratigraphic levels dating to the Late
Dorset period, each separated by sterile sand. These distinct occupation levels
offer an unprecedented opportunity to study and compare well-defined relatively
brief occupations, in contrast to the often-mixed surface and near-surface sites
more commonly found. They offer the opportunity to learn about many aspects of
Late Dorset Culture, from the importance of exploiting the massive dovekie
colony, to their demise as the ancestors of the contemporary Inughuit moved into
the area. The early Thule levels also present at the site offer the possibility
of identifying the nature and extent of interaction (if any) between these two
groups. In this remote location, evaluation, monitoring, and mitigation of
changes due to erosion are difficult. This fieldwork will allow the research
team to both continue monitoring and to partially mitigate impending loss of
these significant cultural resources.