* 1623018
* EAGER: MAKER: bioMAKERlab: A Wetlab and Starter Activities for Promoting Synthetic Biology in High School Classes and Workshops
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

This project will make synthetic biology activities accessible to high school
students and teachers by providing them with an authentic but safe context to
learn and broaden their understanding and perspectives of the role of synthetic
biology in bioengineering in personal, health, and food production contexts as
well as raise their interest in STEM. The design of bioMAKERlab will generate an
educational version of an existing professional-grade lab for synthetic biology
to promote safe production, accessibility, and affordability for high schools
and community colleges interested in integrating such wetlab activities into
their curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most current efforts to broaden access to
maker activities for K-12 students have focused on developing collaborative
fabrication workspaces (fablabs) involving 3D printers, laser cutters, and other
digital and traditional tools. This project will develop and implement
bioMAKERlab, an innovative wetlab starter kit and activities that will enable
high school students and teachers to engage in synthetic biology by building
genetic circuits that let microorganisms change color, smell, and shape. In
synthetic biology, participants make their own DNA--gene by gene--and then grow
their designs into real applications by inserting them into microorganisms to
develop different traits and characteristics provided by the genes. The project
will involve students from a Philadelphia public high school and young people
participating in weekend workshops at The Franklin Institute, a Philadelphia-
based science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a part of NSF's Maker
Dear Colleague Letter portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of
Directorates for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering, Education
and Human Resources, and Engineering.