* 1623926
* Community Workshop: Scientific Drivers and Future of Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory (MEVO)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Peter LaFemina, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: Community Workshop: Scientific Drivers and
Future of a Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory (MEVO) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will support members of the
volcano science community familiar with Mt. Erebus on Ross Island, Antarctica,
those working on active or ancient volcanic systems, and those that have
coordinated and developed volcano observatories at locations other than Mount
Erebus. The goal of the workshop is for the scientific community to articulate a
plan and their priorities for scientific infrastructure, facilities support, and
scientific observations on Mt. Erebus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mount Erebus is a large volume, persistently
active, open-system volcano, with a summit crater 500 m in diameter, rising to
3794 m above sea level. Conditions at the summit and the upper part of the
volcano are among the harshest environments on Earth. The volcanic edifice of
Erebus is geographically central and forms the backbone of Ross Island and the
summit of Erebus is located 40 km from McMurdo Station. The workshop will
review: 1) What have has been learned to date from geophysical, geochemical,
biological and other observations at Mount Erebus?; 2) What specific and unique
scientific questions can be addressed by additional observations at Mount
Erebus?; 3) What are the special considerations for any future research efforts,
permanent geophysical and other scientific infrastructure, or temporary field
deployments on Mount Erebus?; 4) What are the volcanic hazards related to Mount
Erebus and what are the risks these pose for McMurdo Station?; 5) What are the
measurement requirements to address new or ongoing research objectives related
to the Mount Erebus magmatic system?; and 6) Can analysis and measurement
techniques along with any autonomous sensor, power, and telemetry systems
developed for deployment on Mount Erebus be used to study other remote
volcanoes? The outcome from the workshop will be a report of the workshops
priorities to the investigator community and a review and summary of the
workshop in the American Geophysical Society publication EOS Transactions.