* 1623745
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Carbon and Climate Tracers on the Atom Airborne Campaigns
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Britton Stephens, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,141.00

This project is a collaborative effort that supports the deployment of two
instrument packages as part of the ATom campaign. The objective of ATom is to
make "tomographic" type maps of the global distribution of aerosols, reactive
gases, and short-lived climate forcing agents using aircraft measurements. The
NSF-supported HIPPO campaign previously demonstrated the feasibility and
advantages of the tomographic sampling used in the design of the ATom mission.
In addition to the study of short-lived climate forcing agents, this project
includes global-scale measurements that can advance other fundamental aspects of
carbon and climate science, such as understanding the distribution of carbon
sinks and the links between ocean biochemistry, carbon cycling, and climate
change.

The NASA-supported ATom project consists of four deployments in order to map
distributions in all seasons. The instrument packages to be deployed include the
Airborne Oxygen Instrument (AO2), which provides rapid in situ measurements of
atmospheric O2 and CO2 concentrations, and a flask sampler that collects samples
for analysis of O2/N2, CO2 concentration, CO2 isotopes and Ar/N2. By combining
these measurements with large-scale atmospheric transport models, direct
constraints on the corresponding air-sea fluxes of heat, O2, and CO2 are
obtained. Atmospheric O2 measurements can reveal the vertical and latitudinal
extent of hemispheric seasonal ocean O2 outgassing and in-gassing signals and
define spatial gradients at enough times in the seasonal cycle to derive
climatological annual-mean distributions.