* 1623160
* Targeted Infusion Project: Addressing the "M" in STEM - Utica Campus Community College (UC3) Improving Interventions and Instruction (I3) through STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jonathan Townes, Hinds Community College-Utica
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,868.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Hinds Community College-
Utica Campus (UC3) seeks to establish strategies to strengthen interventions and
instruction to enhance student performance of high school and college students
in mathematics. Ninety-nine percent of the students on the Utica Campus are
African-American, with 64% being first-generation college students and/or are
from low socio-economic backgrounds. The project will contribute to the
development of effective techniques by adding intrusive mathematics coaching to
the developmental mathematics classes, outside STEM related experiences, and
career exploration for college students. Effective techniques and approaches to
be developed include providing ACT test preparation and state assessment boot-
camps for high school/pre-college students. The project will also provide
professional development for faculty, and include partnerships with industries
and collaborations with 4-year HBCUs. Given the recognized and increasing
importance of community colleges in the educational enterprise and ultimately
the workforce, this project will contribute meaningfully to the knowledge base
about the potential contributions and role of community colleges in
developmental education, particularly mathematics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the project is to recruit, support, retain and prepare
developmental students who are interested in STEM to accelerate through
mathematics developmental courses in order to complete associate degrees and
transfer to 4-year institutions. The objectives are to: (1) increase high school
students' mathematics scores on state assessments, performance-based assessments
and ACT/COMPASS; (2) increase developmental students' mathematics performance
and passing rates in developmental math and college level math scores; (3)
increase developmental students'knowledge and interest in STEM education and
careers; and (4) create a dynamic math teaching and learning community that
improves the performance of students in developmental and non-developmental math
courses and which transforms the Hinds Community College-Utica Campus
academic/educational environment. The project could serve as a national model to
encourage other community colleges to intervene effectively and early in
mathematics.