* 1623635
* EXP: Agile Research Studios: Scaling Cognitive Apprenticeship to Advance Undergraduate and Graduate Research Training in STEM
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 549,944.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project will advance undergraduate and graduate research
training in STEM by designing organizational processes and cyberlearning
technologies that support self-directed learning within a community of
researchers. Faculty mentoring, research experience, and authentic problem
solving increase undergraduate performance and retention in STEM, especially
among women and underrepresented minority students. Faculty mentoring is
effective but labor intensive and often reserved for more productive graduate
students; undergraduate research positions can provide authentic practice but
are limited in number. This research posits that undergraduates and graduates in
STEM can better develop in collaborative cyberlearning research communities.
These communities use collaborative cyberlearning technologies to: (a) teach
research and collaboration, (b) supportively engage students in independent
research, and (c) train graduate students to become effective mentors and future
research leaders. Taking a community-based approach to training self-directed
learners should significantly increase the number of undergraduate students
doing authentic research, provide graduate students with authentic practice in
mentoring and leadership, and increase the efficacy and scale of research
training amid scarce resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to fill
an urgent need to mobilize the nation's diverse student talent pool and broaden
participation in science and engineering research, one of the National Science
Foundation's core missions. In support of this goal, this research will lay a
theoretical foundation for understanding the broader ecosystem of integrated
online/offline, social, project-based learning environments through development
and testing of empirically-validated principles for designing cyberlearning
research communities. The research develops socio-technical cyberlearning
systems that train increased numbers of novice researchers without greatly
increasing the orchestration burden on research mentors. The proposed solution
is a general, theoretical model, `Agile Research Studios,' for helping faculty
better train student researchers through social structures, practices, and
cyberlearning tools that: support planning research inquiry, seeking help,
practicing reflection, collaboration, and sharing. Agile Research Studios will
be supported by Virtual Studio, an online platform that orchestrate socially-
shared regulation learning outside of the classroom by supporting 3 interrelated
feedback loops: (a) a sprint planning and replanning loop in which students and
mentors receive feedback on project plans and progress, (b) a help and
collaboration loop that helps students scope and prioritize help requests and
connects them to helpers, and (c) a reflection and sharing loop that promotes
growing over time and promoting collaborations and awareness across a studio.
The project will develop and evaluate the Agile Research Studios model using a
design-based research process, in the context of Design, Technology, and
Research (DTR), a research community that applies Agile Research Studios to
support 20+ learners working on more than 15 research projects at Northwestern
University (NU).