* 1623605
* EXP: Modeling Perceptual Fluency with Visual Representations in an Intelligent Tutoring System for Undergraduate Chemistry
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 540,396.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects design and build new kinds of learning technologies
in order to explore their viability, to understand the challenges to using them
effectively, and to study their potential for fostering learning. This EXP
project aims to help students become visually fluent with visual representations
(similar to becoming fluent in a second language). Instructors often use visuals
to help students learn (e.g., pie charts of fractions, or ball-and-stick models
of chemical molecules) and assume that students can quickly discern relevant
information (e.g., whether or not two visuals show the same chemical) once that
visual representation has been introduced. But comprehension is not the same as
fluency -- students still expend significant mental effort and time interpreting
even visuals that they understand conceptually, and the resulting cognitive load
can cause them to miss other important information that instructors are
imparting. To help improve student fluency with visuals, a series of experiments
with undergraduate students and chemistry professors will investigate which
visual features they pay attention to and use sophisticated statistical methods
to devise example sequences that will most efficiently help students learn to
pay attention to relevant visual features. Based on this research, the project
team will develop a visual fluency training that will be incorporated into an
existing, successful online learning technology for chemistry. The potential
educational impact will not be limited to chemistry instruction: given the
pervasiveness of visual representations in STEM fields and the number of
students who struggle with rapid processing of those visuals, the products of
this research could be integrated into other educational
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop a methodology for
cognitive modeling of perceptual learning processes that can create adaptive
support for perceptual learning tasks. The research will combine machine
learning with educational psychology experiments using an Intelligent Tutoring
System (ITS) for undergraduate chemistry. In Phase 1, metric learning will
assess which visual features of representations novice students and chemistry
experts focus on. Applying metric learning to a novice-expert experiment will
establish a skill model of student perceptions and perceptual learning goals for
the ITS. In Phase 2, the team will use machine learning to develop a cognitive
model of perceptual learning. The team will conduct a chemistry learning
experiment and apply machine learning to test cognitive models. In Phase 3, the
team will use the cognitive model to reverse-engineer optimal sequences of
perceptual learning tasks. An experiment will evaluate the effectiveness of
these sequences, and the team will build on this analysis to create an adaptive
version of perceptual learning tasks. A final experiment will evaluate whether
incorporating adaptive perceptual learning tasks with conceptually focused
instruction enhances learning. Because educational technologies have
traditionally focused on explicit learning processes that lead to conceptual
competencies, they cannot currently assess the implicit learning processes that
lead to perceptual fluency. Combining educational psychology, cognitive science,
and machine learning will yield new cognitive models that could transform the
adaptive capabilities of educational technologies to support such perceptual
fluency as well as other implicit forms of learning. The project will also yield
next-generation computational algorithms to model human similarity judgments and
to use adaptive surveying to collect data on perceptual judgments more
efficiently.