* 1623237
* Broadening Participation Research: Fostering Retention in STEM Disciplines at Minority Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,992.00

Researchers at Tuskegee University will leverage the results of prior research
to develop a model of psychosocial and institutional structural factors that
influence the retention of STEM students at HBCUs. The current project will
expand the research by collecting additional data and including Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs). More specifically, they will examine the interaction of the
psychosocial and structural factors identified previously and continue to
examine those combinations that are most likely to produce success in retaining
students in the STEM pipeline at these institutions. The study has the potential
to positively impact undergraduate STEM education at all
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a three-phase mixed-
methods approach involving phenomenological qualitative research, quantitative
surveys, and quantitative analysis of secondary data to investigate four
research questions: (1) What psychosocial factors appear to affect the retention
of students in STEM disciplines at minority-serving institutions? In what ways
are those effects manifested? (2) How do structural factors influence retention
rates in STEM disciplines at minority-serving institutions? (3) What influence,
if any, do psychosocial factors appear to have on the effectiveness of
structural factors which are intended to support student retention in STEM
disciplines? (4) What differences and similarities are there in the apparent
influence of psychosocial and structural factors on STEM retention at
institutions serving different minority populations? The new sample populations
are expected to yield 16 focus groups with a total of 80-112 participants.
Population samples will include current STEM students, administrators and staff,
faculty, and graduates of STEM programs. The researchers propose to structural
equation modeling for the quantitative data analysis and axial and selective
coding for the qualitative analysis. Understanding the interplay of these
influences and their effects on each other and on retention will allow the
researchers to further refine the model and produce a clearer perspective about
STEM programs at minority-serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) Broadening Participation Research in Education
track. This program track supports ideas to create and study new models and
innovations in STEM teaching and learning, investigate the underlying issues
affecting the differential participation and success rates of students from
underrepresented groups, and produce knowledge to inform STEM education
practices and interventions.