* 1623286
* Conference on Combinatorial Structure in Hypercubes
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Arpad Benyi, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* jacques verstraete
* 03/31/2017
* USD 33,884.00

This award supports participation in the conference ''Fifty Years of the Hales-
Jewett Theorem,'' held at Western Washington University, May 6-8, 2016. The
conference provides a forum for mathematicians working on problems related to
the Hales-Jewett theorem, a cornerstone result in combinatorics. The conference
features ten plenary talks by distinguished mathematicians and provides an
opportunity for students and junior researchers to meet and learn from leaders
in the field. The meeting provides a venue for exchange of ideas to catalyze new
developments in the field, as well as the training of graduate students working
in this area.

The Hales-Jewett Theorem is a central theorem in the area of research known as
Ramsey Theory. This area has been actively investigated by leading
mathematicians for more than one hundred years, with recent spectacular
progress. In a large collaborative effort through the Polymath Project, one of
the long sought-after goals in the area, the density Hales-Jewett Theorem, was
finally proved in 2012. The conference features current research on this topic
and others in Ramsey Theory and related areas. Leading researchers will present
new results, and during the conference there will be ample time for open
discussions on the field's many unsolved problems. More information can be found
at the conference web site loglogn.wix.com/halesjewett