* 1623368
* Collaborative Research:   Bridging Paleolimnology And Archaeology Through Human Biomarkers In Lake Sediment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 91,447.00

Understanding human population levels over time is fundamentally important for
answering numerous questions about society?s deep past. For instance, were
rising population levels responsible for spurring major social transformations,
like the adoption of agriculture, more complex social and political hierarchies,
or intensified warfare? How were population levels affected by major events like
the colonization of new areas, environmental crises, or the collapse of states?
Traditionally, archaeologists arrive at estimates of past demography through
archaeological survey, but this is not always possible (e.g., for phases of
human settlement with low population densities and high mobility, or in regions
with poor surface visibility of sites due to thick vegetation or alluvial
deposition). Paleolimnology, the study of lakes and other bodies of water , has
the potential to provide relevant information. This interdisciplinary project
aims to establish whether recently defined biochemical markers in ancient lake
sediment can serve as reliable proxies for human population levels over time.
P.I. Dr. Elizabeth Arkush, Co-P.I. Dr. Aubrey Hillman, Co-PI Dr. Josef Werne,
and Co-PI Dr. Mark Abbott will use National Science Foundation support to
analyze sediments in lake cores recovered in 2015 from small lakes in the
Titicaca Basin of southern Peru. If successful, this technique will hold major
potential for reconstructing the demographic histories of regions. In addition,
because lake core sequences also have other significant information such as
precipitation levels, this technique holds promise for investigating the
relationship between human populations and environmental change by reducing the
chronological uncertainty that comes from matching separate climate and
population records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research shows that fecal
?stanols?, a class organic compounds deriving from feces of higher mammals, are
present in measurable amounts in lake sediments. The presence and quantity
should reflect human population levels in the lake watershed, particularly
coprostanol, which is the major stanol type in human feces. This project aims to
evaluate and expand the utility of this biomarker for archaeological research by
comparing stanols in cores from two lakes in the south-central Andes with
sequences of population levels derived from two completed full-coverage
archaeological surveys. In addition to advancing new methodology for the
reconstruction of past demography, the resulting dataset has the potential to
make significant advances on questions about the connection between pre-
Columbian sociopolitical change and paleoclimate. The project?s broader impacts
include significant training and research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students.