* 1623494
* EAGER: MAKER: Deployable Makerspace: Mobility, Additive Manufacturing, and Curricular Spectacle
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Aaron Knochel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,780.00

This project leverages Making to develop and test its role in improving the
effectiveness of informal learning pathways for increasing retention and
broadening participation in Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and
Mathematics or STEAM through the context of a deployable makerspace with a
particular emphasis on additive manufacturing (AM). Mobile makerspaces have been
shown to excite local communities and this research investigates how this
initial fascination can impact learning and engagement with STEAM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how deployable makerspace
provides a more comprehensive spectrum of concepts related to material extrusion
additive manufacturing called a "material-to-form" model with particular depth
in design and material science important to making. Also, the impact on
broadening participation through the experiential component of making by
adapting makerspaces will be explored.The question of whether interaction with a
deployable makerspace will improve participants knowledge of Additive
Manufacturing and the material and design considerations associated with it.
This research brings together important technological innovations that are
transforming how we conceptualize STEAM education: digital fabrication,
makerspace culture, and mobility. Finally this research will explore what
possibilities for engagement and curriculum development when the Makerspace goes
to the student. This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter
(DCL) portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR) and Engineering (ENG).