* 1623366
* RAPID: Preserving Primate Data to Investigate the Relationship Between Skeletal Shape and Hybridization
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Rebecca Ackermann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 78,192.00

Hybrids are the offspring of two different species or varieties of a plant or
animal. Recent genetic evidence suggesting that our hominin ancestors interbred
with other hominin species has highlighted hybridization in our own evolutionary
past. If there are predictable patterns in hybrid skeletal shape, it might be
possible to identify evidence of hybrids in the hominin fossil record, for which
genetic data are not always recoverable. A good way to determine whether such
patterns exist is to study hybrid skeletal shape in species that are closely
related to humans. This project will preserve hybrid macaque (monkey) skeletons
and related imaging, genetic, and life history data that would provide excellent
comparative data on hybridization, but that are at immediate risk of being lost.
The monkeys are part of a hybrid macaque colony (Chinese and Indian Macaca
mulatta) that is no longer being expanded and is therefore declining in size as
individual animals die. If the monkeys' skeletal data are not preserved after
death, and normally they are not, this valuable resource to understand
hybridization will be lost. This study will benefit the scientific community by
producing a curated research collection of hybrid skeletal remains and
associated data. It will also support international collaborations and student
mentorship and training.

Recent evidence of gene flow among archaic human lineages has brought admixture
to the forefront of anthropological and public interest. This study will develop
principled criteria for detecting skeletal evidence of admixture, using a model
organism that is closely related to humans. Specifically, the RAPID award will
allow for postmortem preservation and scanning of approximately 80 macaque
hybrids from the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC), starting
immediately, so that their skeletons and related data can become part of a
valuable collection used to address hybridization and other research topics.
Attrition in the hybrid macaque colony is high, and a representative sample of
the colony (in terms of hybrid status) may not be possible to acquire if
individual animals are not preserved starting now. The investigators plan to use
the resulting skeletal collection (estimated n=200) to quantify and model hybrid
phenotypic variation, evaluate discriminant functions to distinguish hybrids
from non-hybrids, and develop models for detecting hybridization in hominins and
other taxa on the basis of skeletal phenotype. Large, genotyped primate samples
of known pedigree are very rare. The skeletal sample and associated data will be
curated at UC Davis and made available to other researchers. The collection and
related research questions are likely to be of interest in disciplines including
primatology, biology, zoology, and quantitative genetics.