* 1623875
* I-Corps: Unmanned Emissions Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2016
* Andrea Strzelec, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Air pollution remains a major health hazard in the United States despite
significant improvement in air quality since the passage of the Clean Air Act
and formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. Globally,
air pollution is the largest environmental risk to human health. Major causes of
air pollution include mobile sources such as transportation, and stationary
sources such as landfill gas, livestock, stationary power, and flare gas
emissions. When stationary sources are distributed over large areas or have
nearly inaccessible exhaust streams (i.e. power plant smoke stacks), it can be
very difficult to identify the locations or severity of those sources. We have
developed a unique method for measuring gases directly and in place. The
proposed technology uses an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), commonly referred to
as a drone, to measure gasses and gaseous emissions. Location-specific gas
concentration measurements are accomplished by integrating gas sensors into the
drone, which is flown over the area of interest, and using the onboard GPS to
determine the exact position of the measurement. This I-Corps team believes the
most useful application of this technology is in the Oil &amp; Gas and
Stationary Power industries. In addition, this has applications in Railroad,
Large Bore Ships, and Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has
developed a unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to measure gases and gaseous
emissions. The proposed innovation enables accurate and precise measurements of
gas emissions in situ. The product's competitive advantage is the ability to
access locations with ease regardless of any ground obstructions present and
size of the survey area. Specific technical advancements include improved gas
and emissions monitoring capabilities. The overarching goal of this project has
clear environmental, societal, and economic benefits. The scope of possible
applications has been significantly expanded to consider fuel cell
manufacturers, large stationary power plants, mining, oil refineries, waste
processing, large scale film processing industries, federal and state regulatory
monitors and the list will most likely expand. The customer need that will be
met by this technology is the ability to identify and quantify emissions sources
? whether for regulatory purposes or because these emissions represent product
loss. Currently, the developmental status of the technology is at proof of
principle. The UAV with sensor has been designed and a prototype was built that
is undergoing validation testing. The team looks forward to learning a lot from
the customer discovery sessions and further developing the technology into a
minimum viable product. To demonstrate the technology, a data set will be
developed using known standards for ease of comparison. The team can use this to
benchmark the technology against competing technologies and for validation.