* 1623080
* Examining the Impact of a Learning Community Model and Critical Pedagogy on Minority Student Retention in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Samuel Darko, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2020
* USD 349,983.00

Benedict College will examine the impact of a Connected Learning Community Model
on undergraduate student retention, academic success, and self-efficacy. The
model, based on Bandura's Social Cognitive Theory, features student research
experiences coupled with peer-to-peer and faculty mentoring and provides an
engaging and supportive interactive learning environment to influence student
outcomes. The model incorporates several factors: the influence of peers with
similar sociocultural backgrounds, the influence of an academic mentor in
fostering effective study skills, the influence of acquiring a responsible work
ethic, and the influence of a better understanding of the benefits of STEM
education. The project is expected to positively impact the pathway of
underrepresented minorities in the STEM workforce by producing an evidence-based
intervention that could be adapted for similar institutions, including community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will implement a mixed-methods
design to investigate whether a connected learning community impacts the
academic performance, retention, and self-efficacy of underrepresented minority
STEM students. Multiple regression models will be used to explain the variation
of academic success, retention, and self-efficacy with covariates such as age,
socioeconomic status, gender, family education history, and marital status using
the quantitative data. Qualitative data will be collected and analyzed for
causative factors to support the quantitative effects observed during the study.
Pre- and post-project interviews will be used to assess students' satisfaction
with their academic experience, perceived benefit of membership in the learning
community, interest in STEM careers, and commitment to persist in STEM. The
study can potentially produce a novel paradigm for undergraduate STEM education
targeting underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP) Broadening Participation Research in Education track. This
program track supports ideas to create and study new models and innovations in
STEM teaching and learning, investigate the underlying issues affecting the
differential participation and success rates of students from underrepresented
groups, and produce knowledge to inform STEM education practices and
interventions.