* 1623478
* EAGER: Heritable Gene Editing in Maize using Transient Expression of the CRISPR-Cas9 Endonuclease System
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Andrew Settles, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2018
* USD 285,728.00

The growth and productivity of crop plants are fundamentally determined by DNA.
Throughout the history of agriculture, farmers and breeders have selected for
variants in DNA sequence that improve plant productivity. Recent technologies,
collectively known as gene editing, can induce DNA variants at specific sites in
the genome. Gene editing can produce desired traits in crops, but the current
process for gene editing in corn is technically challenging with limited
throughput. This project will explore methods to more efficiently induce DNA
variants at specific sites in the corn genome. The research will test whether
short-term delivery of gene editing enzymes to corn stem cells will cause DNA
variants that can be inherited from the treated plant to the next generation. If
successful, the project will develop a new tool for genome research and corn
breeding that is expected to have a high impact on understanding gene function
and developing more productive corn varieties. The project will also directly
involve undergraduates in the research to support the education and professional
development of the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this research is to develop more efficient methods to edit the
maize genome. Gene editing using the Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) system is very effective at generating heritable
mutations when the CRISPR system is introduced as a stable transgenic locus.
This project will investigate whether transient expression of the Cas9
endonuclease and a synthetic, single guide RNA (gRNA) in shoot apical meristem
cells can produce inheritable gene edits. The central hypothesis is that
transient expression of Cas9 and gRNA in plant stem cells will induce mutant
sectors large enough to contribute to the gametes. If successful, transient
mutagenesis will produce targeted mutations without tissue culture or the
generation of a transgenic organism. Aim 1 will determine if Agrobacterium
tumefaciens infiltration of seedling shoots can transiently express foreign DNA
in the shoot apical meristem at sufficient levels to cause targeted mutations
with the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Aim 2 will determine if cell penetrating peptides
can transfer DNA, protein, and gRNA into shoot stem cells at sufficient levels
to cause targeted mutations.