* 1623826
* Student Travel International Congress on the Biology of Fish,  June 12-16th, 2016,  Texas State University, San Marcos, TX.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Susan Edwards, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,000.00

Fish are a primary food source for populations around the globe and are highly
sensitive to environmental change. The Physiology Section of the American
Fisheries Society (AFS) holds the International Congress on the Biology of Fish
every two years. It attracts a high caliber international delegation of
scientists dedicated to fish research from over 40 countries around the world.
The Congress symposia cover a broad range of topics ranging from basic to
applied fish biology and provide a unique environment for cross-fertilization of
ideas aimed at the long term viability of global fish species. One of the
strengths of the congress has always been student involvement; of the 544
delegates presenting at the last Congress, 217 were students. The quality of the
students' science and presentations are exceptional and has always been real
highlight of the meeting. The goal of this application is to provide support for
students at the graduate and post-doctoral level to travel to and participate in
the 2016 Congress to be held at Texas State University in San Marcos, Texas,
June 12-16. Candidates applying for NSF travel support will be judged on a
combination of the scientific quality of their abstract, the relevance of their
subject matter to the symposia, and financial need. The travel award program
more broadly promotes development of a strong scientific infrastructure,
encompassing junior scientists of many ethnicities and genders. The organizers
aim to continue to foster success of under represented students in the STEM
fields within Fish Physiology. In addition to the science there are several
supporting sessions held throughout the congress aimed specifically at students;
these range from publication/grant writing workshops, to specific mentoring and
career events along with social events aimed at assisting students to develop
their professional networks. Proceedings of the Congress are supplied in PDF-
format, free-of-charge to the public on the AFS Physiology division website.