* 1623145
* Career Commitment and Retention in STEM: Examining the Impact of a Career Management Intervention
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Researchers at Tennessee State University will examine the impact of a career
development intervention that was revised based on lessons learned from prior
research. The project will focus on STEM career persistence by investigating
career decision making difficulties, stages of change in career development,
growth mindset, and academic satisfaction. Participants will develop a ten-year
plan for matriculating through undergraduate education to graduate school and
beyond, receive information about the importance of academic support activities,
and develop skills in planning and managing their career paths. These goals will
be achieved through the implementation of a research-based series of workshops
designed to increase students' understanding about how to align their career
aspirations with job market trends and how to manage their career plan. The
expected outcome is that students will have an increased commitment to their
major field of study, self-efficacy for career-related tasks, and greater
confidence in their potential for success. The research findings will contribute
to the vocational psychology and STEM persistence literature by integrating
theory related to career development with research on an effective intervention
with African American STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
is a mixed-methods research design to investigate several research questions:
(1) In what ways will the intervention increase career planning and management
skills of African American students' (2) In what ways will the intervention
reduce students' career decision-making and planning difficulties? (3) What will
be the effect of the intervention on African American students' commitment to
and interest, performance, and retention in STEM? and (4) What effect will the
intervention have on African American students' participation in professional
opportunities? Quantitative data will be gathered using a quasi-experimental
pre-/post-test control group longitudinal design. Variables will include
measures of career decision-making difficulties, change processes, growth
mindset, and productive persistence. Qualitative data will be gathered using
focus groups and individual interviews from different STEM academic departments.
Data analysis will be conducted using MANOVA/MANCOVA. Additional analyses will
examine for the impact of gender, race/ethnicity, first-generation status, and
STEM major. Documentation of the effectiveness of the intervention will support
the replication of the model at other HBCUs focusing on increasing the diversity
of the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Broadening Participation Research in Education track. This program track
supports ideas to create and study new models and innovations in STEM teaching
and learning, investigate the underlying issues affecting the differential
participation and success rates of students from underrepresented groups, and
produce knowledge to inform STEM education practices and interventions.