* 1623805
* Enhancing the Broader Impacts of Developing a Social-Cognitive, Multilevel, Empirically-Based Model of Public Engagement for the Shaping of Science and Innovation Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Lisa Pytlik Zillig, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 42,188.00

Emerging science and technology (S&T) innovations can trigger public
controversies and signal the opportunity to work through competing public
values, understandings, and misunderstandings to decide how to reconcile public
values with new S&T. One way that Congress (21st Century Nanotechnology Research
and Development Act , 2003) and the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy (Open Government Plan, April 7, 2010) have suggested to approach this
complicated task is to engage with the public about the ethical, legal, and
social issues related to scientific and technological innovations. Currently, a
wide range of public engagement techniques are used-including focus groups,
public forums and deliberations, surveys, and social marketing. Different forms
of public engagement involve different features designed to evoke meaningful
public input. However, little is known regarding which public engagement options
are effective under different conditions. How should information about
scientific or technological innovations be conveyed? Is it better for
participants to engage with information individually or in groups? Can and
should participants be encouraged to think critically about the information
presented? This project seeks to begin to answer these questions by applying
insights from psychology and other social sciences to multiple simulated and
controlled (that is, laboratory) "public" engagements about complex, cutting-
edge, nanotechnology issues. The researchers collected substantial information
from these engagement events. The analyses of the data from the engagements will
enable researchers, policymakers, and the public to better understand the
strengths and limitations of different approaches to public engagements and to
build new insights about such engagements.

This project will disseminate data and results from a set of four unique
longitudinal studies. Studies were conducted across three- to four-week
timespans, and involved more than 1,200 student participants. In each study,
different social and cognitive aspects of engagement were experimentally
manipulated to assess their impacts on common public-engagement goals. For
example, studies varied the design of information about new technologies, and
whether participants considered technology-relevant ethical, legal, and social
issues individually or in groups. Effects of these manipulations were examined
on knowledge acquired about nanotechnology, attitudes toward and perceptions of
the development and regulation of nanotechnology, trust in nanoscientists and
the policymakers who deal with regulating nanotechnology, and acceptance of
policy outcomes. The current project will broadly disseminate each study's
findings, as well as facilitate public access by providing detailed descriptions
of the manipulated design features and supplementary materials that include the
data from the studies, study materials, instruments, and data transformation and
analysis syntax in multiple formats. These materials will foster further
analyses by other researchers using alternative theoretical perspectives and
allow theoretical development on topics beyond nanotechnology.