* 1623208
* Targeted Infusion Project: Expansion and Implementation of the Interactive LearningExpress App
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bo Sun, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 397,779.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Lincoln University seeks
to create an affordable mobile application (app) that focuses on the application
of mathematical concepts to biological problems. This research will develop,
test, and evaluate a novel, low cost, independent app to facilitate the teaching
of biology application problems and to enhance student quantitative literacy.
Both the content and the app will be developed by students from underrepresented
groups, with subject matter expert oversight. It is expected that this app will
increase student engagement which will contribute to greater student success in
performing biology application problems. This app will help students improve
math competency at their own pace, and allow the professor to help them at the
point where they are having difficulty. Thus, this app will improve faculty
ability to address one important stumbling block that can prevent students from
continuing in STEM fields. One expected benefit of wide scale use of this app is
increased retention of students in STEM majors.

The proposed project's overall goal is to provide students with learning
opportunities to apply mathematical concepts to life science problems and to
provide instructors with real time information on student learning outcomes
through the development and validation of a low cost interactive math app. To
achieve this goal: 1) students will be recruited to assist in development of the
app, 2) student focus groups will be formed to test app content and provide
feedback, 3) math and biology faculty will be recruited to develop curricular
modules that incorporate the app, and 4) the app will be evaluated in three
Biology courses. The features of the app, including multiple levels of
difficulty, tutorials, sample problems, and feedback to students and instructors
coupled with the extensive question bank, will assist in strengthening the
quantitative literacy of students at a wide range of universities.