* 1623105
* IUSE/PFE-RED: FACETS: Formation of Accomplished Chemical Engineers for Transforming Society
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Eva Chi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,999,957.00

Addressing the grand challenges of the 21st century requires engineers who are
critical thinkers, problem solvers, and able to understand the societal contexts
in which they are working. Educating students in these areas requires a multi-
faceted approach that addresses motivation and identity as a means to ensure a
diverse workforce. The Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering (CBE)
at the University of New Mexico plans to revolutionize undergraduate education
by launching FACETS: Formation of Accomplished Chemical Engineers for
Transforming Society. FACETS will revolutionize CBE by (1) introducing "CIRE"
design challenges in the core curriculum that are Community-, Industry-,
Research-, and/or Entrepreneurship-based; (2) conducting professional
development institutes that will train and mentor faculty and graduate students;
workshops will be led by experts from industry and national laboratories, from
the learning sciences, from engineering education and multicultural studies, for
example the directors of UNM Native American Studies and Chicano/a Studies, and
(3) create a digital badging system will help students take ownership of their
competencies and develop engineering identities and enable faculty to monitor
and assess student outcomes and to engage in research on their teaching. The
CIRE design challenges, digital badging system and implementation plan will be
transferrable to many intermediate to large institutions through the use of a
modular approach. Local industry and community partners will participate in
presenting the design challenges and encourage entrepreneurial thinking. The use
of community engagement through design challenges will engage students in
developing their sociotechnical awareness and attract diverse, native and rural
populations into engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of chemical
engineering has evolved over the past century - originating in the petrochemical
industries - but now includes electronic materials processing, pharmaceutical
production and product design, such as nanoparticles, tissue engineering, nano-
medicine, etc. However, the chemical engineering undergraduate core curriculum
has not fully reflected this transformation. In order to reposition chemical
engineering to educate students prepared for future challenges, the project team
will create and study design challenges and digital badges. The project is
underlain by a theory of change based on research on engineering education,
guided by a broad research question: How can a digital badging system paired
with design challenges support students to develop professional identity and an
understanding of engineering as an innovative field? The project will result in
new understanding of how to engage faculty to support diverse students to be
successful in engineering. It will lead to sustained change in the department,
including: the ability to prepare diverse engineers ready to solve the
challenges of tomorrow; partnerships with industry, national labs and
communities; and a model for how to revolutionize undergraduate education.