* 1623590
* RAPID: Tracing the origin and fate of particulate organic matter in nearshore marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2018
* John Melack, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2018
* USD 199,500.00

Material exchange between ecosystems is being increasingly recognized as an
important determinant of many ecological patterns and processes. Nowhere is this
more evident than in the highly productive coastal zone, which receives large
amounts of terrestrial particulate organic (POM) matter through stream and river
discharge. In semi-arid regions such as southern California, the delivery of
terrestrial POM to the nearshore is largely restricted to storm events that are
intensified during El Nino years of above average rainfall. The processing and
fate of this material is poorly known, yet there is growing evidence that it
could contribute significantly to nearshore productivity. This research project
will help to fill a critical knowledge gap pertaining to the origin,
distribution, processing of terrestrial POM and its potential to serve as a
reservoir of nitrogen storage for nearshore primary production during periods of
the year when marine sources of dissolved inorganic nitrogen are low. Research
on this award will be done in close collaboration with the Santa Barbara Coastal
Long Term Ecological Research program (SBC LTER). As such it will augment SBC's
strong contribution to student training and mentoring in interdisciplinary
research at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels. Outcomes will
be incorporated into SBC's ongoing Schoolyard LTER program, which is organized
around a theme of kelp forest ecology and land-ocean exchanges and aimed at
long-term connections with underserved, low-achieving schools that include year-
round on and off campus activities. The LTER Investigators have developed formal
partnerships with local cities and Santa Barbara County to develop vulnerability
assessments of the regions coastal ecosystems and the LTER will incorporate the
findings from this study into those assessments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
unprecedented drought currently in its fourth year in California, coupled with
the ongoing conditions of anomalously low ocean productivity and the prospect of
one the strongest El Ninos on record provide an unparalleled opportunity for
researchers at the Santa Barbara Coastal Long Term Ecological Research program
(SBC LTER) to test specific hypotheses pertaining to the origin, distribution,
processing and bioavailability of terrestrial organic matter in coastal marine
sediments and their potential for serving as a reservoir of nitrogen storage to
fuel nearshore primary production during periods when nitrate concentrations are
low. NSF RAPID Response award funds will be used to: (1) measure bulk properties
and biomarker tracers of particulate organic matter (POM) in stream water and in
coastal marine sediments at SBC sites differing in exposure to terrestrial
runoff prior to and following large storm events, and (2) determine the
bioavailability of dissolved organic matter (DOM) released from POM in marine
sediments following large runoff events. The research will complement and inform
SBC's ongoing efforts to investigate the availability and utilization of
recycled forms of nitrogen in supporting the primary production of nearshore
macrophytes and phytoplankton during non-upwelling periods when nitrate levels
ar typically low.