* 1623821
* CIF: EAGER: Towards an Information Theory of Attention
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Lav Varshney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Information theory has set forth ideals of communication system performance that
have driven technological development for decades. Successes in technologies
like telephony and the Internet now allow an individual to reliably receive a
great deal of information. Indeed, a major problem facing society today is too
much information rather than too little: the problem of information overload. A
wealth of information creates a scarcity of human attention and a need for
engineering designs that consider both information and attention. Problems,
however, are not just technical in scope but fundamentally socio-technical, with
solutions requiring explicit consideration of human behavior. This early-concept
exploratory research aims to understand the gain and loss of attention in
communication, drawing on mathematical models of people. The plan first
considers the fundamental trade-off between information rate and Bayesian
surprise, a psychological measure of human attention, over timing channels and
in multiple-access and multicast settings modeled after social media systems.
The plan next considers the best ways to communicate when the receiver may lose
attention, either by getting "worn out" or by not being surprised enough.
Methods to obtain the best fidelity over channels that die will also be
developed. the project integrates with an education/outreach plan also focused
on attention, which aims to inculcate a culture of engagement in the college of
the future. Educational materials for undergraduates across campus, in new
courses on big data and on heroic engineering will be developed. Public outreach
will draw on the proposer's media presence and IEEE
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will lay new foundations for
an information theory of socio-technical systems that brings mathematical rigor
and concern for fundamental limits to problems and information systems that are
becoming increasingly prominent in society: problems that must dispense with the
assumption that humans can be abstracted away. The significance lies in the
introduction of a new dimension to communication, attention, whose importance in
information-theoretic terms remains untapped. This is expected to lead to novel
trade-offs between information and surprise in various network settings, as well
as novel formulations of communication in the presence of both noise and signal-
dependent failure, providing concrete formulations of reliable communication
using finite block lengths.