* 1623905
* I-Corps: Improving Performance in Passive RFID Networks
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Maciej Zawodniok, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The project focuses on commercialization of new techniques that improve
communication performance of battery-less, passive radio frequency
identification (RFID)-based systems. Such passive communication is already used
in many industries and application due to its benefits of small size, wireless
communication capabilities, wireless powering of the device, lack of battery and
related maintenance, easy deployment, environment friendly (no battery
pollution), etc. However, this good characteristic comes with a drawback: short
range and interference when a large number of devices is deployed in a small
area. This prevented employment of RFID in applications where large number of
tags is to be read and also produces hesitations in future usage of RFID systems
in Internet of Things (IoT). Yet there is large market potential. The current
(in 2015), passive RFID market is over $8 billion worldwide ranging from retail
industry and tracking object to health care and Internet of Things (IoT).
Specifically, UHF RFID field is expecting to have over $ 9.5 billion market by
2018. This market craves for increasing read rates, extending range, material
compatible tags and security. The proposed solution will remedy a low read rate
problem and security concerns in RFID market while extending the communication
range and providing more power for advanced, smart applications. The proposed
technique can be used for UHF RFID tags to increase read rates in warehouses
(e.g., Walmart) and extend the range in wireless sensor networks (e.g., NASA).
Considering the individual specification of these products it is expected that
RFID manufactures and consumers will welcome the introduction of these products
to the market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work includes discovery of
potential customers and their needs with respect to RFID technology. In contrast
to existing work that often focuses on purely technical advancements, the
proposed effort aims at refining the proposed solution for improving the
performance RFID such that the customers needs are addressed. The proposed
solutions aim at combining four novel approaches to developing a more efficient
RFID tag including:&lt;br/&gt; (1) novel RFID tag antenna design that maximizes
backscatter signal by 200% over existing designs; &lt;br/&gt; (2) flexible
impedance matching network for loading the RFID tag antenna that allows dynamic
tuning of antenna properties to compensate for mutual coupling and interference
from environment; &lt;br/&gt; (3) collaborative scheme where adjacent RFID tags
improve communication performance by using both the antenna and impedance tuning
circuitry to minimize their destructive interference and coupling; and
&lt;br/&gt; (4) introducing a new operation state for RFID tags in a network
fashion in that tags can receive signal from the environment but they produce
minimum scattering (interference) to the environment. The customer discovery
will ensure that the resulting solution will be commercially viable.
&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the team will develop a prototype and proof-of-concept
demonstration that will target the customer needs and show the value
proposition.