* 1623739
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic fault rupture in the presence of 3D heterogenous tectonic stress: the case of the San Andreas Fault in Eastern San Gorgonio Pass
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* David Oglesby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2019
* USD 164,467.00

The San Andreas Fault is the largest and arguably the most dangerous source of
earthquakes in Southern California. It has produced very large (magnitude
greater than 7.5) earthquakes in the past, and it is likely to do so again, with
essentially no warning. One of the key tools that seismologists can use to help
anticipate and mitigate the effects of such future disasters is to make
numerical (computer) models of potential earthquakes. Current numerical models
indicate that an earthquake that propagates from Indio toward Los Angeles,
through the San Gorgonio Pass (SGP), can channel ground shaking energy directly
toward the Los Angeles Basin, where it is amplified by basin sediments and can
lead to very high ground motion. Thus, it is extremely important to determine
whether such an earthquake that passes through the SGP is likely (or even
possible). This is not a trivial question, as the fault structure in the San
Gorgonio Pass is quite complex, with the main San Andreas splitting into a
number of smaller faults with different orientations and directions of slip. We
will use the most accurate available modeling techniques to address the question
of whether an earthquake can propagate through this region, leading to a large,
damaging event for the region. We will focus on the eastern SGP, where the
Coachella Valley strand of the SAF branches into the Mission Creek, Banning, and
Garnet Hill fault strands. Each of these strands has very different structure
and apparent activity levels, so an understanding of through-going earthquake
potential in the region may hinge on whether there is a preferred rupture path
in this region. This project implements numerical models of potential
earthquakes in this region to determine which of these strands is the most
likely path of an earthquake. The models use fault stresses derived from long-
term simulations of fault slip and Earth surface deformation in the region, and
give information on potential earthquake rupture path, slip distribution,
earthquake size, and ground motion. These innovative earthquake models will also
include the effects of rock failure away from the faults, which may have a
significant effect on the energy budget of earthquakes. This work constitutes an
important advance in the science of earthquake modeling, and it has important
broader impacts, including estimates of earthquake size and ground motion in the
region, with further implications for engineering, zoning, and emergency
response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of whether an earthquake can
propagate through the San Gorgonio Pass (SGP) region of the San Andreas Fault
(SAF) is of tremendous scientific and societal importance. The SGP is a ?pinch
point? along this fault system, in which the SAF splits into multiple non-
coplanar segments, including both strike-slip and thrust; there may well be no
through-going surface to support continuous earthquake rupture in this region
[e.g., Yule, 2009]. Numerical models [e.g., Olsen et al., 2008] indicate that an
earthquake rupture that propagates through the SGP from southeast to northwest
can channel seismic radiation directly toward the Los Angeles Basin, where it is
amplified by basin sediments and can lead to very high ground motion. Thus, the
question of whether the San Gorgonio Pass serves as a significant barrier to
earthquake rupture propagation is of great practical as well as theoretical
interest, and it affects ground motion not just locally but in the most
populated regions of Southern California. This work aims to help answer this
question by performing numerical models of potential earthquakes in this region.
Specifically, we will focus on the eastern SGP, where the Coachella Valley
segment of the SAF branches into the Mission Creek, Banning, and Garnet Hill
fault strands. Each of these strands has very different structure and apparent
activity levels, so an understanding of through-going earthquake potential in
the region may hinge on whether there is a preferred rupture path in this
region. We will use a combination of methods to address this question: coupled
long-term and interseismic quasi-static modeling method to determine the on- and
off-fault stresses in the region, and a 3D dynamic rupture model that uses these
stresses to model potential earthquakes, including rupture propagation, slip,
and near-source ground motion. Each of these methods has been well tested
individually, but this is the first time that they have been combined in this
way. The work will is a significant advance in the field of realistic fault
dynamics, in that it is (to the PIs knowledge) the first study to combine a
tectonically- and geometrically-consistent heterogeneous stress field with off-
fault failure; prior models have had either but not both of these abilities.
Earlier homogenous-stress models that incorporate such failure mechanisms
[Andrews, 2005; DeDontney et al., 2012; Duan and Day, 2008; Dunham et al., 2011;
Gabriel et al., 2013] indicate that off-fault plasticity can have a very strong
effect on the energy budget and rupture propagation during an earthquake; we
expect the inclusion of these effects in our heterogeneous stress models to be
at least as significant. Our work will advance the science of fault dynamics in
regions of geometrical complexity, especially fault branches. The methods
developed in this project are readily applicable to other earthquake-prone
regions with significant fault complexity, such as Northern California. The
results have important implications for earthquake occurrence in the SGP, as
well as for seismic hazard throughout Southern California. In particular, it has
important implications for estimates of potential earthquake size in Southern
California, and consequently the generation of strong ground motion and
estimation of seismic hazard. This information can be useful for engineering,
zoning, and emergency response purposes. In addition, the investigators perform
outreach activities to the local Morongo Band Of Mission Indians in San Gorgonio
Pass. This funding supports the Ph.D. research of a talented young postdoctoral
researcher of Afro-Caribbean ancestry, a significantly under-represented group
within the Geosciences.