* 1623012
* I-Corps:  accelMOTION
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2016
* Heather Bansbach, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

More than 65 million Americans suffer from a musculoskeletal injury annually,
costing the United States approximately 900 billion dollars every year.
Musculoskeletal injuries include injury to the muscles, ligaments, tendons, and
bone. These injuries are the primary cause of lost work days and often require
physical therapy to restore proper function. If care is not taken to restore
proper function following injury, one is exposed to a greater risk of re-injury.
These injuries are challenging to prevent due to their multifactorial nature,
however they are preventable with the right tools and knowledge. Physical
therapists are able to help patients recover and restore musculoskeletal
function, but it requires regular monitoring which is difficult with the
decreasing number of patient visits. Even after physical therapy is completed,
there is often a gap between restoring function and being able to return to full
activity without risking re-injury. The proposed technology fills this gap and
provides patients with a means to assess their progress in recovery and prevent
future injury. The proposed technology leverages over 15 years of experience and
research on injury prevention in Special Operations Forces operators and in
student athletes. The Neuromuscular Research Laboratory at the University of
Pittsburgh has developed a model that has been proven effective in preventing
injuries. This I-Corps team has applied these methods to develop a tool that
minimizes the cost, size, effort, and expertise required to identify risk of
injury and appropriate training without compromising precision or quality of
these assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology, accelMOTION,
has the potential to greatly enhance the quality and cost-effectiveness of
physical therapy. The ability to accurately quantify measurements and monitor
patient compliance will enable them to quickly provide more accurate and
repeatable evaluations, as well as consistently manage rehabilitation and
treatment outside the physical therapy clinic. This technology enables physical
therapists to quickly and quantitatively assess patient characteristics with the
use of a small wearable sensor. It can assess neuromuscular, physiological,
biomechanical, and musculoskeletal characteristics including balance,
flexibility, and task performance. The user is guided on placement of the
wearable sensor and how to perform the desired assessment. The platform assesses
quality of the measurement, and then uses an algorithm to derive injury risk
associated with each assessment. This tool can then be used at home by the
patient to monitor their progress in between physical therapy sessions. The
physical therapist is easily able to track patient progress both in and out of
the clinic. Training recommendations customized to the individual are developed
based on the areas that may be exposing the individual to a greater risk of
injury making it simple for the physical therapist to modify exercise
prescriptions in between clinic visits. This unique and prospective
multifactorial approach to study musculoskeletal injury has the ability to
greatly enhance patient care following musculoskeletal injury.