* 1623723
* Patching the Pipeline:  Scholarships for Associate-Degree Transfer Students in the Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 06/30/2015,07/31/2021
* Jennifer Louten, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 532,814.00

The goal of this project at Southern Polytechnic State University is to provide
scholarships and academic support in order to patch a leak in the STEM pipeline,
specifically the loss of transfer students. The project operates using a twelve-
point outline of actions focused on recruiting and retaining transfer students.
The intellectual merit of this plan lies in the design, implementation, and
evaluation of methods aimed at increasing the successful matriculation and
graduation of A.S.-to-B.S. STEM students. The project builds on previous
research identifying factors that lead to the loss of STEM students in such
transitions. The project also systematically investigates support mechanisms to
remediate this difficult transition. The evaluation component is well designed
and will produce ongoing feedback as well as cost-effective programs that can be
sustained beyond the grant period.

Several broader impacts result from this project. First, the number of talented,
low-income students entering STEM professions is increased. Secondly, this
project undertakes a systematic investigation of institutional efforts to
successfully smooth the difficult transition from two year to four year schools.
Third, due to the well planned evaluation component, this project is positioned
to disseminate information to relevant stakeholders so that students at other
institutions may make this transition more easily and effectively.