* 1623892
* Indo-US Workshop on Multiscale, Multiphysics Analysis of Energy Conversion in Li-ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Ankur Jain, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2018
* USD 22,651.00

The Indo-US Workshop on Multiscale, Multiphysics Analysis of Energy Conversion
in Li-ion Batteries will be held on June 15-17, 2016 at the Indian Institute of
Technology in Bombay, India. The workshop will bring together experts with
diverse scientific and engineering backgrounds from the United States and India
to discuss sustainable battery materials for electric transportation and
renewable energy storage applications. The topics will focus on lithium ion and
sodium ion battery materials with properties enabled through nanotechnology, and
the development of advanced mathematical modeling tools to better understand the
performance of these battery materials, particularly with regards to safe
operation of lithium ion batteries. The workshop will support the travel of ten
US-based university faculty members and graduate students to join a delegation
supported by the Indo-US Science and Technology Forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participants from the US and India will divide the workshop presentation topics
equally to provide a comprehensive and interdisciplinary overview of lithium and
sodium ion battery technology. The US participants will present topics on
multifunctional materials, future battery chemistries, sustainable energy
conversion, thermal transport, and thermal-electrochemical coupling. The
participants from India will present topics on nanostructured material
synthesis, Na-ion and Na-S batteries, multiphysics properties of nanostructures
for energy storage, and molecular modeling. The participant interactions are
expected to lead to US-India collaborations in nanostructured energy conversion
materials, high-rate electrochemistry, measurement of thermal-electrochemical
coupling parameters, and multiscale modeling of simulation of Li-ion cells, with
particular focus on thermal-electrochemical processes underlying battery safety.
Future collaborative research efforts will seek to establish multiscale
structure-property-function relationships for lithium ion batteries, leading to
models for electrochemical energy conversion need to develop safe and
sustainable electric transportation systems. A workshop report will be published
as an invited article to the ASME Journal of Electrochemical Energy Storage and
Conversion.