* 1623856
* Structure-Function Correlations in a Type III Extradiol Dioxygenase
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Aimin Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,272.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Molecular and Cellular
Biology Division are funding Dr. Aimin Liu from Georgia State University to
characterize 3-hydroxyanthranilate-3,4-dioxygenase (HAO). This enzyme performs
oxidative ring-cleavage at the meta position of six-membered aromatic rings in a
reaction known as extradiol dioxygenation. HAO is a prototypic member of
extradiol dioxygenases built upon a cupin structural fold (known as type III
extradiol dioxygenases). The goal of this project is to study the substrate
recognition, oxygen binding, activation, selective targeting, and to identify
the intermediates of the reactions catalyzed by HAO. Furthermore, the Liu lab
seeks to identify the role of an additional rubredoxin-like Fe(Cys)4 center of
the enzyme, which is not required for catalysis but is conserved in bacterial
enzymes. The research aims to build a framework for understanding the mechanism
of these enzymes and common steps shared by extradiol dioxygenases. The
chemical, structural, and spectroscopic properties of iron-bound oxygenated
intermediates will help illuminate iron-dependent oxygen activation and
oxidation mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The incorporation of molecular
oxygen into organic molecules is one of the most important metabolic processes
in nature and its ultimate purpose is energy extraction. The Liu laboratory
studies the mechanism by which a particular enzyme accomplishes this task.
Knowledge created by the lab advances the understanding of oxygen activation and
its specific incorporation into metabolites. The scientific questions are
answered by using biochemical methods, spectroscopic tools, X-ray
crystallography, and computational modeling. This multidisciplinary pursuit
creates substantial opportunities to engage science students, including members
of groups underrepresented in science, in research at the frontier of chemistry
and biology. The knowledge gleaned from the research are incorporated in the
biochemistry and bioinorganic chemistry curriculum.