* 1623962
* RAPID: The Double-probe Instrumentation for Measuring Electric-fields (DIME) CubeSat
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Geoffrey Crowley, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2017
* USD 199,541.00

This is a short-term (less than one-year) effort to complete the construction,
functional testing, and instrument calibration of a CubeSat with the capability
to measure electric fields in the upper atmosphere. The DIME (Double-probe
Instrumentation for Measuring Electric-fields) CubeSat concept builds on and
further develops the NSF-funded Dynamic Ionosphere CubeSat Experiment (DICE)
project aimed at measuring major space weather disturbances in the upper
atmosphere. DICE was one of the first NSF CubeSat missions to be selected and
flown. The DICE project consisted of two CubeSats weighing less than 2.2 kg
each. They were launched into a low Earth orbit in October 2011 and collected
data in space for two years. Each DICE satellite carried a suite of three
scientific instruments. However, only two of them functioned successfully in
space. Due to difficulties accurately controlling the spin of the spacecraft on
orbit it was not possible to deploy the long wire booms that made up the
electric field instruments. Thus, the DICE spacecraft could not provide
measurements of the electric field. Fulfilling the need for continuous global
measurements of this critical parameter in upper atmosphere dynamics remains a
key goal and challenge for aeronomy and space weather research. The goal of the
DIME project is to continue the development of an innovative approach to space-
based measurement of the electric field. Leveraging the successes and lessons
learned from the DICE mission DIME is envisioned as the next generation low
cost, highly capable ionospheric sensor-sat observatory. New developments
include improvements in the spin stabilization and control of the CubeSat, as
well as improvements to the DICE electric field deployment mechanism. The DIME
development so far has been funded under the Air Force SBIR program but falls
short of delivering a fully equipped satellite that is ready to be launched and
provide scientific data. Support for the purchase of the remaining parts and
completion of the full flight assembly of the DIME CubeSat, and also for the
completion of the satellite functional testing and calibration, while the
present workforce and expertise is in place is the subject of this RAPID award.
Delivery of a fully launch-ready DIME CubeSat, will enlist support from the Air
Force for the launch and operation on orbit of the satellite. A newly graduated
engineer, who worked as a student on the DICE project, in collaboration with a
postdoctoral researcher, who with this project is offered a unique experimental
research opportunity, will carry out most of the work under this effort. The
project also continues to foster valuable collaboration between industry,
academia, and government, involving ASTRA (a small business), the Air Force
Research Laboratory, and Utah State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
three fundamental drivers of global ionosphere-thermosphere (IT) behavior: solar
UV/EUV radiation, high latitude forcing from solar wind-magnetosphere
interaction and coupling to the ionosphere and thermosphere, and forcing by
waves and tides from the lower atmosphere. While the principles of IT behavior
are generally accepted, a complete understanding of the fully coupled
ionosphere-thermosphere-magnetosphere system requires extensive measurements of
environmental parameters that are not currently available. What are needed are
simultaneous multipoint measurements of the electric field in the ionosphere.
Focus here is on the high latitude forcing. While E-field measurements have been
available from NSF-funded ground-based radars and the DMSP satellites, there is
insufficient data to enable a comprehensive specification of the key high
latitude potential pattern, electric fields, and their variability in space and
time. The DIME sensor-sat has a unique potential to be a pathfinder that will
pave the way for low-cost, very capable, next generation space weather CubeSat
platforms from which to observe the system-driving electric field and other
parameters in the Earth?s ionosphere. Future constellations of DIME platforms
could provide networked, global measurements of the electric field. The DIME
design additionally includes instrumentation to provide complementary magnetic
field and plasma parameter measurements. In this way, DIME constitutes a key
step in enabling large-return Geospace science missions using CubeSat
technologies, targeting outstanding unanswered system-science and space weather
questions.