* 1623458
* Collaborative Research: The Use of Biological Markers to Reconstruct Human-Environment Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nicholas Balascio, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,749.00

A team of scientists from the University of Massachusetts, Columbia University
and William and Mary College will use new molecular techniques to reconstruct
the past history of environmental changes in the Faroe Islands, a key location
in the migration of people across the North Atlantic. Recent archeological
research has found intriguing evidence that the first settlers on the islands
arrived before the 9th century Norse settlers, but little is known about their
impact on the environment, and what animals they might have brought with them.
The research will focus on lake sediments that provide a record of natural and
human-induced environmental changes over time. The research will contribute to
studies of how humans adapt to environmental changes in marginal island
environments, by examining the timing and history of environmental impacts, and
the development of strategies that have allowed limited natural resources to be
used sustainably for more than a thousand years. The project will involve
collaboration with archeologists in the Faroe Islands, to prepare related
educational materials for display in their National Museum, and will provide
unique opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in the research
and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faroe Islands
represented an important "stepping stone" in the westward migration of people
into Iceland, Greenland, and North America, so the timing of settlement in the
Faroes has particular significance for an understanding of North Atlantic
colonization. The research will provide new information about when settlers
first arrived in the Faroe Islands, the type of animals that accompanied them,
their use of fire to modify the local vegetation cover, and how these events
relate to past climate variations in this remote region. The researchers will
extract organic molecules preserved in lake sediments to obtain records that
indicate the presence of human settlers. This will include compounds that are
produced in the intestines of people, pigs and grazing animals (sheep, goats and
cattle), and molecules related to the burning of peat and shrubs. Other
compounds will indicate changes in the composition of vegetation. The research
will also focus on DNA in the sediments, to identify the presence and types of
animals that may have been brought to the islands by the first settlers. The
sediments will be dated using radiocarbon, and volcanic ash from Icelandic
eruptions of known age.