* 1623247
* EDU: Collaborative: Integrating Embedded Systems Security into Computer Engineering and Science Curricula
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Meng Yu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

With the advancement of technologies, networked devices become ubiquitous in the
society. Such devices are not limited to traditional computers and smart phones,
but are increasingly extended to cover a wide variety of embedded systems (ES),
such as sensors monitoring bridges, electronics controlling the operation of
automobiles and industrial equipment, home medicine devices that are constantly
reporting patient health information to doctors. While the wide deployment of
networked ES significantly benefits various aspects of human life and society at
large, it also poses daunting security challenges that can put national security
as well as the privacy of ordinary citizens at risk. Adequately addressing such
challenges requires advanced technologies to be developed by industries and ES
designers as well as users to be well educated about the security related
issues. To facilitate technology development and better educate future
designers, this project develops curricula focusing on the unique challenges of
the emerging ES security, which has not been systemically covered in existing
computer security related curricula that emphasize security in computers and the
traditional Internet.

This project makes intellectual contributions through the completion of the
following objectives: 1) developing course modules (lecture notes, labs and
evaluation questionnaire) to introduce ES security in the layers of software,
networking, operating system, architecture, and hardware; 2) integrating the
developed material into several existing undergraduate courses at PIs'
Universities; 3) establishing a unified ES security course with two versions
(computer engineering and computer science versions) by integrating the
developed course modules; 4) getting the developed material evaluated by an
External Advisory/Review Committee; 5) teaching the developed material using
both project-based learning and flipped classroom learning; 6) assessing the
proposed teaching methods using formative and summative approaches; 7) broadly
disseminating the developed material and promoting diversity in ES security
education. Material to be developed will reach over 100 students per year,
including many minorities and women.