* 1623262
* Targeted Infusion Project: Using evidence-based programming to inform a living-learning community
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2017
* John Fife, Virginia State University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 389,785.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Virginia State University seeks to expand, adapt and
study a cross-disciplinary academic intervention aimed at incoming freshmen that
have indicated an interest in STEM with the goal of improving retention and
persistence in STEM majors. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and
a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the implementation of the interventions,
the Phenomenological Variable of the Ecological Systems Theory (PVEST)
developmental model will be tested for validity. A variety of personal factors
that influence academic behavior will be studied in African American students in
order to strengthen the factors that are most associated with successful
academic performance. The project will support 1) formation of successful
academic habits, 2) academic identity formation, 3) mitigation of self-
handicapping through emotion regulation, and 4) expanding the brand of Virginia
State University to include high academic achievement as a key part of the
college experience. Both the intervention and the results of the study of the
developmental model should be useful in developing models that support freshman
integration into STEM majors at other institutions.