* 1623907
* I-Corps:  Ultrasound Guided Oxygen Release with Nanobubbles for Diagnosis and Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Joseph Irudayaraj, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The contribution of hypoxia to chemoresistance, radioresistance, vasculature
alterations, complex blood flow, and genomic instability are well documented. By
reverting hypoxia via epigenetic programming by re-oxygenation of tumorigenic
cells (cells in hypoxia are 2-3 times less receptive to radiation and subsequent
therapies than normal cells), the hypoxia-adaptive pathways can be destabilized
to significantly suppress tumor progression opening the door for improved
chemotherapy and radiation treatment. Thus an effective oxygen delivery system
could significantly impact the efficacy of cancer therapy. Further, the ability
to steer the particles by ultrasound to enhance localization and the ability to
burst the bubbles to deliver cargo (oxygen and drug) by an ultrasound trigger
provides a significant opportunity in improving targeting and delivery efficacy.
Based on preliminary discussions, this I-Corps team expects that pharmaceutical
companies will be receptive to furthering the proposed oxygen delivery concepts
to develop a solution that is practical to impact not only cancer treatment but
other diseases as well. Delivery of oxygen can impact a range of biomedical
applications that can impact treatment in addition to cancer cure, examples
include oxygenation of stem cells trapped in biomaterials, oxygenation of islets
cells to treat diabetes, and oxygenation to treat ischemic heart tissues and
other hypoxic cardiovascular diseases.

This team's key innovation is the ability to precisely steer nanobubbles for
enhanced localization to effect therapy. An example is in epigenetic programming
to revert hypoxia with minimal side effects and to enhance efficacy of
subsequent therapies. The team expects to add a new dimension to the well-
established clinical utility of ultrasound-assisted cancer diagnosis and to
significantly benefit a range of therapeutic drug deliveries by precision
ultrasound guiding and focused triggered release of cargo (oxygen and or drugs).
Initial discussions with several customers are in progress on the proposed
technology. The I-Corps program will enable the team to identify promising
market opportunities, understand the most important needs of customers and
strategic partners, and determine the optimal path for commercialization. This
team is hopeful that an outcome of our customer discovery will be a new startup
business and an SBIR Phase I proposal or licensing of the technology to a
commercial partner.