* 1623085
* Targeted Infusion Project: Academic Enhancement of Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences Programs at Tennessee State University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Thomas Byl, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 370,953.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Tennessee State University
(TSU) seeks to enhance the curricula of the Departments of Biological Sciences,
and Agricultural and Environmental Sciences and promote interaction between the
students and faculty of the two departments. The proposed activities will
enhance integration of research and education in the biology, ecology and
environmental sciences (BEES), and provide research opportunities for students
through formal instruction and independent research projects. These activities
will stimulate students' research interests, enhance their research skills,
prepare them for graduate studies, and build a more diverse workforce in BEES.
These activities will also increase the retention rate of undergraduate students
in Biological, and Agricultural and Environmental Sciences at TSU. Over the
three years of the project, more than 300 students enrolled in Biology, Ecology,
and other Environmental Sciences courses will benefit directly from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enhance
undergraduate education in the biology, ecology and environmental sciences
(BEES). The proposed project will: 1) improve the undergraduate curriculum and
course contents by developing and incorporating new research-related course
materials; 2) develop a team-oriented and research skill-based multi-
disciplinary learning course involving biology, ecology, plant and soil, and
environmental sciences; and 3) provide hands-on research experience to
undergraduate students through participation in faculty research projects at the
TSU Agricultural Education and Research Center (TSU-AREC). This project will
significantly improve undergraduate students' training in BEES, and prepare them
for graduate studies and a competitive workforce.