* 1623558
* EAGER: MAKER: Play in the Making: Supporting Design Thinking in Maker Spaces among Underrepresented, Underserved, and Minority Students through Game Design
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Elisabeth Gee, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2019
* USD 295,393.00

The goal of this two-year exploratory research project is to develop an
empirically-based teaching and learning model for broadening participation of
girls, minority, and low-income middle school students in STEM and Making
through game design. The model will center around a series of design challenges
that engage middle school students in solving personally and socially
significant real world problems using low and high-tech tools that are available
in Maker spaces. While game design has been recognized as a potentially powerful
means of STEM learning, it has been most commonly used to introduce children to
programming. We have yet to explore the potential of making games as a means of
enhancing design thinking and inspiring other forms of Making. Making games is
not a common activity in Maker spaces, yet game making is an activity that
appeals to a wide range of young people. Game design may be a way to attract
youth who might find more typical Maker space activities to be intimidating or
unappealing. This project will lay the foundation for further inquiry into the
pathways that young people from underrepresented backgrounds might take from
game design into other forms of Making and STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leadership will collaborate with six
mentors (3 teachers and 3 librarians) to iteratively design, test, and refine
design challenges in a formal and informal learning environment. Students will
engage in the design thinking process that emphasizes the role of empathy and
understanding human needs as central to effective design. They will be
introduced to a variety of tools ranging from paper-based and cardboard
construction to e-textiles, programming, and robotics as they participate in
design cycles of empathizing, defining, prototyping, and testing. Parents will
be invited to participate in different stages of the design process as
informants, co-designers, and user testers to support students' learning and
Making process. The pedagogical strategies that will be developed as part of the
project for students will inform ways to design and organize activities in the
Maker context to create more inclusive learning experiences for students.
Furthermore, the project will explore what support mechanisms mentors need in
regard to Making and design thinking to effectively facilitate students'
learning and Making. The results from this project will illuminate participation
structures that are important to build a Maker community where students,
educators, and parents work together as learning partners in schools and
libraries. This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL)
portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for Computer
&amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR) and Engineering (ENG).