* 1623910
* CAREER: Community-Based Engineering as a Learning and Teaching Strategy for Pre-Service Urban Elementary Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Kristen Wendell, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2019
* USD 313,773.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development project aimed at developing,
implementing, and assessing a model that introduces novice elementary school
teachers (grades 1-6) to community-based engineering design as a strategy for
teaching and learning in urban schools. Reflective of the new Framework for K-12
Science Education (NRC, 2012), the model addresses key crosscutting concepts
(e.g., cause and effect: mechanism and explanation), disciplinary core ideas
(e.g., engineering design, and links among engineering and society), and
scientific and engineering practices (e.g., identifying a problem, and designing
solutions for technology-related problems in local school or community
environments). It builds on theoretical perspectives and empirical foundations,
including situated learning, engineering design cognition,and children's
resources and funds of knowledge, including cultural and linguistic diversity.
The study integrates research and education plans that investigate the short-
term impact of the model on 90 novice teachers' learning through their pre-
service coursework and practice teaching, and its longer-term impact on a subset
of 48 of those teachers as they begin their first year of in-service teaching.

The study employs a design-based research that addresses three phases: (a) a
development phase to create a community-based engineering module and assessment
instruments; (b) an iterative implementation phase that includes three cycles of
community-based engineering experiences with three cohorts of novice teachers;
and (c) a synthesis phase focused on generating cumulative findings and
recommendations. Its hypothesis is that incorporating community-based
engineering into elementary teacher education will enhance novice urban
elementary teachers' engineering design competency, understanding of engineering
and scientific practices, and ability to identify and respond to student ideas
and practices in science and engineering. This hypothesis guides four research
questions: (1) How do novice urban elementary teachers' engineering design
abilities evolve during community-based engineering experiences?; (2) How do the
teachers' understandings of engineering and scientific practices evolve during
community-based engineering experiences?; (3) How do the teachers' engineering
abilities and understandings of engineering and scientific practices impact how
they identify and respond to students' science and engineering ideas and
practices?; and (4) Does participating in extended professional development on
community-based engineering impact the teachers' (a) understandings of
engineering and scientific practices, (b) abilities to identify and respond to
student thinking, or (c) incorporation of science/engineering lessons into their
first two years of teaching? The research plan articulates a descriptive thread
and an experimental thread. The descriptive research thread addresses the first
three research questions, inclusive of three constructs: (a) novice urban
elementary teachers' engineering design abilities, (b) their understandings of
practices of science and engineering, and (c) their abilities to identify and
respond to students' ideas and practices. The experimental research thread
addresses the fourth research question, which assesses the impact of community-
based engineering professional development on two of the constructs (b and c
mentioned above), as well as on the frequency and characteristics of the
science-engineering lessons that new teachers will implement with their students
in their first two years of teaching. Data gathering strategies include the use
of valid and reliable instruments, such as the Creative Engineering Design
Assessment, a curriculum critique and revision task, and a video-case-based
assessment. Data analysis include both quantitative and qualitative methods.

Expected outcomes are: (1) a research-informed and field-tested strategy to
incorporate community-based engineering into elementary teacher education and
elementary grades science classrooms, (2) samples of modules demonstrating this
strategy, and (3) a digital guide on incorporating community-based engineering
experiences into elementary science teacher education programs, particulalrly in
underserved urban areas.