* 1623659
* Student Travel Grant - 2016 Spring Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Michael Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

CBET-1623659, Mueller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiences in attending technical
conferences are extremely beneficial to students. These experiences will not
only help with the students' professional development, but also stimulate their
critical thinking in formulating future research directions. This award is to
partially support the travel expenses of graduate and undergraduate students in
attending the 2016 Spring Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the
Combustion Institute. This conference is one of the most important regional
conferences on combustion science and engineering. Presentations in this
conference represent the most updated research outcome in combustion. The
conference facilitates the exchange of combustion research results through
plenary lectures and oral presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its effect
on energy conversion, environmental quality, and climate effects, understanding
of combustion processes and practical combustion systems is of paramount
importance to society. Exchange of information at conferences increases the rate
at which research breakthroughs can be made to make combustion more efficient
and cleaner with fuel-flexibility. A particular focus of this conference is on
graduate and undergraduate students: providing an opportunity for these students
to present and get feedback on their research and running a workshop that
enhances their "soft skills" such as oral presentation and technical writing
skills. This award will be used to offset the travel expenses of non-local
students in an effort to increase student participation at the meeting,
particularly students from underrepresented institutions that may not have the
financial means to fully support student travel to conferences.