* 1623778
* EAGER: Raphide Proteins and Taro Acridity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Robert Paull, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2019
* USD 299,930.00

Numerous crops cause skin edema and vesicle formation when handled or cause
swelling of lips, mouth and throat, itchiness and pain when eaten without
cooking. This irritation is referred to as acridity. Acridity has been reported
in Kiwi fruit, a number of palms and ornamental plants (such as Dieffenbachia,
daffodils, hyacinths and other bulb plants) and pose health risks to harvesters,
children and pets. All the edible Aroids, including taro or dasheen, are acrid
to varying degrees. Aroids such as taro's nutritious corm are eaten as a staple
and the leaves as a vegetable by more than half a billion people. The cause of
acridity is unknown. The current assay for acridity is to eat a small sample or
rub a raw corm on the forearm of a test subject. More often than not, the test
leads to the rapid withdrawal of test subjects from the study. The goals of this
project are to determine the cause of acridity in taro so that potentially rapid
breeding selection tool(s) can be developed to test for acridity. A viable
solution to the acidity bottleneck would contribute to better food availability
and new value-added products.

This project is at the exploratory stage and could transform the molecular
understanding of acridity, an anti-nutritional property of taro and other
aroids. The common belief is that acridity is caused by sharp barbed needle-like
calcium oxalate crystals (raphides). However, the fact that purified acrid
raphides can be inactivated by proteinase with no change in raphide morphology
suggests that proteins on the raphides cause acridity in an allergy type
reaction. At least twenty-eight proteins are found on purified raphides. The
goal of this project is to identify and validate which of these raphide-
associated proteins are responsible for acridity in taro. Once identified, the
protein(s) will be sequenced and predicted allergy-causing sequences will be
further identified by sequencing. The sequences will then be used to develop a
molecular assay for validating and associating the presence of the proteins with
differences in acridity between taro varieties from Africa, Asian and Oceania.
This project will be the first in-depth study to solving this major breeding
bottleneck to improve the quality of taro, a traditional but neglected crop, and
increase crop diversity and thereby increase the market opportunities' for
small-farmers and rural households. Acridity data will be integrated into the
European Union's Innovation & Networks Executive Agency (INEA) funded project on
taro. Advanced training in biotechnology will be given and technology shared and
coordinated with existing projects.