* 1623486
* EAGER: MAKER: The origins of making: A Data Science Approach to Investigating Cognitive and Affective Basis of Learning through Constructing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Patrick Shafto, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 297,772.00

The proposed work assesses the efficacy of making among young children to
determine the efficacy of Making: does it elicit enjoyment? Is that enjoyment
related to meaningful learning? Teachers and developmental psychologists have
advocated the importance of children's play in learning, but only relatively
recently have scientists pointed to ways in which the active exploration of very
young children supports learning. Like causal interventions informal science, in
the course of play children spontaneously de-confound variables, explore
unexpected outcomes, and take actions that reflect hypothesis
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work leverages the core assumptions of Making
-- children's play -- through the development of a "Mobile Maker Center" (MMC)
that can be brought to local science museums, parks, zoos, or libraries to study
children's interactions with STEM related toys. The work uses a novel approach
to data gathering in the maker space, Databrary, to capture student engagement.
MMC's are designed to facilitate developmentally appropriate themes for
exploration, such as toys with levers and buttons (which teaches children about
causality and hypothesis testing), a gear toy with removable parts (which
teaches children about motor design and engineering explanations), and balance
blocks (which teach children about the role of mass and length in scales and
prediction).