* 1623215
* Impacts of the Concept Mapping Strategy in Introductory Biology Courses on Learning and Retention of Underrepresented STEM Students
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ernest Steele, Jr., Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Morgan State University will investigate the impact of a concept mapping
strategy in introductory biology courses on the retention and academic success
of underrepresented students. The researchers hypothesize students experiencing
greater success in introductory biology by constructing concept maps and using
them as an active learning tool will more likely be retained as a STEM major.
The impact of concept mapping will be measured by investigating the correlations
among course grades in two biology courses, mapping skill, ability to think big,
motivation, and retention rates. The conceptual framework for the proposed
project incorporates theories that support the efficacy of purposely creating an
active learning environment that centers on the use of concept learning maps.
The research has the potential to transform the biology learning environment
from teacher-centered to student-centered with a focus on meaningful learning
thereby increasing retention.

The researchers will use a mixed-methods approach involving four classes and
30-40 faculty to answer two research questions: (1) What are the measurable
impacts of using concept maps on metacognition and motivation among
underrepresented students in introductory biology courses. (2) What are the
correlations among course grades, mapping skill, metacognition, and motivation
as well as retention and completion rates in upper-level biology courses? They
will collect quantitative data using two survey instruments and qualitative data
using classroom observations of concept mapping and semi-structured interviews
with faculty. The research findings are expected to yield insights to reverse
the attrition in introductory gatekeeper biology courses for STEM majors and,
ultimately, provide an alternative model for improving overall student success.

This project is supported by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) Broadening Participation Research in Education
track. This program track supports ideas to create and study new models and
innovations in STEM teaching and learning, investigate the underlying issues
affecting the differential participation and success rates of students from
underrepresented groups, and produce knowledge to inform STEM education
practices and interventions.