* 1623053
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Rethinking Engineering Diversity, Transforming Engineering Diversity (REDTED)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Theresa Bruckerhoff, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,013,891.00

Efforts to improve diversity in engineering have stagnated over the last 10-15
years, despite numerous programs and other activities that have been developed
over that time. The lack of progress suggests that it is not enough to simply
"fix" the pipeline. Rather, efforts are needed to change the way all
stakeholders in engineering education think about diversity. This project will
revolutionize the Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) Department at Rowan
University to radically increase diversity and achieve high retention and
graduation rates of all CEE students. An ambitious plan for curricular and
extracurricular reform is being used to increase the representation of women and
Underrepresented Minority (URM) students and historically underserved groups.
These measures will be deployed using a multi-pronged approach that includes
revising admission criteria to promote a more diverse student body; enhancing
the perception and understanding of diversity and equality among students,
faculty and administrators to improve the culture of inclusiveness; developing
an Advocate and Allies Mentoring Program for first year and transfer students;
transforming the existing engineering curriculum in the second and third year
from a narrow sub-discipline based approach to a more inclusive system-based
approach; and enriching aspirations for all students by providing role models
from industry and academia. Through these efforts radical changes will be made
in the structure of the program: increase the percentage of women and
ethnic/racial minorities (visible URMs) in the department from 19.3 percent to
above 50 percent in the 5 year duration of the grant, while at the same time
also increasing the percentage of all historically underserved groups; redesign
curriculum, teaching and learning, and department systems and processes to
promote inclusiveness that benefits all students; improve retention of all
students from 85 to 95 percent; improve 5-year graduation rates of all CEE
students from the current level of 68 to 80 percent; and incentivize the faculty
to be active partners in the transformation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
transformative research project will generate new knowledge about the
experiences of URMs in engineering. The main research questions include: (1)
What is the perceived human capital (acquiring knowledge or skills),
sociocultural capital (developing interpersonal relationships and networks), and
personal capital (intrinsic and extrinsic motivation) of URM engineering
students? What are the similarities and differences in those perceptions across
race, ethnicity, socio-economic status, gender and sexual orientation? (2) How
do the students perceive their self-efficacy and professional identity in
(civil) engineering? (3) What aspects of faculty development training are most
effective in promoting adoption of inclusive teaching practices and learning
environment and creating an inclusive culture? These research questions will be
used to obtain a better understanding of the perceived barriers for URMs in the
field of engineering and identify strategies for developing a model of
inclusivity. Strategies encompass admission and retention of students, faculty
attitudes and teaching, and curricular changes that will impact the way students
think and function in the professional workplace. The vision also extends to the
students' professional growth with higher aspirations being cultivated by
addressing and enhancing human, social, and cultural capital. The transformation
will help the student internalize aspirations, develop self-efficacy and self-
confidence that they belong in the field as leaders and advocates for
inclusivity. The results from this project will be a transformation kit, which
allows other engineering programs to make similar changes. This project will
provide guidance on how to change the culture of engineering to one of
inclusion, ultimately resulting in a more diverse engineering workforce prepared
to address the challenges of the 21st century.