* 1623411
* MAKER:  An Ethnography of Maker and Hacker Spaces Achieving Diverse Participation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Donna Riley, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,033.00

Maker spaces have been widely touted as a potentially liberative moment for
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education, presenting an
opportunity to bring traditionally underrepresented groups into STEM fields by
engaging them in spaces that are open, creative, and supportive of people from
all backgrounds. At the same time, early reports indicate that many maker and
hacker spaces are already enacting certain norms that are more conducive to
participation of white, male, middle-class, able-bodied hobbyists. Despite this
trend, there are spaces that explicitly stand out in their inclusion of homeless
makers, women, people of color, and people with different kinds of abilities.
This project examines how diverse maker spaces welcome groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM, and how these practices can inform the design and
operation of campus and community maker or hacker spaces that presently struggle
to achieve diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethnographic methods and Critical
Discourse Analysis (CDA) are used to understand these spaces in terms of their
physical and linguistic artifacts. This Participatory Action Research (PAR)
includes ethnographies at 6 to 8 inclusive maker and hacker spaces, an Open
Space Technology (OST) workshop focused on identifying and analyzing core
attributes of transferable inclusive practices, and CDA that reflexively
summarizes and propagates this information in applicable ways to academic and
community sites. Research questions include: (1) What practices and artifacts do
participants in diverse maker and hacker spaces employ to establish and maintain
environments that are diverse and inclusive? (2) What does the discourse in
diverse maker and hacker spaces reveal about how meaning and value are co-
constructed around identity, creativity, and the culture of production / the
production of culture in engineering? (3) What best practices emerge from
diverse maker and hacker spaces, and how can these translate to design or
transformation of existing maker spaces on campuses and in communities?
Intellectual Merit: This work is early in its use of CDA, the Highlander strain
of PAR, and OST, all novel in engineering education; and early in seeking to
characterize features contributing to the liberatory nature of emergent diverse
maker spaces. The work is interdisciplinary and potentially transformative in
leveraging linguistic analysis and social theories to ferret out root causes of
exclusionary STEM practices for the potential high payoff of building campus and
community maker spaces (and other STEM spaces) that are inclusive. Broader
Impacts: This project co-constructs ways to stimulate innovative design thinking
in experiential curricula; increases retention and broadens participation in
STEM by embedding inclusive practices; empowers citizen engineers through local
and national networks of makers, students, and faculty; and enables new ways of
STEM learning and design thinking that will enrich the U.S. innovation ecosystem
through progressive learning environments for undergraduate engineers. Findings
are propagated non-tradtionally via maker virtual communities, maker faires, and
informal networks, in addition to traditional propagation through the STEM
education literature and the network of 150 engineering deans and other academic
leaders committed to making on campus.