* 1623246
* EDU: Collaborative: Educating the Security Workforce through On-Demand Live Competitions
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Giovanni Vigna, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 145,357.00

The United States is facing a cyber-security crisis. Recent studies predict a
shortfall of 1.5M global information security jobs by 2020. The lack of
qualified cyber-security workforce gives rise to high-profile security
incidents. In addition, attacks against the nation's critical infrastructure can
have devastating effect that go well beyond the financial losses that we are
witnessing today. Example targets include aviation control software, the power
grid, and even the networks themselves, with the advent of new and emerging
network-centric technologies such as software-defined networks. Therefore, it is
crucial to educate the next generation of cyber-security professionals. Cyber-
security exercises, in which students analyze software to discover flaws and
mitigate them, are an excellent instructional method to effectively improve the
security skills of protection, detection, and response.

Security training requires that developers acquire both the skills necessary to
find security vulnerabilities in software, as well as the skills to fix existing
flawed software. The knowledge that comes from studying vulnerabilities and
vulnerability patterns provides students with the hands-on expertise to
complement theoretical security skills. Live cyber-security exercises are an
excellent tool to teach and reinforce security concepts in students. However,
live cyber-security competitions place a significant time and effort burden on
the organizers, because as soon as an intentionally-vulnerable software is used
in a competition it cannot be used again. Therefore, all the time and effort
spent creating the intentionally-vulnerable software is used on a single
competition. In addition, running a live cyber-security competition requires
technical skills (e.g., networking and server administration) that may be
outside the expertise of educators. This project allows any educator or student,
regardless of their technical skills, to host their own security competition. In
addition, the participants will be able to create the intentionally-vulnerable
software, which stimulates creativity and constructive behavior. Finally, this
project will develop a repository of intentionally-vulnerable software, which
allows educators to select sample vulnerable software from different
vulnerability classes, furthering the educational goals of the instructor.