* 1623056
* Targeted Infusion Project: The Impact of Infusing Soft Matter Into Undergraduate General and Physical Chemistry Courses
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Darlene Taylor, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 10/31/2020
* USD 294,514.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at North Carolina Central
University (NCCU) seeks to develop an integrated undergraduate education,
training, and research initiative in polymer science by infusing topics on soft
matter into two gatekeeper chemistry courses. NCCU is one of four partners
within the Triangle Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC),
but the association is limited since there is little polymer research and
training and no formal polymer course offerings at NCCU. The infusion of polymer
science in foundational chemistry courses, the provision of research experiences
to undergraduates, and the strengthening of the existing relationship with the
NSF Triangle MRSEC will have a direct effect on students and faculty at NCCU.
The proposed project will help improve student retention and thereby inspire
these students to pursue graduate studies and/or careers in STEM disciplines.

The overall goal of the project is to infuse polymer content into the General
Chemistry and Physical Chemistry courses. The specific goals are to: 1) develop
online video content focused on polymers as an engaging topic to supplement ACS
core content for undergraduates enrolled in general chemistry and physical
chemistry courses; and 2) engage undergraduates in polymer research through the
laboratory components of their general and physical chemistry courses. The long-
term goal is to create an integrated polymer education, training, and research
initiative at NCCU with strong connections to soft matter expertise partners.
This will help improve student performance in gatekeeper courses, and expose
students to polymer research through their general and physical chemistry
laboratories.