* 1623282
* Implementation Project:  Hinds Community College- Utica Campus Phase II- Establishing a Cohesive Community College STEM Institutional Transformation Academy - STEM-UP Academy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Townes, Hinds Community College-Utica
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,954.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at Hinds Community College-Utica seeks to build on previous
successful efforts to facilitate students' transition from high school to
community college to four year institutions and to increase their success rate
in STEM disciplines. The goal is to assist students in navigating their
educational path and to increase retention and graduation rates of students with
STEM associate degrees. The project aims to specifically increase the placement
of community college students into four-year institutions through academic
partnerships with Jackson State University and Alcorn State University. The
project is expected to create a pathway model for student matriculation from
community colleges to four-year degree granting institutions which can be
adapted and scaled by other institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following activities and strategies are
designed to meet the project's goals: development of the Summer STEM Academic
Integrated Learning Program for high schools students in Copiah, Claiborne,
Hinds, and Vicksburg-Warren counties; a College Success Camp for entering
freshmen; development of a support and mentoring program to assist students with
transfer and enrollment in a four-year university of their choice while
providing them with summer research experiences at the Hinds Community College-
Utica campus or at participating universities; establishment of faculty
professional development programs to assist faculty in restructuring the
learning environment and in building new collaborations. A cyber-mentoring
component will be established to continue providing support to graduates of the
program once they transfer to a four-year program. The project strategies
supporting these objectives are evidence-based and will be monitored and
evaluated for effectiveness.