* 1623669
* I-Corps: Automated Postures Analysis for Ergonomic Risk
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2016
* SangHyun Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Workers in industries like manufacturing, construction, retail, health care, and
logistics are involved in physically demanding activities, dealing with awkward
body postures and repetitive manual handling tasks that result in ergonomic
injuries (e.g., musculoskeletal disorders). For example, ergonomic injuries
account for an average of 33% of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses in
the U.S. These injuries are also associated with high costs (about $50 billion
annually in the U.S.) to employers due to absenteeism, lost productivity, and
increased health care, disability, and workers' compensation costs. To deal with
such injuries, manual observation-based ergonomic assessments (e.g., checklists)
have been widely used to identify awkward or/and repetitive working postures.
However, manual observation methods are time-consuming, expensive and error
prone, which makes them difficult to be easily applied to many workplaces. The
need for trained analysts is also an obstacle to promote ergonomic assessments
in workplaces. As a result, an effective and easily accessible means for
ergonomic assessments is required to detect and minimize the risks of ergonomic
injuries in a timely-manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed computer vision-
based automatic posture analysis approach processes video images of workers
taken via ordinary video recording devices like smartphones, tablets, and off-
the-shelf camcorders, and consequently evaluates the level of their ergonomic
risk they have while performing workplace tasks. The proposed innovation is to
make the current ergonomic risk assessment process efficient, affordable, and
robust by minimizing time-consuming, expensive, and error prone manual
observation. Image sequences of working postures have distinguishable patterns
that can be used to differentiate safe and injury-prone postures. By learning
these patterns, this technology automatically identifies awkward postures on
video recordings, enabling one to conduct ergonomic assessments in a timely
manner without technical sophistication or skill. The proposed technical
approach is also flexible and robust enough to deal with complex and crowded
work environments. Particularly, this innovative virtual modeling approach to
automatically create massive training datasets eliminates cumbersome data
collection. In addition, the capability to differentiate different postures and
realize rapid pose estimation with mobile devices enables the proposed approach
to be applied to diverse ergonomic checklists in many industries. This
innovation can provide an exciting path for many industries who suffer ergonomic
injuries to reduce their burden of manual observation, ultimately opening a door
toward the prevention of ergonomic injuries and the increase of productivity.