* 1623270
* Targeted Infusion Project: The STEM Enrichment by Design (STEMed) Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jessica Lopez, St. Philip's College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,672.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at St. Philip's College
(SPC), a minority-serving institution designated as both a Historically Black
College and University (HBCU) and a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI), seeks to
recruit, retain and provide math acceleration for first time in college (FTIC)
students. SPC's students face many challenges to post-secondary educational
success and unfortunately, only a small percentage of students enroll and
succeed in STEM courses. The Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
Enrichment by Design (STEMed) project will address the need for low entry
students to improve their pathway to a successful STEM education. This project
will allow students to move into college-level mathematics courses sooner than
usual, therefore graduating earlier. This reduction in obstacles will increase
the number of students graduating from SPC, transferring to a 4 year institution
and continuing their STEM education, and/or entering the workforce. While SPC
improves its developmental math and STEM programs, STEM students from diverse
backgrounds will increasingly obtain a quality education. The local community
and the nation will benefit from the increase in these future STEM professionals
in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the STEMed
project is to decrease the time FTIC students take to complete their STEM degree
and graduate by focusing on recruiting, retaining, and accelerating FTIC STEM
students through developmental math. This goal will be accomplished through the
following specific objectives: 1) recruit FTIC STEM students from San Antonio
Independent School District and SPC's Veteran's Office; 2) implement the
Accelerated Math Preparation (AMP) Program to help FTIC STEM students advance
into college level math; (3) provide Student Incentive Stipends (SIS) for those
in financial need who complete the program; and 4) mentor students until
graduation and/or transfer to a four-year institution. The expected outcomes are
to decrease degree completion time and increase the number of STEM degree
graduates.