* 1623688
* GEO Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity Ideas Lab
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Brian Yoder, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2019
* USD 278,071.00

As articulated in numerous reports from the President's Council of Advisors for
Science and Technology (PCAST) and the National Research Council, broadening
participation of traditionally underrepresented minorities in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines is a high priority
for the Nation in that it contributes to an innovative and productive research
enterprise. Although progress is being made in achieving greater diversity
within some STEM communities, it has been challenging to scale up the use of
effective practices for increasing diversity in order to realize greater impact
at the national level. To address this challenge, NSF has launched a new NSF-
wide FY 2016 initiative called "Inclusion Across the Nation of Communities of
Learners that have been Underrepresented for Diversity in Engineering and
Science" (NSF INCLUDES). The Directorate for Geosciences (GEO) is contributing
to the NSF INCLUDES initiative through the GEO Opportunities for Leadership in
Diversity (GOLD) program, which is using the Ideas Lab mechanism to create
innovate, interdisciplinary approaches for building a national network of
geoscientists who can help to advance NSF's broadening participation goals and
objectives. Participants in the Ideas Lab are being recruited from communities
with expertise in the geosciences, social-psychology, institutional
transformation, broadening participation research, and research on leadership
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Society for Engineering Education
(ASEE), in collaboration with Knowinnovation, Inc. (KI), is supporting the GOLD
program by providing travel and logistical support for the GOLD Ideas Lab (being
held March 20-24, 2016) and conducting research on the utility and benefits of
the Ideas Lab approach for developing and soliciting NSF proposals. The project
builds on preliminary research conducted during the implementation of three
Ideas Labs offered in FY 2014 in conjunction with the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) program, which identified three key parameters that can
influence the ultimate success of Ideas Labs for developing creative new ideas.
The research to be undertaken through this EAGER award during the GOLD Ideas Lab
will help to confirm or clarify these preliminary findings. The Ideas Lab
process is a fairly new mechanism for generation of proposals to NSF; as such,
the findings of this participatory action research study will help to identify
the circumstances under which use of the Ideas Lab mechanism is most beneficial.