* 1623251
* Workshop on Scenarios for Brain-Inspired Cognitive Assistants, San Jose CA, May 12-13th.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Jonathan Candelaria, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2017
* USD 39,493.00

Proposal 1623251&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop on Scenario for Brain-
Inspired Cognitive Assistants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jonathan
Candelaria&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Semiconductor Research
Corporation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date &amp; Location: San Jose CA, May
12-13th.&lt;br/&gt;Workshop Goal: Explore research opportunities towards a goal
of creating cognitive intelligent assistance to improve human productivity and
overall quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today we are at the cusp of a new era of
computing. In the first era, machines were designed and built to greatly
accelerate the performance of basic arithmetic calculations compared to human
"computers" In the second era, these machines, by then called "computers"
themselves, were programmed to solve highly complex problem sets, as well as
enable global communication networks. We are now beginning to explore the use of
machines to expand upon and augment human cognitive capabilities. We envision
"machine intelligence" acting as an interface between humans and their
environments, providing insight and guidance for problems that cannot be handled
by the unaided mind or by computers alone. How to optimize this collaborative
interaction between humans and these "intelligent" machines is an open research
question. In order to create the foundation for future intelligent systems that
can most effectively and efficiently assist individuals, businesses and society
at large, it is essential that this research question be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is
designed to discuss and study progress toward developing "intelligent" machines.
It can serve as "helpful assistants" to improve human productivity and overall
quality of life. The workshop on "Brain-Inspired Cognitive
Assistance"&lt;br/&gt;is proposed for San Jose CA, May 12-13th. The goal of this
workshop is to formulate scenarios for developing novel architectures for
intelligent, energy efficient, brain-inspired perception, computing, decision
and management in the future 10-15 years. Various concepts show promise,
including cellular automaton assembly, static and dynamic neural networking,
deep machine learning, etc. as well as a wide variety of social robotics
principles, genetic software, bio-inspired convergence of interaction
principles, predictive cognition, natural language and complex pattern
recognition algorithms and methodologies.