* 1623806
* Is Static Soil Density a Viable Assumption for Studying Surface Hydrologic Processes?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Robert Horton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 419,530.00

A soil surface is an interface between the ground and the atmosphere. Soil
surface layer conditions influence the Earth's hydrologic cycle by impacting
rainfall infiltration and runoff, soil water evaporation, and storage of plant
available water. Properties of soil surface layers are dynamic in time. Tillage
loosens soil surface layers, while vehicular traffic and raindrop impacts cause
soil surface layers to compact. The dynamic density and porosity natures of soil
surface layers are not well known. Furthermore, the dynamic hydraulic properties
of soil surface layers are almost unknown. This study is designed to measure
dynamic soil surface layer properties under a range of field conditions and to
evaluate the impacts of these properties on the hydrologic cycle. Advancing
knowledge of these processes is critical for understanding important land
surface-atmosphere exchanges (e.g. permafrost release of greenhouse gases and
evapotranspiration) and could lead to better agricultural water management.

The proposed study will use newly developed thermo-TDR sensors to provide co-
located, in situ measurements of surface soil water content and thermal
properties. Thermo-TDR sensors are also able to measure dynamic surface soil
density and porosity. Proposed field and numerical experiments will address
three fundamental questions: i. Over what temporal scales and to what extent
does loosened soil density change? ii. Can patterns be identified to facilitate
development of predictive relationships, incorporating transient density, with
other fundamental soil hydraulic and thermal properties? iii. How does shifting
soil density directly impact water and energy exchange at the land surface-
atmosphere interface and mass and heat transfer in subsurface soil? Addressing
these questions provides opportunity to transform the hydrologic sciences,
strengthen analytical frameworks and improve predictive theory. Proposed work,
guided by specific expertise on soil properties and processes, and supported
with newly developed tools, provides the opportunity to measure dynamic soil
surface layer properties under a range of field conditions. Because knowledge of
soil density and porosity is fundamental to investigation of soil hydraulic,
thermal, and gas transfer properties and processes, new discoveries achieved in
this study offer transformative potential for wide ranging investigations of
land surface, hydrologic cycle, and ecosystem dynamics.