* 1623854
* Doctoral Dissertation in Economics:   Informational Asymmetries and Auction Design: An Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,303.00

Auctions are an important mechanism used to allocated goods and raise revenue.
Oil-lease and spectrum auctions raise large amounts of revenue for the
government and have been the focus of much economic research. Many of these
auctions are for goods which have an uncertain value which is the same for all
bidders (e.g., the amount of oil in a lease). Traditional theoretical models
assume that bidders have the same amount of information concerning the value of
the good. However, this assumption ignores the fact that often bidders may be
asymmetrically informed, which has been empirically shown to affect bidding
behavior. Understanding how asymmetries in bidders' information affects their
bidding behavior is important for predicting the revenue an auction will
generate and for designing auctions to increase the revenue they raise.

The PIs expand the traditional auction framework to allow for bidders to differ
both in their estimates of a good's value and the precision of their estimates.
They study how bidding behavior changes when bidders can and cannot observe the
precision of opposing bidders' information. In many sealed-bid or online
auctions, the identity of opposing bidders is hidden and each bidder may not be
perfectly informed about how precise his opponent's information is. With the
rise of internet auctions, however, sellers have a large degree of control of
the information bidders possess about one another. How much information about
bidders' characteristics an auction designer should release is an important
consideration when designing auctions and is one that has not previously been
studied. The current research project shows how sellers can optimally design the
release of this information. By studying the impact of changing how much
information bidders possess about one another, the PIs find a new avenue by
which auction design can improve revenue generation.

The theoretical predictions show that publicly revealing the precision of each
bidder's information decreases the expected revenue an auction will generate.
This finding suggests that controlling how much information bidders have about
each other is an important factor to consider when designing auctions. The PIs
seek to answer the following question by performing a series of experiments: how
do bidders behave when they know that their information about the good is more
(or less) precise than other bidders? How do their bidding strategies change
when they do not know the precision of their opponents information? The proposed
study intends to answer these questions, which will contribute to a better
understanding of how much information to disclose in auctions. This experiment
will provide a better understanding of how to implement information design into
auction formats.