* 1623979
* 20th GLOBE Annual Meeting
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2017
* USD 149,336.00

The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program
is a cooperative international science and science education program jointly
supported by NASA and NSF, with additional in-kind support from NOAA, Department
of State, and USAID. Using inquiry-based, place-based, and problem-based
pedagogies, GLOBE directly supports national efforts to engage a new generation
of diverse students in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines and encourage them to consider careers in STEM. GLOBE annual
meetings bring together GLOBE Country Coordinators and U.S. Partnership
Coordinators, members of the scientific community that support GLOBE, and
representatives of the sponsoring agencies. Annual meetings provide a venue for
both sharing of best practices for GLOBE implementation that have been developed
through the creative efforts of the community, as well as additional training in
the use of GLOBE program resources and technology. This will be the 20th annual
meeting for GLOBE, offering an opportunity for the community to both reflect on
and celebrate their many accomplishments and focus on effective implementation
of emerging opportunities for the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides partial support for the 2016 GLOBE Annual Meeting, which is being held
July 17-22 at the Estes Park Conference Center, Colorado. Over 150 adult members
and 50 student members of the worldwide GLOBE community are expected to attend.
The University Consortium for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) and the GLOBE
Implementation Office (GIO) are leading the planning effort for this meeting,
with contributions from other members of the GLOBE community. This year's annual
meeting is focusing on three main themes that reflect emerging priorities within
the GLOBE program: (1) student research and science fairs; (2) STEM equity and
inclusion; and, (3) citizen science. The annual meeting is also being used to
convene strategic planning meetings for the four GLOBE Working Groups related to
education, technology, science, and evaluation. The ~50 pre-college students
attending the annual meeting will also participate in a concurrent 2-day hands-
on research experience based on the GLOBE protocols that is being organized by
the Estes Institute.