* 1623885
* Collaborative Research: Assessing millennial-scale community dynamics using highly-resolved mammal and vegetation food webs
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Luis Chiappe, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 397,042.00

The extinction of Earth's largest animals is radically changing the feeding
relationships among other species ("food webs") which may place them at greater
risk of extinction in the future. This project will examine Rancho La Brea tar
pits for the complete fossil record (large carnivores to plants) and build ice
age food webs prior to the major changes at the end of the last ice age 12,000
years ago (human arrival, the loss of large mammals, and climate change).
Understanding the relationships among ice age animals and plants will help
biologists predict which species were at most risk of extinction and apply these
model predictions to present-day biodiversity. This project is also an excellent
opportunity to support science education and diversity, by directly involving
middle school students in California and Maine in the identification of fossils
used in this research. Project findings will also be shared in new La Brea Tar
Pits &amp; Museum exhibits, which draw 350,000 visitors each year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, sediments from multiple asphalt seeps
will be sampled for the small animals, insects and plants of the La Brea Tar
Pits (California, USA). Fossils will be identified, radiocarbon dated, and then
integrated into multi-trophic paleo food webs over the 40,000 years before the
widespread environmental upheaval at the end of Pleistocene. Previously only the
upper trophic levels (particularly carnivores) were investigated in detail;
added information will test food web properties for predicting the sensitivity
of species to global change. The project?s novel Bayesian framework, employed to
reconstruct biomass flow, will be useful to both paleo and modern food web
studies by facilitating integration of multiple proxies to characterize
uncertainty in trophic interactions.