* 1623911
* I-Corps:  Automated Software for Modeling of Linear and Non-linear Optical Properties
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Development of robust computational models and methods is a necessary step for
advances in design and engineering of biomolecules and materials with desired
optical and imaging-related properties. However, molecular simulations nowadays
become increasingly more complicated and often involve a combination of
techniques: molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, molecular and quantum mechanics
tools are integrated to provide an accurate physical picture of realistic
systems. Integrating these tools is associated with many technical difficulties,
including interoperability, interfacing and exchanging the data, and data
analysis. Currently, most of these data-management tasks are performed by hand,
which results in high human costs of computational modeling. In this project a
software product is proposed that facilitates complicated computational modeling
of optical and imaging properties of biomolecules and materials with less human
involvement. The developed product is expected to dramatically lower the barrier
to perform state-of-the-art simulations that are currently accessible only for
the experts in the field. Thus, the new product ameliorates the quality of the
computational modeling, while optimizing human time and involvement.

The goal of this project is to deliver to the market a computational software
that helps users in both academia and industry to set-up and automate
computations pertaining to their research, as well as maintain, organize and
analyze the data, and share the data with colleagues. The software product is
expected to provide unique opportunities for computing a variety of optical and
imaging-related properties (one- and two-photon absorption and emission spectra,
Raman cross-sections, polarizabilities and other non-linear properties) of
biomarkers and imaging probes in realistic systems, thus facilitating
development of these fields and strengthening interplay between experimental and
computational research. This I-Corps team will conduct interviews to see if the
intended initial product will find a market need that can be met via various
delivery channels including a "software as a service" business model, also known
as cloud computing, which could include charging subscription fees for using the
software. The team's thought of a first potential user group with a need for the
proposed software are researchers developing near-IR dyes, working with single-
molecule spectroscopy techniques, FRET spectroscopy, and bio-imaging techniques.
The team intends to connect with individuals and entities in this group to see
how they currently meet their needs in this area, and if they are satisfied by
the solutions currently available to them. The team will extend beyond this
initial group of researchers to see if other and larger groups of potential
users in a variety of industries are using simulation software, and if their
needs have the potential to be met with our intended product. The team will use
the information gathered to help make the decision about whether to license the
proposed technology, or pursue a route to a startup..