* 1623591
* SFS: Capacity: A Streamlined Cyber-Security &amp; Intelligence (CS&amp;I) Pathway: A Collaborative Model between Two Centers of Academic Excellence (IC CAE &amp; CAE2Y)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* John Sands, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,981.00

The Moraine Valley Community College/Chicago State University (MVCC/CSU)
partnership establishes a local educational pipeline in the cybersecurity and
intelligence (CS&amp;I) in the Chicago metropolitan community. The project
addresses the need for both well-trained faculty and students to meet the
growing need for CS&amp;I professionals. This project creates pathways between
undergraduate and graduate level programs. Students at MVCC, in existing majors
like cybersecurity, geospatial information systems, management information
systems, computer science, criminal justice and other social and physical
sciences programs, can articulate to undergraduate programs at CSU with an
academic minor in the security and intelligence (SIS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This partnership builds upon two recognized centers of
academic excellence; the Intelligence Community Center for Academic Excellence
at CSU (IC CAE) and the NSA/DHS Center for Academic Excellence in Two-Year
Colleges (CAE2Y) at Moraine Valley Community College (MVCC). The project also
leverages the resources and academic community established by the NSF ATE funded
National Support Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA)
at MVCC. This project enriches the SFS program by utilizing and adapting a
previously funded NSF project in the area of CS&amp;I at California State
University, San Bernardino (CSUSB) in three key areas: 1) incorporate content
and courses from the CSUSB Cyber Intelligence curriculum into the CSU's SIS
undergraduate minor; 2) create a pathway between students from local community
colleges using the CSSIA cybersecurity curriculum to articulate into
undergraduate degrees at CSU with a security and intelligence minor; 3) build a
pathway between the NSF ATE Cyber Center "CSSIA" and its network of affiliate
community colleges and the CSU Cyber Intelligence similar to CyberWatch West and
CSUSB. The project also includes a series of summer camps that expose students
from two-year institutions to the career opportunities in CS&amp;I.
Additionally; the project includes a small-scale research program that explores
the methods of teaching and learning CS&amp;I and strategies to develop
awareness of careers in CS&amp;I in urban and diverse secondary classrooms. The
research program utilizes classroom-based action research (collaborative
research), where teachers, working collaboratively with CS&amp;I experts, to
develop and deliver instruction in the content area of CS&amp;I. Ultimately,
research findings could be used to develop best practices and to generate theory
in the area of secondary level cybersecurity and intelligence instruction.