* 1623867
* RAPID:  Testing the ability of the 2015-2017 El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) to drive a community-level regime shift in the Galapagos marine ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Jon Witman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 198,194.00

Changes in the ecological structure, biodiversity and functioning of ecosystems
have occurred in all types of habitats. Sometimes the change is so large and
abrupt that the ecosystem switches to an alternate state, or regime, that
persists for long periods of time (i.e. decades to millennia) such as the switch
between a vegetated and desert ecosystem in the Sahara. Since regime changes may
drastically alter the ecosystem goods and services provided to humankind, there
is a practical as well as theoretical need to understand the conditions and
drivers leading to tipping points between alternate regimes. To date, little is
known about either the pre-conditions or drivers of regime change, particularly
in subtidal habitats where long-term data on the ecological state of communities
of interacting species prior to regime change is difficult to obtain. Most of
the knowledge about tropical regime shifts in marine habitats has focused on
shifts between corals and macroalgae even though these organisms represent only
part of a species-rich ecosystem with many possible trajectories and outcomes of
regime change. Consequently, the overarching goal of the proposed investigation
is to test a conceptual model developed herein predicting how both El Niño and
La Niña phases of the unusually strong 2016 ENSO (El Niño Southern Oscillation)
may drive a regime shift in the Galapagos rocky subtidal at the whole community
level. As the target community involves sponges as a key component, in addition
to barnacles, Crustose Coralline Algae (CCA), corals, sea urchins, sea stars and
predatory fish, the model tests predictions from the Sponge Reef Hypothesis
(SRH), an emerging paradigm predicting that sponges may increasingly dominate
space as corals decline from future climate change (representing a coral to
sponge regime change). Preliminary data indicate that counter to the SRH,
sponges declined during the unusually warm temperatures at the outset of the
present ENSO in Galapagos subtidal communities. However, sea urchin predation on
sponges and CCA appears to have accelerated at the same time, so manipulative
field experiments are proposed to rigorously test and differentiate the effects
of ENSO elevated temperature on sponge mortality from the effects of enhanced
sea urchin predation on sponges. These experimental results will be evaluated in
the context of actual, long-term (13-16 year) changes in the whole community
obtained by quantitative re-sampling of the benthic community at 12 sites in the
central Galapagos throughout the present ENSO. Re-sampling this baseline will
also enable the analysis of indicators leading up to the hypothesized regime
change. Broader educational impacts of the project will transpire at all levels
from high school students to graduate students and the public.

Although regime changes have been described as abrupt shifts to alternate,
persistent states in many ecosystems in response to natural or anthropogenic
drivers, research on regime change in bottom-dwelling communities of tropical
oceans has largely focused on a switch from coral-dominated to macroalgal-
dominated regimes. This narrow focus overlooks potential influences of the
diverse assemblages of sessile invertebrates such as sponges that share space on
the hard substrate of reefs with corals and could proliferate as a new regime if
corals are diminished. The SRH is an emerging community ecological paradigm that
posits that sponges may increasingly dominate space as corals decline from
future climate change and ocean acidification, yet it has not been rigorously
tested. The exceptionally strong El Niño occurring in the Galapagos Islands
presents a unique opportunity evaluate the potential for climate oscillations to
create regime shifts at the community level and to test the SRH because subtidal
benthic community structure has been quantified at least annually since 1999 at
multiple sites in the central Galapagos Islands. Recent 2015 surveys indicated
significant mortality of sponges at multiple sites coincident with the present
El Niño warming, counter to the SRH. However, sea urchin predation on sponges
and Crustose Coralline Algae (CCA) appears to have accelerated at the same time,
so manipulative field experiments are proposed to rigorously test and
differentiate the effects of ENSO elevated temperature on sponge mortality from
the effects of enhanced sea urchin predation on sponges. More specifically,
eight main hypotheses along with four alternate hypotheses are developed and
proposed from a new conceptual model predicting direct and indirect pathways of
regime change in a community of CCA, sponges, barnacles, corals, sea urchins,
sea stars and predatory fish. The research will be performed in the rocky
subtidal at the 12 community baseline sites in the central Galapagos archipelago
during four trips in 2016-2017 bracketing the El Niño and La Niña phases. The
proposed combination of experimental and observational (i.e. baseline re-
sampling) methods will enable a rigorous evaluation of climate-induced direct
and indirect pathways of regime change in tropical benthic ecosystems.