* 1623932
* Workshop: Morphological Typology and Linguistic Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Adam Ussishkin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2019
* USD 29,088.00

The workshop supported by this award will bring together linguists and
researchers from related disciplines to discuss lexical morphology (how grammars
create complex word forms) and morphological variation across the world's
languages. Language typology is the field of scientific study that investigates
how languages are similar to and different from each other. Previous work has
produced much information about how languages differ, but no clear consensus
about why. Why do some languages tend to use simple, individual words to convey
each bit of meaning? Why do other languages build complex words that are
equivalent to entire sentences? (English is somewhere in the middle.) And
especially, why do languages differ so significantly in this way, when all
humans are born with the same mental 'tools' for producing, understanding and
learning language? The relationship between language diversity globally and the
individual speaker's mental 'toolbox' is particularly important. Research in
this area is foundational to the following goals: (i) developing expert speakers
of foreign languages that are important to the national interest; (ii) improving
adults' ability in general to acquire languages successfully; and (iii) creating
tools and resources (e.g. automatic computer translations) for under-resourced
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant funds a two-day conference that will
connect language diversity to the mental tools that individual speakers have for
producing, understanding and learning language. Do the ways that people mentally
organize and process language lead to the similarities and differences that are
observed across languages? If so, how? The conference will advance understanding
of how languages differ, evaluate hypotheses about the reasons for similarities
and differences, and identify new paths for investigation. The conference will
bring together researchers who work in different areas--language diversity, how
words are stored and organized in the human mind, and computational methods for
modeling language structure. By bringing together researchers with different
expertise, this conference will offer new ways to think about language diversity
and its relationship to the individual. It will also play an important role in
training a new generation of scholars. Almost half of invited speakers are
junior scholars, the conference organizing committee includes graduate students,
and the conference will offer travel grants so that students can present and
learn about cutting-edge research.