* 1623787
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Spatial Organization Within A Traditional Political System
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Marcello Canuto, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 23,209.00

Dr. Marcello Canuto and Maxime Lamoureux-St-Hilaire of Tulane University, along
with colleagues from the United States and Guatemala, will undertake research to
study Classic Maya royal courts (AD 250-830). This research will focus on the
Classic Maya polity of La Corona, located in northern Guatemala. This
archaeological project will study the elusive topic of the administrative and
economic behaviors which supported the political activities of a royal court for
centuries. This project departs from others which have emphasized priestly kings
and divine kingship as the focus of Classic Maya political activities because it
focusses on the practical dimensions of power. The study of the everyday
practicalities of ruling in Classic Maya society will help develop a more
pragmatic model for the roles of both the elite and non-elite in the operation
of an ancient political institution. While the Classic Maya were unique in many
ways, their political institutions were functionally similar to that of other
ancient complex societies. Thus, this project's approach is replicable and
therefore should positively impact the broader field of anthropological
archaeology. Moreover, by broadening our analytical scope, the study of ancient
non-western political systems should shed light on studies of modern-day
political and economic systems many of which derive from and incorporate such
traditional elements.

Dr. Marcello Canuto, Maxime Lamoureux-St-Hilaire, and their research team will
study key administrative buildings as well as the floors and refuse-disposal
areas associated with the support-oriented section of the La Corona regal
palace. Beyond traditional archaeological methods, this research project will
employ proven interdisciplinary methods in order to reconstruct the economic
behaviors of this ancient institution. Geochemical analyses will study trace-
elements absorbed in the plastered floors of the palace, while soil flotation
will be used to recover micro-artifacts embedded in those same floors, along
with botanical remains recovered from refuse-disposal areas produced by this
ancient royal court. These different techniques have only been recently applied
jointly to study ancient architecture. The data produced by these
interdisciplinary techniques are unique in that they will document several
subtle markers of ancient behaviors which would not normally be recoverable by
traditional archaeological techniques. The development of this innovative
methodology to study the practical aspects of ancient political institutions may
positively impact the broader field of anthropological archaeology. This project
is part of the larger La Corona Regional Archaeological Project (PRALC), which
operates in the northwest Petén Region of Guatemala; one of the most under-
studied regions of the Maya world. Moreover, the enduring presence of PRALC
helps protect the natural and cultural patrimony of this remote region of
Guatemala from human depredation such as poaching, looting, and illegal
settlement.