* 1623048
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution - Oceanographic Instrumentation (Moored Instrumentation to Support Present and Future Field Programs)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Brian Hogue, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2019
* USD 730,261.00

Funding is requested for the acquisition of new sensors in support of POOL. The
Physical Oceanography Observing Laboratory (POOL) of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution is a virtual facility that maintains and provides
moored instrumentation to U.S. investigators conducting research supported by
the National Science Foundation and other national agencies. Component
laboratory groups construct the mooring elements and prepare the sensors, go to
sea to deploy and recover moorings and, if requested by the principal
investigator, extract and process the data from the moored instrumentation and
make them ready for scientific analysis. Nearly 5 years ago now, the POOL
instrumentation was significantly renewed through a Major Research
Instrumentation grant. Nevertheless, the present inventory of POOL
instrumentation is fully committed to current, ongoing projects, greatly
restricting the ability to support&lt;br/&gt;new initiatives in the near future.
Moreover, overlapping deployments now scheduled will&lt;br/&gt;result in a
shortfall in some requested instruments. Acquisition of selected new moored
sensors&lt;br/&gt;is requested here to address this shortfall and facilitate
future field work. Instrumentation requested includes:&lt;br/&gt;1) Nortek
Aquadopp current meters $128,160 &lt;br/&gt;2) Seabird SBE 37SM MicroCats
$116,920 &lt;br/&gt;3) MMP upgrade/overhaul/modifications $103,425 &lt;br/&gt;4)
EdgeTech 8242XS acoustic releases $133,200 &lt;br/&gt;5) Seabird SBE 37SM
MicroCats $116,920 &lt;br/&gt;6) MMP upgrade/overhaul/modifications $103,425
&lt;br/&gt; $702,050 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.