* 1623040
* Workshops: Forming an integrated understanding of function across fungi:  NCEAS and Santa Barbara, CA; August, 2016 and March 2017
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Mark Schildhauer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2020
* USD 72,501.00

Although they are usually invisible, fungi occur practically everywhere in the
soil. Scientists have known for centuries that there are many different types of
fungus (mushrooms, for example) and that they play important ecological roles.
Some help decompose leaves, some are necessary for nutrient cycling, some cause
disease in plants, some provide food for animals, and the roles of many are
still mysterious. Because most fungi are so small, scientists have had
difficulty detecting them. With the advent of powerful genetic techniques,
however, scientists are suddenly able to discover and study fungus in ways and
in places that were previously unimaginable. These technological breakthroughs
have led to a new and very different type of problem: so much information is
being collected that it's difficult to keep straight -- coordinating the fast-
moving research is a major challenge. This award provides support for two
workshops in which leading scientists who study fungus will agree on how to
organize and store data so that it is publicly available and easy to use, and to
develop new questions that will guide the study of fungi in natural and
agricultural environments. Results of the workshop will strengthen our ability
to detect, prevent and fight fungal diseases of plants and
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two workshops will focus on synthesizing new
insights into the diverse ecological roles of fungi, use of sequencing
technologies, development of standard practices, design and curation of large
databases, and fostering networks of collaborators. Fungal biologists who attend
the workshops will be diverse in terms of expertise, gender, career stage, and
ethnicity. This diverse assemblage of researchers will be the first of its kind
to focus on fungal traits, ecological guilds and sequencing standards. The group
will release and refine two fungal databases (traits and ecological guilds) in a
dynamic, version-controlled, open framework, and will provide recommendations on
community standards and best practices in next-generation sequencing.