* 1623206
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancement of Materials Science Education through Active Learning at Florida A&M University
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2020
* John Telotte, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 12/31/2020
* USD 399,910.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University seeks to
utilize active learning approaches in courses in biomedical and chemical
engineering and incorporate research into the curriculum. The activities and
strategies are evidence-based and a strong plan for formative and summative
evaluation is part of the project.

This project has the specific goals to: increase the number of pre-engineering
students that choose an engineering major; increase the number of students that
choose the materials science option; increase the number of students
participating in undergraduate research; and prepare students to pursue graduate
studies and/or enter the workforce. To achieve the goals, the project will:
infuse modules and laboratory experiments in materials science into fourteen
existing undergraduate courses in chemical and biomedical engineering; and
involve undergraduate students and faculty in research investigating the
consequences of structure-function relationships in nanoparticle suspensions.
The project could serve as a model for small departments that are trying to grow
enrollment, while at the same time keeping faculty engaged in research.