* 1623244
* EDU: Cyber Girls: Teacher training and school-based cyber security education for high school girls
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,890.00

The main objective of this two-year project is to develop, implement, and study
an intervention that increases cybersecurity awareness and proficiency among
high school teachers and exposes high school girls to cybersecurity activities
and careers. This objective is spurred by the growing need for cybersecurity
professionals coupled with the under-representation of women in this field. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that 18% of cybersecurity specialists are
women. There has been increasing awareness that any scalable and sustainable
effort to grow the workforce in cybersecurity cannot ignore pre-college
students, indicating a need for more effective programs and support for high
school aged children, especially girls. However, little is known about what it
takes to engage adolescent girls in cybersecurity and combat the dramatic
shortage of women in the field. This research study will generate evidence based
knowledge about successful cybersecurity professional development for high
school teachers and effective cybersecurity instruction for adolescent girls.
The results will help other districts and schools justify the use of similar
intervention models so that their teachers can break the barriers of stereotype
threat and engage and retain girls in the cyber security field.

More specifically, this innovative cybersecurity intervention includes the
following: (1) A cybersecurity training program for high school teachers; (2) A
curriculum made up of hands on, collaborative and ability building activities
that help high school teachers introduce their female students to concepts and
challenges of cybersecurity within single-sex school-based settings; (3) A
female mentor network for high school girls and teachers, field trips that
expose girls to opportunities in the field and involvement in a nation-wide high
school forensics challenge that attracts thousands of students passionate about
cybersecurity; (4) Ongoing technical assistance for teachers implementing the
curriculum in order to ensure sustainability of the program in the partnering
schools; Over the course of two years, at least 150 girls from 3-6 high schools
in New York with racially, ethnically, and socioeconomically diverse student
populations will be recruited to participate in the intervention. A quasi-
experimental design, using a control group and pre-post tests in each school,
will be utilized to examine the success of the intervention. Additionally, a
qualitative research design will be utilized to document the process of learning
that takes place and the experiences of the students. The impact on, and
experience of, teachers in the program will also be studied using a pre-post
test quantitative and qualitative research design. This mixed methods study will
gauge impact and effectiveness in order to improve future efforts and to produce
an evidence-based model for engaging girls in cybersecurity, which can be
disseminated nationally.