* 1623425
* CAP: ICLS 2016:  Transforming Learning, Empowering Learners -- Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2017
* USD 23,261.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
CAP projects build capacity for research and development in the field of
cyberlearning by improving technical infrastructure, human capital, and in other
ways. The International Conference of the Learning Sciences provides a forum for
research on the design of learning environments, including technology-enhanced
learning environments. This project supports a Doctoral Consortium and an Early
Career Workshop at the conference which allows early career scholars to receive
mentoring from established cyberlearning researchers from both computer science
and learning research.

This project supports travel for advanced graduate students and new faculty from
U.S. universities to attend the capacity-building activities at the ICLS 2016
conference in Singapore. Participants are selected through a competitive process
that ensures high intellectual merit in their work. The project not only
increases capacity by providing mentoring opportunities to young US researchers,
but also allows early career researchers vital access to the latest findings
from around the world (early-career scholars, who often have limited research
funds, are often prevented from attending high-profile international meetings
for budgetary reasons.) Through structured activities, the US scholars will
learn from, and build connections with, peers and mentors from the US and other
countries.