* 1623771
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Investigating The Effect Of Environmental Variability On Mobility And Territorial Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 23,147.00

Territoriality is fundamental to understanding human societies as it relates to
the emergence of property rights, land tenure, warfare, and socioeconomic
inequalities. However human societies have not always been territorial and many
questions remain as to the timing and conditions under which territoriality
emerges. It is only through the discipline of archaeology can social scientists
evaluate the emergence of and changes in territoriality across thousands of
years. Anthropologists have theorized that territoriality emerges as a trade-off
between benefits and risks of defending land using the Economic Defensibility
Model (EDM). The EDM will be evaluated through the study of archaeological
materials from the Texas Coastal Plain using geochemical methods. This project
involves collaboration with The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, and the Center for Archaeological Research
at the University of Texas at San Antonio. This research contributes to the
training of a minority graduate student in archaeological and geochemical
methods. It will also contribute to a publicly available geochemical dataset
that will be useful to multiple disciplines, including geology, ecology as well
as archaeology.

The EDM considers resource density, territory size, and modes of defense to
posit the conditions under which territoriality emerges. While this model has
been effective in understanding ethnographic examples of different types of
territoriality, it has yet to be systematically evaluated in archaeological
contexts. This project addresses this gap by examining territoriality during the
Late Archaic period (2000 BC-AD 800) on the Texas Coastal Plain (TCP). The Late
Archaic was a period of climatic amelioration and during this point in time
population density peaked as hunter-gatherers made use of freshwater resources,
white-tail deer, pecans, and tubers. They returned to central locations for
rituals and to bury their dead however, the scale of their population movements
is unknown. Researchers argue that as hunter-gatherer populations on the TCP
increased, there was a decline in mobility that may have led to increasing
territoriality. The investigators will utilize strontium (87Sr/86Sr) stable
isotope analysis to evaluate the presence of territoriality. As an ecological
tracer, 87Sr/86Sr levels in human bone can potentially tie individuals to
particular locations and therefore allow inferences regarding territoriality.
The 87Sr/86Sr of tooth enamel of over 50 individuals from the archaeological
site of Loma Sandia will be measured. In addition, the bioavailability of
87Sr/86Sr from seven geologic regions in the TCP will be evaluated through
examination of modern faunal samples. These datasets will be analyzed to
evaluate the degree that humans are tied to particular locations. This project
will contribute to the rigorous assessment of the Economic Defensibility Model
and advance our understanding of the causes and conditions for the emergence of
territoriality.