* 1623032
* I-Corps: LabMate: Accelerated Empirical Process Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Today, recipe development and optimization for micro- and nanofabrication
processes are typically based on time consuming and expensive experimental trial
and error. Some processes may take up to a year to be created and fully
optimized severely limiting technology development. Statistical software tools
like JMP attempt to capitalize on classical design of experiment (DoE)
techniques to mitigate this high cost of recipe creation and optimization, but
they neglect information that might be gained from an understanding of process
physics and often require large numbers of experiments for precise fits. Other
process tools, including Synopsys and Coventor, lack many predictive
capabilities. Shortening the development cycle offers a clear opportunity to
save time and money and enables new nanoscale technologies. This I-Corps team
has invented a methodology for using physics based models and integrated
Bayesian statistics to dramatically speed up and reduce the cost for the
empirical optimization of micro- and nanofabrication processes compared to
classical DoE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology "LabMate" employs
an iterative feedback between a model constructed on a robust theoretical
foundation and experiments. In addition, LabMate enables the knowledge and
experience of the user to be incorporated quantitatively into the model to
further decrease the time to optimization and making it well-suited for
commercial application. Preliminary application of the proposed method to the
development of dry etching recipes shows that the number of experiments can be
reduced by a factor of two to three compared to the number of experiments
required by DoE. This translates to hundreds of thousands of dollars in annual
savings for etch recipe creation and optimization. Importantly, although the
initial target market lies within the semiconductor space, the proposed
technology can easily translate to any physical process with a large number of
unknown parameters and limited experimental data. This team is targeting recipe
optimization for dry etching processes at companies including LAM, Intel, Tokyo
Electron, Global Foundries, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, and
Applied Materials. An initial market survey taught the team that the few
simulation tools that exist today for etch recipe creation and optimization lack
the flexibility and capacity of our invention. The team will employ a
subscription based model with customer support to commercialize the proposed
software.