* 1623844
* A Helioseismic Study of Active Region Flows and their Contribution to Global Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Douglas Braun, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 12/31/2020
* USD 367,028.00

The survey to be produced as part of this 3-year project will considerably
increase our knowledge about the physics of subsurface flows inside the Sun,
allowing their variation with magnetic region properties, and with time, to be
ascertained. The research program seeks to understand how these flows affect
larger circulation patterns, particularly the meridional and zonal flow
components of global circulation. The meridional flow is involved critically in
the process that leads to Sun's polar field polarity reversals and the ability
to predict properties of subsequent solar cycles. It is not clear how it is
modulated in time by the contribution of active-region related inflows. A
quantitative assessment of this contribution, provided by this research project,
will allow critical improvements to be made in predictive models. Theories
regarding the physics of the flows have been put forward, with predictions about
their variation with depth. These predictions will be tested by the inverse
modeling efforts as part of this project. Using artificial data available from
numerical MHD simulations, the research activities will also aim to develop and
validate methods to infer subsurface flows reliably and which avoid artifacts
caused by the influence of surface magnetic fields on the seismic waves. These
methods will be invaluable for improving and validating other models of flows
and structures inferred through helioseismology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
purpose of this 3-year project is to perform a comprehensive, high-spatial-
resolution helioseismic survey of subsurface flows around solar magnetic regions
in order to improve models of solar dynamo. The research project has four main
objectives. The first objective is to characterize, using helioseismic
holography applied to Dopplergrams from the Helioseismic Imager onboard the SDO
mission, the near-surface flows observed around solar active regions. This
characterization will include examining the dependence of the flow properties
with magnetic flux. The time dependence of the flows as regions evolve will also
be examined. The second objective is to establish and quantify the contribution
of the near-surface flows surrounding active regions to the latitudinal- and
temporal-variation of the global meridional and zonal flow patterns. This will
be achieved by comparing monthly time and longitude averages of active-region
related flows with meridional and zonal flow measurements. The third objective
is to determine, through helioseismic inverse modeling, the depth dependence of
active-region related flows, in order to provide a physical understanding of the
flows. The fourth objective is to validate the reliability of the flow
determination around active regions. This will be achieved using existing
synthetic data derived from state-of-the-art numerical MHD simulations of waves
in the vicinity of magnetic structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of
the contribution of active-region-related flows in Sun's interior to the larger-
scale dynamics is required for improving surface-flux-transport models of the
solar dynamo. The outcome of this project is expected to improve general
knowledge of solar and stellar dynamos and the evolution of magnetic fields. The
expected results will allow improvements in predicting the solar-cycles of the
Sun. The project team will broadly disseminate data products for their use in
these types of models as part of this program. This project will facilitate
continued involvement of the team in the REU Program in Solar and Space Physics
hosted by the University of Colorado at Boulder. A considerable portion of this
research is being carried out by a postdoctoral research scientist who will take
the lead on several of the project tasks. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.