* 1623371
* Investigating the Effects of Socioscientific Argumentation Development on Student Academic Success
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Raphael Isokpehi, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2021
* USD 349,881.00

Bethune-Cookman University is examining the effects of socioscientific
argumentation learning and development on student success in STEM. The
overarching purpose of the research is to investigate how to produce STEM
graduates with argumentation expertise to address ill-structured problems that
require scientific, evidence-based reasoning to inform decisions. The
researchers will structure an intervention around units of biology and
environmental science courses focused on scientific issues and conduct a three-
phase research study. The Phase I pilot will determine the current argumentation
level of STEM students and analyze the pilot data to identify gaps in effective
socioscientific argumentation development. In Phase II, the researchers will
develop and adapt a socioscientific argumentation learning training system for
students. Phase III will be an experimental study to investigate the effect of
socioscientific argumentation training on student outcomes. The significance of
the study is that the findings can be used to provide students with skills and
competencies needed for graduate school or the STEM workforce; namely,
evaluation of evidence, construction of arguments, and evaluation of competing
arguments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a quasi-experimental
design to answer three research questions: 1) What socioscientific argumentation
strategies do the students currently use? 2) What gaps exist in effective
socioscientific argumentation? 3) Does socioscientific argumentation instruction
influence student outcomes? In Phase 1, they will use socioscientific issues at
the nexus of food, energy, and water for questionnaires, written reports, and
debates to collect data on students' decision-making process, tendency to engage
in arguments, argumentation levels, and quality of argumentative structures. The
researchers will use several rubrics and socioscientific argumentation models to
analyze data collected in Phase 1. They then propose to conduct a pre- and post-
comparison of the quality of arguments on socioscientific issues between
intervention and comparison groups. Measures of student academic success will be
assessed from the dimensions of academic achievement, career success, attainment
of learning outcomes, persistence, acquisition of skills and competencies, and
satisfaction. The research will produce information needed to develop
intervention models for improving scientific argumentation skills development of
STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Broadening Participation Research in Education track. This program track
supports ideas to create and study new models and innovations in STEM teaching
and learning, investigate the underlying issues affecting the differential
participation and success rates of students from underrepresented groups, and
produce knowledge to inform STEM education practices and interventions.