* 1623380
* EDU: QuaSim: A Virtual Interactive Quantum Cryptography Educator-A Project-based Gamified Educational Paradigm
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Mahadevan Subramaniam, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/29/2020
* USD 306,037.00

Quantum cryptography is a subject that is typically difficult to learn. One
possible reason is that students are treated as passive recipients with linear
and fragmented teaching presentations that provide no opportunity for learning
the holistic nature of the discipline. Further, quantum cryptographic equipment
is expensive and beyond the reach of most universities. At the same time,
project-based learning environments are proven more likely to meet educational
objectives compared to traditional lectures. QuaSim is a pedagogical game-based
simulator that allows students an interactive experience to improve learning by
transforming subject-based lectures in quantum cryptography into project-based
virtual simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge components in QuaSim are
codified in a highly expressive first-order logic augmented with abductive
reasoning to generate explanations for user interactions and solutions. A
continual adaptive framework generates customized scenarios and mine responses
to measurably improve learning. While a user who is repeatedly able to solve
problems without hints is led to harder and/or timed problems, a user repeatedly
performing erroneous interactions is fed into pre-defined and automatically
learned error models to identify the responsible knowledge component and
prescribed scenarios with hints to address knowledge gaps. QuaSim is perhaps the
first game-based simulator for quantum cryptography that incorporates abductive
theorem proving along with data analysis to continuously adapt game scenarios
based on user performance to measurably improve learning. Such adaptations
enable instructors to empirically and quantifiably relate student performance to
knowledge components and design lesson plans. QuaSim is expected to improve the
quality and efficiency of undergraduate and graduate STEM education.