* 1623813
* Distance Learning through Self-Induced Learning Infrastructure (SELIN) Implemented by Arctic Anthropologists
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Patrick Plattet, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 299,566.00

This EAGER (Early-concept Grants for Exploratory Research) award supports an
exploratory project that investigates a developing field of anthropological
research, human-animal communication, and tests a new e-learning platform for
facilitating research training in the social sciences at the university level.
The project pairs new distance learning software, Self-Induced Learning
Infrastructure (SELIN), with materials designed to generate enthusiasm among
college students for science research. Several programs in Alaska are currently
using community based traditional knowledge as a launching point for science
education. A good example is an existing lesson that uses dog sleds to teach
physics to students from rural Alaskan communities. The Alaska based SELIN
project team will add to these efforts by investigating a new area of social
science research on human-animal interactions by investigating the relationships
between dog mushers and their dogs. This relationship will be documented and the
data used to create a course that teaches social science concepts and research
methods to college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SELIN, the new e-learning
platform developed at the University of Neuch√¢tel, Switzerland, lends itself to
a variety of observational sciences including biology, veterinary medicine,
sociology, linguistics, and child development. The availability of SELIN
distance courses in English will make the platform accessible to a wider
audience. The findings and data that come from this research (which will be made
available, unedited, to other researchers) about the cultural and economic
factors that drive dog mushing will be beneficial to veterinarians and those
involved in resource management in the Arctic. The fact that the course is
asynchronous means it can deliver science to communities where there is limited
access to scientists and science education, among them rural and Indigenous
Arctic communities for whom the subject matter is of particular interest. The
findings from the research used to develop the course on human and animal
communication offer insights for those involved in practical applications such
as training and coordinating activities with animal species for search and
rescue, law enforcement, and potentially service animals who assist the
disabled.