* 1623280
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Quantitative Biology Methods into Cognate and Upper Division Courses: Enhancement of the Life Sciences Curriculum at Fisk University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Steven Damo, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 376,844.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Fisk University seeks to
incorporate quantitative biology methods and embed authentic research into
lecture and laboratory components of cognate and upper division life science
courses. Fisk University, an HBCU, has over 98% students of color, and more than
90% of these students are African-Americans, resulting in a direct impact on
this population. The proposed project will provide students with a strong
foundation in core scientific skills, particularly quantitative skills such as
computation, modeling, problem solving, and data analysis. The proposed
activities are expected to increase students' interest in STEM related fields,
increase retention and progression in STEM disciplines, and will serve as a
possible replicable model for other institutions that share a similar mission.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to innovate the
curriculum and pedagogies employed in order to better prepare students in the
life sciences for an increasingly multidisciplinary research landscape. This
goal will be accomplished through the following specific objectives: 1) develop
an introductory physics for life sciences course which strikes an appropriate
balance between physics core concepts and life science applications; 2) create a
biophysical chemistry course that focuses on the structure, thermodynamics, and
kinetics of biological macromolecules; and 3) develop modules for upper level
biology courses that reinforce the connections between life and physical
sciences. This interdisciplinary approach will synergize with several ongoing
initiatives at Fisk University and have a transformative effect on student
training for careers in STEM disciplines.