* 1623124
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Extracting Salient Scenarios from Interaction Logs (ESSIL)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Barbara Grosz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 170,000.00

The Extracting Salient Scenarios from Interaction Logs (ESSIL) project proposes
to develop a new type of educational technology to support students' learning
about complex systems from their participation in a multi-person immersive
simulation. Many important challenges we face today as a society -- including
responding to climate change, managing global economies, city planning, disease
outbreaks -- are "complex systems" problems, meaning that important phenomena in
each (for instance trends in weather, stock bubbles, traffic jams, disease
transmission) result not from a single cause, but because many small causes
combine together. Participating in a simulation has the potential to help
students understand the principles of complex systems, but because different
principles surface depending on how each simulation unfolds, it can be difficult
for teachers to adjust their lesson plans on the fly to highlight the principles
that emerge in a given simulation run. To address this challenge, ESSIL will
develop methods to create "automatic salient recaps," as a way to help learners
and their teachers make better sense of simulations. These recaps, which will be
automatically generated, provide a story of "what happened" in the simulation in
a way that both helps students remember their experience and reveals important
scientific principles. Teachers and other facilitators will use these recaps,
along with an accompanying discussion guide, to support productive learning
conversations about the scientific principles incorporated in a simulation. The
recaps will be developed for a large-scale immersive simulation installed at the
New York Hall of Science (NYSCI), potentially improving the educational
experience of thousands of daily visitors. The capabilities developed to produce
them have widespread applicability, because logs of student interactions are
routinely produced by many educational systems. The project is supported by the
Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program, which funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. The immersive simulation context for the project is Connected
Worlds, an embodied, multi-person ecology simulation at NYSCI, with pedagogical
goals around sustainability and systems thinking. Using logs from groups of
students interacting with Connected Worlds, ESSIL will construct selective
recaps of their experience that both are personally salient to them (by
including memorable details of their experience) and have explanatory coherence
(to enable their discussion of important interconnections in the simulation's
underlying model). Artificial Intelligence-based methods will be developed to 1)
identify salient changes in the state of the simulation during student
interaction and 2) construct qualitative models of causal chains that could have
led to these changes. These qualitative models will be used to generate salient
recaps and discussion guides based on them, which will be provided to teachers
whose classes are visiting NYSCI. The effectiveness of the innovation will be
investigated by comparing visiting students' conversations with and without
ESSIL-generated discussion supports and by interrogating their resulting models
of the Connected Worlds system through concept maps.