* 1623915
* EAGER:   Exploratory Studies of Metabolic Water in Plants and Microorganisms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2019
* USD 272,868.00

Water is produced in the cells of organisms during respiration. This project
seeks to understand the importance of this water for plants and soil
microorganisms. This metabolic water is potentially of vital importance when
external water supply is low. The project will test the idea that metabolic
water is important to plants in withstanding drought and repairing drought-
induced damage to the plant water transport system. The project will also test
the idea that metabolic water provides a means for soil microbes to sustain
activity in dry soils. The project will employ novel techniques based on
providing a tracer for metabolic water via a chemically distinct form of oxygen
that allows distinguishing metabolic water from water that is not produced by
metabolism. The techniques developed in this study to monitor metabolism in
complex living tissues have potential applications for studying mitochondrial
disorders underlying human disease and cancer detection. Undergraduate students
will be active participants in the research, receiving training in microbial and
plant ecology, and respiratory metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic water
is produced during respiratory metabolism in animals, plants, and aerobic
microorganisms. Although its vital importance is well recognized in some
animals, virtually nothing is known about the physiological or ecological
significance of metabolic water in microorganisms and plants. The project
hypothesizes that metabolic water contributes importantly to the water balance
of soil microorganisms, prolonging activity in drying soils by providing an
internal source of water that slows desiccation and delays the onset of
dormancy. For plants, it's hypothesized that metabolic water contributes to the
recovery of water transport function in embolized vascular cells by providing a
local source of water under positive pressure that contributes to refilling of
embolized cells. To test these hypotheses, the project uses a suite of
innovative observations, experiments, and modeling activities. A key
experimental methodology involves incubations in air containing oxygen gas
enriched in the stable isotope of oxygen, 18-O, resulting in 18-O enriched
metabolic water that can be distinguished from environmental water by its
distinctive isotopic composition. The 18-O studies are augmented with two
cutting-edge imaging techniques: high-resolution x-ray computed tomography to
visualize refilling of embolized vessels, and stable isotope Raman spectroscopy
to locate 18-O labeled metabolic water within cells and tissues. New insights
from these studies will be transformational in terms of understanding the
interaction of central energy metabolism and water relations in plants and
microorganisms.