* 1623336
* Target Infusion Project:  Transforming Physics Courses Using the Scale-Up Active Learning Model
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Beichner, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,649.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State
University (NCA&amp;T) seeks to transform course delivery in the physics
gatekeeper courses by adapting and implementing the Student-Centered Active
Learning Environment with Upside down Pedagogies (SCALE-UP) model. The
activities and strategies are evidence-based and a strong plan for formative and
summative evaluation is part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the specific goals to: build and implement the SCALE-UP model for the four
Introductory Physics gateway courses; build a community of practice for student
centered learning; and build a strategic pipeline for high-achieving STEM
students by attracting and retaining talented students in STEM majors. Each
year, the four targeted courses will enroll approximately 1,300 students from
the STEM disciplines. Based on results from a pilot project with this approach,
it is expected that this approach will increase students' conceptual
understanding, reduce failure rates, improve performance in subsequent courses,
develop faculty teaching expertise, and increase the retention rate of physics
majors.