* 1623025
* Interdepartmental Hurricane Operations/Research Forum; Miami, Florida; March 15-17, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Meg Austin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The Interdepartmental Hurricane Operations/Research Forum will be held on March
15-17, 2016 at the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, in
Miami, FL. Topics will include a review of the 2015 tropical cyclone season-
performance, progress, and lessons learned; snapshot of recent tropical cyclone
research investments by the federal agencies; review of Joint Hurricane Testbed
activities and discussion of priorities; forums on observational data
acquisition systems/strategies and modeling advancements in the context of
operational requirements and priorities; and planning for operations in the 2016
tropical cyclone season. The Interdepartmental Hurricane Operations/Research
Forum is sponsored by the National Science Foundation, NOAA Office of
Atmospheric and Oceanic Research, and the Office of Naval Research.

Intellectual Merit: At the Interdepartmental Hurricane Operations/Research
Forum, representatives from the academic research community, industry and
Federal agencies will have the opportunity to discuss the latest research on
tropical cyclone observing, forecasting, and warning such as: 1. Review of the
2015 hurricane/typhoon season to gauge current capabilities, progress toward
addressing operational challenges, and priorities for future research. 2.
Research priorities of the operational centers 3. Observations and observing
strategies 4. Tropical cyclone model development 5. Transitioning research to
operations 6. Advances in tropical cyclone forecast and warning products and
services, including social science applications

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important to the Nation because it brings
together the academic research community, industry, Federal agencies and other
user communities such as emergency management, to prepare for the upcoming
hurricane season and make improvements to the Nation's hurricane forecasting and
warning program.