* 1623047
* EDU: Development and Analysis of a Spiral Theory-based Cybersecurity Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Calvin Ribbens, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 03/31/2020
* USD 299,948.00

In this SaTC-EDU project at Virginia Tech, faculty members and graduate students
in the Engineering Education, Computer Science (CS), Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering (ECE) and the Hume Center for National Security and Technology in
College of Engineering are collaborating to develop and implement a unique
curriculum delivery model in cybersecurity into the CS and ECE curricula using
Jerome Bruner's spiral theory approach. A theme of software security for cyber
applications is chosen to develop and implement cybersecurity learning
activities across several required courses in CS and computer engineering
curricula impacting more than 300 students each year. Investigators are also
conducting cybersecurity learning research using a mixed methods research
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two research questions are being investigated: (i)
How effective are the spiral theory-based learning levels in enhancing students'
core knowledge and skills in cybersecurity?, and (ii) How does students'
motivation vary across gender, ethnic backgrounds, academic levels, and
disciplines when participating in the cybersecurity learning levels? This
research contributes in identifying characteristics of cybersecurity learners
and developing education and training programs targeted at engaging a broad
range of students (e.g., students from various ethnic backgrounds) in STEM
education, particularly in cybersecurity. The investigators plan to conduct a
workshop at the site of Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education
(SIGCSE) to share results with national and international educators.