* 1623980
* GLOBE Partner and Diversity Training Workshops
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2017
* USD 232,414.00

The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program
is a cooperative international science program that engages students in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) learning, with a focus on environmental
processes and student research. Now in its 20th year, GLOBE continues to engage
a vibrant community of scientists, educators, and students through operations in
more than 115 countries worldwide. GLOBE's fundamental approach of providing
students with inquiry-based, authentic scientific research experiences that are
often locally-relevant builds on an extensive STEM education research base
regarding effective approaches for engaging students in learning STEM concepts
and pursuing careers in STEM. The cultural diversity of the global community
engaged in GLOBE, and the ability to interact with that diverse community,
positions GLOBE as a compelling platform for demonstrating that ALL students
have the potential for participating in and succeeding in STEM activities.
Building capacity to leverage GLOBE resources, with the goal of increasing
student engagement and diversity in STEM, is a major focus of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to the GLOBE
Implementation Office at UCAR to conduct two comprehensive training workshops
for ~40 existing and new GLOBE Partners. Training of local educators on GLOBE
protocols has traditionally been undertaken by the GLOBE Partners, but the
resources have not been available to bring on many new Partners - especially in
areas that are underserved in STEM education - or enhance the abilities of
existing Partners in the use of new tools that have become available to the
program. In the five years since the last large-scale, comprehensive U.S.
Partner workshop was offered, 40 new partners have joined the program and they
have only received abbreviated one-on-one training. To address new priorities
within the GLOBE program related to broadening participation of traditionally
underrepresented students in STEM, these training workshops are being designed
to model and disseminate best practices for implementing GLOBE within especially
high minority population communities. The SCALE Immersion Model for Professional
Learning (SIMPL) professional development strategy is being used during the
workshops to both deliver content regarding GLOBE program resources and provide
an example of how Partners might improve the pedagogical training of GLOBE
educators in their local communities. The workshops are being held in April and
May 2016, with one workshop being held in New Mexico for Partners from the 3
western GLOBE regions and the other being held in North Carolina for Partners
from the 3 eastern GLOBE regions. Within 12-16 months following the training
workshops, the participants are expected to convene local workshops on
broadening participation through GLOBE in their communities, thereby amplifying
the impact of the workshops.