* 1623125
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Reinventing the Instructional and Departmental Enterprise (RIDE) to Advance the Professional Formation of Electrical and Computer Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mack Shelley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,999,869.00

Electrical and computer engineering (ECE) technologies have evolved from simple
electronics and computing devices and tools to complex systems that profoundly
change the world we live in. Designing these complex systems requires not only
technical knowledge and skills but also new ways of thinking and the development
of social, professional and ethical responsibility. Through the RIDE project,
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Iowa State University
is involving students, faculty, engineers and others in collaborative, inquiry-
driven processes to collectively and systematically transform the department and
the engineers it trains. Students are not only learning about fundamental ECE
technologies in core courses during their sophomore and junior years (middle
years), but also the socio-technical context to go beyond the hardware and
software toward responsible development. Students are expanding their analysis
and design skills to create solutions that work for individuals and society. To
accomplish these goals, faculty are reshaping core curricula using evidence-
based pedagogical strategies and are working together to enhance their
understanding and integration of these strategies in courses. This work is being
done through new structures for collaboration and facilitated through
departmental change processes. The project is expected to advance scholarly
teaching and education research department-wide; serve as a model for ECE,
computing and engineering departments across the country; enhance the capacity
to conduct engineering education research at Iowa State; develop a diverse,
socio-technical-minded ECE workforce; and broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in ECE, especially women, through inclusive learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the ECE department is
undergoing a transformation to a more agile, less traditional organization able
to respond to industry and society needs and sustain innovations. This
transformation is being driven by the project's novel cross-functional,
collaborative instructional model for course design and professional formation,
called X-teams. X-teams are reshaping the core technical ECE curricula in the
middle years through pedagogical approaches that (a) promote design thinking,
systems thinking, professional skills such as leadership, and inclusion; (b)
contextualize course concepts; and (c) stimulate creative, socio-technical-
minded development of ECE technologies for future smart systems. X-teams are
also serving as change agents for the rest of the department through communities
of practice referred to as Y-circles. Y-circles, comprised of X-team members,
faculty, staff, and undergraduate and graduate students in the department, are
contributing to an organizational culture that fosters and sustains innovations
in engineering education through an agile framework that blends several
documented change theories, including collaborative transformation, crucial
conversations, and essential tension. Y-circles are engaging in a process of
discovery and inquiry to bridge the engineering education research-to-practice
gap. Research studies are being conducted to answer questions to understand (1)
how educators involved in X-teams use design thinking to create new pedagogical
solutions; (2) how professional formation pedagogy in the middle years affects
student professional ECE identity development as design thinkers; (3) how ECE
students overcome barriers, make choices, and persist along their educational
and career paths in the middle years; and (4) the effects of department
structures, policies, and procedures on faculty attitudes, motivation and
actions. These studies are informing and improving project activities, advancing
knowledge, and supporting adaptation by others.