* 1623362
* Targeted Infusion Project: Data Science eXtension (DSX): Incorporating data science fundamentals in computing curriculum at Spelman and Morehouse Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Chuang Peng, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 479,688.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Spelman College and Morehouse College seeks to address
the need for skilled data scientists through data science and big data training
for faculty and students at both colleges in partnership with the College of
Charleston's Data Science program. The activities and strategies are evidence-
based and a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the specific goals to: train
faculty on data science principles that are part of computing fundamentals and
infuse the existing curriculum to showcase the data science principles; develop
and implement a data science curriculum at the undergraduate level at both
institutions; and broaden awareness of data science to students underrepresented
in the discipline at the undergraduate level in preparation of graduate studies
or corporate positions in data science. Two groups of ten faculty will be
trained in data science principles, and these faculty will create, infuse and
deliver data science modules to about 500 of their students.