* 1623603
* The Role Of Social And Spatial Network Structure In Patterning Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Traci Ardren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 367,240.00

The mechanisms that help societies coalesce into functioning units, can also
unravel during times of stress. Such mechanisms take a variety of forms, but are
always grounded in social interactions. Forms of integration can be largely
economic, political, ritual, or combine aspects of each of these social realms.
Places and infrastructure created to increase or house social interactions, such
as plazas, roadways, or markets can be highly informative about the choices
people make to develop, maintain, or dissolve a sense of community. In urban
contexts in particular, these sorts of features are key components of
integrating a rural population into the urban setting. Commonalities in
household goods and arrangements are another excellent measure of social
integration, as households evolve in response to broader social adjustments.
Within this context the current project will investigate the apparent fragility
of Classic Maya sociopolitical phenomenon and the weaknesses of their ancient
states. By examining the structure, degree, and kind of social interactions
among members of several very different communities that appear to have
participated in the same Late Classic state, this research will analyze how
households articulated with the social, political, religious, and ideological
strategies utilized by the elite. These ancient communities are located along
the longest ancient Maya road, a major piece of infrastructure that connected
two urban centers and their rural territories. Although past Mayan society
constitutes the focus of this research the underlying principles which it
proposes to illuminate are relevant in many developing regions of the world
today. Failed states which constitute significant international problems today
result from the lack of sufficiently strong integrating mechanisms. Archaeology
permits researchers to examine such issues through a long term perspective.
Local stakeholders who live and farm along this road today will benefit from
learning the details of not only how the road and other ancient infrastructure
was built, but through a series of workshops, lectures, and collaborative
research projects, these communities will have their first exposure to the
methods of scientific investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social interactions
that form bonds between people who live in separate cities or regions are a
particularly important tool to understand why humans choose to willingly
participate in systems of hierarchy with its corollary, oppression. Urban
centers are in constant need of new members and draw rural populations into
urban settlements forcibly, but also through providing infrastructure and the
means for new social interactions. The creation of a massive roadway in the
northern Maya lowlands integrated the communities at either end of the road and
the rural populations along its length during the Late Classic, but how did
daily life change? Were different materials available to local household groups
after the completion of the road? Were residential habits altered? Is there
evidence for the movement of populations? These questions will be addressed by
excavation of households at both cities connected by the road, and at one rural
settlement along its length, from periods prior to the construction of the road,
and after. By identifying changes in domestic artifacts, trade goods, and burial
patterns, the degree of integration achieved by the road project can be
measured.