* 1623391
* Workshop:  Enhancing Resilience of Coastal Caribbean Communities: Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for a Changing Climate
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Todd Crowl, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 41,281.00

This award will support a workshop to promote North American collaborations in
coastal reliance between researchers from the United States, Cuba, and Mexico.
The workshop will take place in Havana, Cuba, and will focus on identifying
comparative strategies that can be deployed to deal with local impacts of
environmental change in the Caribbean region will take place in Havana, Cuba. An
interdisciplinary group of ecologists, hydrologists, oceanographers, economists,
social scientists, engineers, architects, and stakeholders will discuss
potential solutions to coastal resilience challenges in Caribbean communities,
with a focus on South Florida, Cuba, and Mexico. The discussions of the workshop
will be summarized in a publication on shared best practices and strategies for
achieving resilience across coastal communities. In addition, the workshop will
result in the creation of an international network of researchers working on
coastal resilience across the Caribbean region. By including postdoctoral
scholars and early-career researchers in the workshop as both facilitators and
participants, they will have the opportunity for professional development.
Furthermore, the pipeline of scientists working on these important societal
grand challenge issues will be strengthened. The workshop will engage American,
Cuban and Mexican scientists, thus creating a broadly diverse group of
researchers working together to develop adaptation and mitigation strategies for
achieving coastal resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will discuss the
state of knowledge on vulnerability of critical human and physical
infrastructure to impending climate changes and projected sea level rise, as
well as the gaps in research that need to be filled to enhance community
resilience. The group will also focus on the urban ecology of the major coastal
cities of Miami, Havana, and Cancun, with an emphasis on comparative strategies
for increasing resilience in different countries. The participants will develop
an integrative framework that will include natural processes,
engineering/architecture, economy, social processes, and cyberinfrastructure. By
using this approach, the participants aim to develop potentially transformative
new perspectives to address coastal community challenges under changing climate
change scenarios. Specifically, the workshop will seek to develop: 1) an
improved understanding of the challenges facing Caribbean coastal regions
vulnerable to climate change and sea level rise, 2) an agenda of research needed
to improve the resilience and adaption of these Caribbean communities, and 3) a
coordinated framework of experts poised to develop and disseminate such
solutions to vulnerable communities.