* 1623230
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Evidence-based Instructional Practices into the STEM Curriculum at Alcorn State University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ping Zhang, Alcorn State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 377,939.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Alcorn State University seeks to improve STEM learning
by training faculty in active learning methods and developing a cohort of
student peer leaders to support the use of the methods. The activities and
strategies are evidence-based and a strong plan for formative and summative
evaluation is part of the project.

This project has the goals of developing faculty expertise in active learning
instructional practices and developing a STEM Learning Resource Center for
implementing peer led teaching and learning into the STEM curriculum. These will
be done by recruiting and training two cohorts of STEM faculty in best practices
through workshops, conferences, and an ongoing faculty learning community. The
Learning Resource Center will be led by STEM undergraduate students and
supervised by STEM faculty. Along with being a repository for STEM career
information, the space will be used for course workshops, project and homework
assistance, exam preparation and assistance with using resources such as
software and library databases. The evaluation and dissemination of this project
should be useful in developing models of student and faculty support for STEM
majors at other institutions.