* 1623941
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrometer for Research and Training of Undergraduate Students
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Jiyan Ma, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 89,179.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) as well as the Chemistry of Life
Processes (CLP) programs, Professor Kumar Sinniah from Calvin College and
colleagues David Benson, Douglas Vander Griend, Rachael Baker and Jiyan Ma have
acquired a circular dichroism (CD) spectrometer. Many chemical and biological
molecules are chiral (having structures that are not superimposable - like our
hands). Chiral molecules that are prevalent in living organisms can exist in two
forms. These can be described as having left-handed or right-handed
conformations. A CD spectrometer can determine which form or whether a mixture
of both is present. The spectrometer can follow changes as the chiral molecule
binds to another molecule (ligand), rearranges its structure, or reacts (perhaps
with a drug or an antibody). Therefore, CD spectroscopy is ideally suitable for
probing protein (or other macromolecular) structures or changes to structures
due to environmental conditions or to the binding of a ligand. CD spectroscopy
has been widely used for three types of measurements: identifying the structure
of proteins, studying the conformational changes during folding and unfolding of
proteins, and determining the energetics involved in binding interactions and
protein unfolding. This spectrometer is used by undergraduates. While being
trained to use this important tool, the research experience prepares the
students for future careers and advanced degrees in medical and scientific
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is aimed at enhancing education and
training of undergraduates and advancing research, especially in areas such as:
(a) investigating the binding interaction between G-quadruplex DNA and insulin,
(b) measuring the far ultra-violet and the near-infrared circular dichroism to
understand the contribution of cysteine-tyrosine post-translational
modifications on protein stability and function, (c) investigating the folding
and unfolding thermodynamics of proteins and peptide systems, (d) investigating
the functional role of Ras monoubiquitination, and (e) monitoring the folding,
stability, and conformational conversion of various prion protein mutants.