* 1623340
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Infusion of Research and Peer-Led Team Learning to Enhance Student Engagement in Foundational Courses at Lane College
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Melanie Van Stry, Lane College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,664.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Lane College seeks to
improve the first-year experience for Biology and Chemistry majors. The project
aims to improve student retention, engagement, and academic progress in STEM by
infusing research and peer-led team learning in General Biology and General
Chemistry foundational courses. Lane College freshmen are mainly from
underserved minority populations, and many are first generation college students
who would not otherwise receive the benefit of higher education. In addition,
very few students engage in undergraduate research opportunities and most are
underprepared for a career in STEM. This project will engage a large number of
underserved minority students in scientific research, improve student
foundational laboratory skills, and provide students with qualifications for
graduate and professional school. It will significantly increase the number of
Lane College students completing the Biology and Chemistry programs. These
benefits will result in an increase in the number of minority students entering
STEM fields, thereby leading to a more diverse workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to improve STEM
retention through student-focused approaches that enhance student learning and
core competencies within foundational courses: General Biology and General
Chemistry. This goal will be accomplished through the following specific
objectives: 1) Adopt and implement an evidence-based Peer Tutoring approach in
foundational courses for Biology and Chemistry to increase student retention and
academic performance; and 2) Develop core competencies necessary for success in
a career in science early through inquiry-based experiences in General Biology
and General Chemistry Laboratory courses. The benefits of achieving the
objectives of this project include: 1) increased student learning of fundamental
concepts in Biology and Chemistry; and 2) improved STEM education and research
at Lane College while honing students' interest in STEM fields as a major and as
a career. This project is a collaborative effort between the Biology and
Chemistry departments within the Division of Natural and Physical Sciences and
Mathematics.