* 1623404
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Culturally Responsive Making: Developing High-Low Tech Maker Activities in Local and Mobile Spaces for Supporting American Indian Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Breanne Litts, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 198,836.00

This project will develop culturally responsive making and makerspaces with
Indigenous communities in Arizona and Utah. The investigators will work in and
with these communities to design maker activities utilizing technologies that
complement existing cultural practices where the communities are located. This
will be done by addressing the following research questions: 1) How does the
design of a community makerspace located at a community college on tribal lands
differ from the design of a mobile makerspace that travels between tribal
communities? What are the affordances and constraints of each model?; 2) How do
high-low tech making activities implemented in these two distinct makerspaces
support culturally responsive making and STEM learning in American Indian
communities?; and 3) How do these new makerspaces and activities impact youth,
teacher, and community conceptions of and interest in STEM learning? &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging heritage craft practices, Indigenous technologies, and
a mixture of high-low tech tools and materials, this project will expand the
range of available maker activities and broaden our definitions of making to
encompass craft practices and Indigenous technologies, which are often excluded
from the maker literature and makerspaces. Through the design and development of
local and mobile makerspace models serving American Indian communities,
knowledge of how to design makerspaces that meet community needs and foster STEM
learning will be generated. In terms of broader impact, the project will
diversify making activities and makerspaces in ways that allow broadened
participation in making for underserved American Indian communities. A key
project goal is to critically explore making as a democratizing practice that
can broaden Indigenous communities' access to and participation in STEM
learning. This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL)
portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for Computer
&amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR) and Engineering (ENG).