* 1623807
* NSF MRI: Acquisition of a 755 Superconducting Rock Magnetometer System to Enhance the Paleomagnetic and Rock Magnetic Laboratory at New Mexico Highlands University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 536,444.00

1623807 Petronis

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports acquisition of a
superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) equipped with an in-line alternating
field demagnetizer and automated sample handling system for the Department of
Natural Sciences at New Mexico Highlands University (NMHU). The SRM will
complement extant paleo and rock magnetic analytical equipment at NMHU and will
serve as a state and regional facility for investigation for the magnetic
properties of natural materials. The facility will support multiple national and
international collaborative science projects. This support is congruent with
NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing the national
health, prosperity and welfare given the importance of training underrepresented
students in methods of analysis and scientific research. NMHU is a primarily
undergraduate and Hispanic Serving Institution and the investigator has a strong
track record of engaging undergraduates student in laboratory and field
research. Many of the students at NMHU are first-generation college students.

The new SRM will support a wide range of research and research training
applications requiring the ability to determine the magnetic remanence of often
weakly magnetized materials , including studies of crustal deformation processes
based on paleomagnetic and rock magnetic fabric analysis, studies of past
climate conditions based on paleomagnetic proxies, paleomagnetic investigations
of shallow crustal magma emplacement processes, investigation of the timing of
deposition of important continental aquifers, and the timing and extent of
Neoproterozoic cap carbonates indicative of past global glaciation events.

***