* 1623104
* Toward Curricular Guidelines for Cybersecurity Education: Defining Educational Standards for an Emerging Discipline
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Diana Burley, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 03/31/2021
* USD 349,948.00

Given the imbalance between the demand for cybersecurity professionals and the
supply provided by the nation's higher education enterprise, there is an
expectation of rapid growth in the number of cybersecurity-related academic
programs in the near future. The proposed project will take important steps
towards defining comprehensive curricular standards for cybersecurity education
and its outcomes can potentially transform cybersecurity education in the US and
internationally. The project includes the full participation of academia,
government and industry stakeholders throughout the development process and in
key leadership roles. It also recognizes that the development of a strong
cybersecurity workforce is a global concern and the project invites global
contributions to curriculum development efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cyber
Education Project (CEP) was started in 2014 with the dual goals
of(1)establishing curricular guidelines for undergraduate cybersecurity programs
that are endorsed by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the IEEE
Computer Society; and 2)developing discipline-specific criteria that would lead
to the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) Cyber Sciences
accreditation. The work to be performed through this proposal addresses mostly
the first goal - it will establish curricular guidelines for cybersecurity
undergraduate programs that are endorsed by major global computing associations
- but it will also inform the ABET accreditation process. The activities and
deliverables will include organization of the International Security Education
Workshop in June 2016 and disseminating the associated workshop report; a
curricular volume providing guidelines for cybersecurity undergraduate programs;
and roadmaps to guide the implementation of the curricular guidance for a range
of constituency groups. The project plans for broad community engagement across
the range of academic constituencies - to include computing disciplines, social
and behavioral science disciplines, and applied content areas. It will also
provide a continuous formative assessment and adjustment throughout the
curriculum development process.