* 1623514
* RAPID: El Nino Isotopic Signature
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Douglas Bird, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 9,568.00

In this study, investigators seek insight into human responses to climate change
in marine environments. In particular, they wish to understand patterns of El
Niño intensity and frequency in the past, and how this influenced past human
populations. As archaeologists, the investigators are well-suited to understand
complex long-term human-environmental dynamics using climatological records and
the material record from archaeological sites. El Niños influence human
populations through changes in weather, often in the form of heavier rains and
larger storms along the southwest coast of the United States, and an increase in
sea surface temperature (SST). This change in SST is particularly relevant
because it is accompanied by decreases in marine productivity, which often leads
to large scale death of marine life along the west coast of the United States
and South America. This severely affected the diet of past coastal populations
who derived a large proportion of their food from the ocean. Today, El Niños can
cause a collapse of fishing industries. This study will refine methods for using
elements of the archaeological record to reconstruct El Niños and long-term
patterns of SST in the past.

A team of researchers led by Dr. Christopher Jazwa will take advantage of the
current extreme El Niño and collect SST data and California mussel (Mytilus
californianus) shells that contain a record of elevated water temperature. The
oxygen isotope in the calcium carbonate that makes up the outer layers of
California mussel shells is influenced by SST at the time it is deposited. This
layer is deposited in bands over the lifetime of the mussel, so it is possible
to use this signature to reconstruct patterns in SST through time. In this
project, investigators will be traveling to Santa Rosa Island, CA, to collect
SST data and living mussels in January, March, May, August, and November of
2016. By collecting samples and data during the El Niño and the summer/fall
immediately afterward, it should be possible to obtain a signature of elevated
SST in the isotopic signature of the shells. Because El Niños are difficult to
predict in advance, it is essential that the researchers travel to the field
quickly once the appropriate signature has been confirmed. The sampling location
is adjacent to archaeological sites with evidence for at least 7500 years of
human occupation. These sites include abundant evidence of fishing and
shellfishing, including mussel shells. The methods developed in this study can
be directly applied to mussels from archaeological collections for three
purposes: 1) track past patterns in El Niño cycles; 2) determine long-term
patterns in SST; and 3) assign individual shells to particular seasons during
the year to understand seasonal movement of past human populations. Fieldwork
and laboratory sample processing will be done with the assistance of
undergraduate and graduate students, aiding in their education and development
as archaeologists. Finally, research will be done in part to satisfy the goals
of Channel Islands National Park to inventory the valuable cultural and
environmental resources that are present there.