* 1623553
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Multi-Platform 3-D Data Preservation of Tornado Damage to Engineered Structures in Texas during November 16-17, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Kenneth Leitch, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,736.00

During November 16-17, 2015, a rare tornado outbreak produced at least 17
tornadoes in Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas, including an Enhanced Fujita (EF) EF3
tornado, which damaged a group of engineered structures at an oilfield services
facility near Pampa, Texas and nearby engineered center-pivot irrigation system
structures. Structural resistances for these structures can be estimated,
enabling the estimation of tornado wind speeds associated with the damage. This
rapid response research (RAPID) project will investigate tornado wind structure
and estimated wind speeds through three-dimensional (3-D), digital data
preservation of the tornado damage to the oilfield facility and irrigation
system structures. Preservation of this 3-D structural damage data will enable
future researchers to validate wind-damage prediction models, via physical
modeling, computer modeling, and other predictive damage modeling (for example,
loss estimation and risk assessment modeling). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
suite of remote-sensing data collection methods, the project team will rapidly
collect high-resolution, 3-D structural damage data through photography and
photogrammetry, laser scanning, unmanned aerial vehicle visual imaging, and
satellite imaging. The data collected from this project can serve as the basis
for collaborative, multi-disciplinary studies emphasizing the accurate and
highly detailed preservation of structural damage from tornadoes, heightened
understanding of the complex wind structures of tornadoes, validation or
refinement of tornado wind speed estimates, and development of more resilient
infrastructure. Undergraduate students will participate in data collection and
then use this data to collaborate on future research alongside graduate students
and faculty researchers from three institutions, thus training future leaders in
the mitigation of natural hazards damage.