* 1623824
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Contextual Factors that Impact Early-Career Faculty Teaching Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Diane Ebert-May, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 804,250.00

Many large-scale professional development programs for biology faculty are aimed
at helping instructors increase the use of learner-centered teaching strategies
that emphasize scientific practices, so that all students can engage in and
learn science. At the same time that public and private funding agencies are
actively investing in large-scale professional development programs, little is
known about how those investments pay out over the long term, particularly in
early-career faculty. This project will investigate the extent of implementation
of innovative teaching practices by early career faculty in biology departments
nationwide and determine if investments in faculty training have "paid off,"
specifically, whether they result in sustained changes in instructional
approaches and improved student experiences and learning. Importantly, the
results from this study will identify the variables at department and
institution levels that affect the teaching practice of early career faculty.
Results from this study will provide evidence for how organizational structures
can sustain educational innovation among all faculty, informing movements that
focus on departments as the unit of change in undergraduate science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the longitudinal
consequences of professional development on teaching practices of early-career
faculty during the critical pre-tenure years, using the Faculty Institutes for
Reforming Science Teaching (FIRST) network as a study system. The study will
focus on a sample of 80 early-career faculty at four major institution types and
evaluate the role of organizational factors in supporting and sustaining
instructional change. Forty of the faculty participated in the Faculty
Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching (FIRST) program and will be compared
to peers in their department who did not participate in FIRST, using both groups
to explore factors that support educational innovation. This integrated model
will focus on individual values and self-efficacy, external reward systems, and
organizational structures that provide the foundation for supporting or not
supporting innovative teaching approaches. The research design allows us to
examine possible decay as well as enhancement of learner-centered teaching
strategies among early-career faculty. These empirical research findings will
identify effective strategies for professional development and organizational
systems (departments and institutions) that sustain change in how faculty teach,
to ultimately improve student learning. At the same time that public and private
funding agencies are actively investing in large-scale professional development
programs, little is known about how those investments pay out over the long
term, particularly in early-career faculty. The proposed study would fill this
critical gap, informing professional development activities in programs across
institution types about how to support sustained, effective teaching practice.
Results from student metrics will further quantify the connections among faculty
professional development, transformed teaching practice, and student learning
outcomes.