* 1623000
* I-Corps: Spontaneous Pop-Up Display
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* R Michael Evans, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

SPUD, the Spontaneous Pop-Up Display, is a high resolution 24 inch display that
collapses to the size of a small umbrella and weighs less than a pound. SPUD can
connect to a laptop (to provide a large secondary or primary screen) and to a
tablet/phone (to create a mobile workstation when coupled with a portable
keyboard). SPUD eliminates the screen size versus portability tradeoff. With
SPUD, users can have the large computer screen they need wherever they want.
This means that those who rely on large computer screens and frequently work
away from a dedicated desk now have the tool they need to maximize their
productivity. Example target customers include auditors, business development
professionals, tax consultants, management consultants, and students. There are
an estimated 10 million professionals who work away from their desk frequently
and rely on large computer screens. These target customers know that large
computer screens increase productivity as much as 50%, as demonstrated through
many studies. This means that these mobile professionals can get more computer
related work done in a day compared to their peers who work on smaller screens.
Additionally, a 24-inch computer screen has been proven to increase productivity
50% over even 18 inch monitors, as shown in a Wall Street Journal study.
Additional customers/uses include government (military, first responders,
disaster relief) and consumer (gamers, campers, parents) applications.

SPUD consists of novel mechanics and optics coupled to a collapsible screen and
portable projector to achieve the collapsible computer screen. To achieve this
outcome, the team has and will continue to engage in mechanics research to
create an interface that optimizes screen quality and usability for the target
market applications. Current mechanics research for this project has focused on
heavily modifying well-known existing technologies and future research will
likely focus on the development of completely novel technologies. Previous
optics development for this project, likewise, has focused on the implementation
of existing lensing systems for this new application. Current optics development
for this project has consisted of the development of a novel catadioptric system
that greatly shortens the throw ratio of traditional projectors while minimizing
weight contribution. Future optics development will employ free-form optics. The
project has large potential contribution as further development of a novel
display type will have broad societal and science impacts. With a collapsible
screen, there are many use cases that will improve quality of life for different
customer segments and even potentially help save lives in first responder and
military applications. The science impact will result in improved functionality
and manufacturability for similar optical based devices while also furthering
the development of freeform optics.