* 1623067
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Radically Expanding Pathways in the Professional Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Luke Lester, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

The world is embracing a new type of engineer - a design thinker who is
innovative, flexible, and collaborative. This project aims to transform the
offerings of a traditional engineering department with a new curriculum model
that emphasizes design and innovation approaches, offering students a variety of
pathways to a degree in a program with disciplinary depth and a range of
learning experiences. This adaptive kind of engineering professional is in
demand by creative industries that are committed to blending science,
engineering, arts, and design to address the world's problems. The department's
current curriculum is composed mostly of traditional engineering courses that
are lecture and exam-heavy, with little opportunity for experiential learning or
open-ended design. A combination of approaches will be developed that includes
providing multiple paths through the curriculum for students, giving them the
freedom to choose a variety of concentrations - from biomedical applications to
digital arts - and providing outreach opportunities for K-12 students in
underserved and underrepresented populations. These innovations will allow the
department to attract a broader pool of students and prepare them for a wide
variety of careers. These improvements not only broaden the diversity of
students entering the program, they expand students' academic experiences and
design and innovation skills. Applying this concept to an entire department
curriculum will allow for the creation of a sustainable and scalable
participatory curriculum that can be replicated by other programs. This project
will also spur new connections with industry leaders, enhancing students'
academic experiences while providing regional economic
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this project is to transform
Virginia Tech's Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering from a
department with narrow curricular paths that attracts and produces a limited
range of traditional engineers to one that draws and retains a wider pool of
students and prepares them to be holistic professionals for a broader range of
careers. To implement this vision the project will create and implement a
reproducible process of curriculum transformation that dramatically enhances the
emphasis on design and innovation. By combining threshold concepts theory and
design-based learning, a department with just two highly determined paths -
electrical engineering and computer engineering - becomes one overarching
program. The multiple curricular pathways will be anchored in real world
problems, forging new connections to K-12 education and to 21st century
industries, including start-ups, design consultancies, and non-governmental
organizations. This re-design process - broadening the pool of students entering
the department while increasing potential career opportunities - is learner-
centered, stakeholder-informed, and features assessment and evaluation efforts
that can be used to continuously improve education in support of holistic
professional development, ensuring it is sustainable and replicable within the
time and resource constraints faced by any major engineering department.