* 1623793
* Impact of Collapsing Gas-particle Jets:  The Initial Conditions for Pyroclastic Flows and Surges
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Marcus Bursik, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2021
* USD 293,079.00

Pyroclastic flows and surges (here called pyroclastic density currents, or PDCs)
are a fundamental phenomenon of explosive volcanic eruptions. PDCs are poorly
understood because they involve flow of complex mixtures of gasses and particles
(such as volcanic ash and rock fragments) at a wide range of speeds and
temperatures. The flows are the most destructive of volcanic phenomena, but poor
understanding has limited scientists? ability to predict their behavior in a way
that optimizes mitigation of hazards and consequences. Direct measurements of
their dynamics in nature are rare because of their unpredictability and danger.
Instead, much of our understanding of PDCs at a given volcano relies on
characteristics of deposits from previous eruptions, along with experiments and
computational modeling. Many pyroclastic density currents are caused by the
falling back, or collapsing, of jets of gas and debris. As the mixtures impact
the ground they change from vertically falling flows to lateral flows (the
PDCs), and this transition is complicated by the different ways that particles
and gas respond to sudden changes in speed and direction. The impact process
critically influences the characteristics of the resulting lateral flows
(speeds, particle concentrations), yet this is a topic that has not been
addressed by previous quantitative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will combine numerical modeling and experiments, complemented by field studies,
to address the following hypotheses: (1) Impact dynamics depend upon collapse
height, collapsing particle concentration, clast size and density distribution,
slope of the ground at the impact site, and duration of collapse; (2) Collapse
of vertical, impulsive jets tend to feed dilute PDCs (pyroclastic surges) by
expulsion of fines and gas; (3) Collapse of sustained jets can feed concentrated
and/or dilute PDCs immediately upon impact, depending upon the clast size and
density population of the collapsing mixture; (4) Impact dynamics define initial
conditions for the PDCs and should inform simplified flow models for hazards
assessments. The work will define the initial conditions for jet/fountain-
collapse fed flows so that simplified PDC models can be better used to guide
decision makers coping with volcanic hazards. The experimental setup developed
by the project will be available for follow-on used by anyone in the research
community. It is anticipated that the fluid dynamic aspects of the research will
have applications to industrial processes that involve gas-particle flows.
Aspects of the work will comprise a key part of a Ph.D. dissertation.
Additionally, a video-based education module will be prepared for university
students, which will demonstrate the integrated approach and aid in developing
an intuitive understanding of multiphase flow dynamics as a key aspect of
geological fluid dynamics.