* 1623801
* Mortgage Design in an Equilibrium Model of the Housing Market
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Adam Guren, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 254,393.00

In the wake of the Great Recession, there has been substantial discussion about
how the design of various mortgage products contributed to falling house prices,
rising default, and contractions in consumption, output, and employment. In
particular, many observers have suggested simple modifications to standard
fixed-rate and adjustable-rate mortgages might have helped to cushion the blow
of a sharp housing downturn. Analyzing the costs and benefits of various
mortgage designs is complicated, because in response to changes in mortgage
contracts, households will change their prepayment, refinancing, default, and
consumption behavior, lenders will change their lending standards and interest
rates, and all of these actions will feed back into house prices, further
affecting lender and household actions. There is no existing research that
analyzes mortgage design in light of these complicated feedbacks. This project
will fill the gap with a theoretical economic model that is fit to data, which
will allow the researchers to simulate the housing market and boarder economy
under different mortgage contracts and monetary policies. Because mortgages are
the largest debt obligations of the vast majority of households, improving the
mortgage system to stabilize the housing market and consumption has the
potential to have large benefits for society. This project will also help inform
the ongoing policy debate on how to reform the housing finance system.

Because household behavior, lender behavior, and house prices all depend on one
another, an analysis of mortgage design requires a general equilibrium analysis
of housing and mortgage markets that incorporates substantial heterogeneity
across households and aggregate shocks. The investigators will use tools from
heterogeneous agent macroeconomics to create a quantitative general equilibrium
life cycle model with aggregate shocks in which households have realistic long-
term mortgages and a rich set of choices as to whether to prepay, refinance,
move, or default, lenders set interest rates for different mortgage contracts in
response to prepayment and default risk, and household and lender decisions
aggregate up to determine house prices. The model will be calibrated to the U.S.
housing market, with a focus on matching recent empirical evidence on how
mortgage payment size and loan-to-value ratios affect default and consumption.
The model will then be used to simulate how different mortgage contracts affect
housing market volatility and particularly in busts like the Great Recession,
allowing the researchers to understand the tradeoffs involved in mortgage design
qualitatively and quantitatively. This project will also shed light on how these
different mortgage contracts affect the transmission of monetary policy and how
monetary policy affects the performance of various mortgage contracts by varying
the extent to which the central bank adjusts interest rates in response to
developments in the housing market and the real economy.