* 1623835
* I-Corps: Human Behavioral Models for Camera Placement and Video Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Shishir Shah, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Physical spaces are compartmentalized to form infrastructures, buildings, and
facilities that serve various purposes for humans. For example, in the design of
a public facility, corridors or passageways are created to facilitate the flow
of humans from one end to another. Similarly, in deploying a video camera
network, the cameras are placed to capture human activities and obtain
identifiable information. However, a very limited amount of observed human
behavioral information is taken into consideration while designing the
infrastructure of the placement of cameras, respectively, in the above examples.
Factors like sustainability, costs, aesthetics, etc. tend to take precedence.
This I-Corps team believes that human behavior understanding holds equal
importance as other factors in designing a facility or in designing the
placement of cameras in a camera network. The team has developed an approach
that predicts expected human motion behavior in any infrastructure, which in
turn is leveraged to inform the placement of cameras to form a video camera
network. This solution optimizes the ability to capture analyzable human data
while ensuring traditional wisdom used in current deployments that include the
ability to monitor fixed assets, entry/exit ways, and open spaces. the proposed
solution delivers a cost-effective design for camera placements to form a video
camera network that generates actionable data and hence maximizes the value and
return-on-investment (ROI) of the deployed system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technology core comprises of methods and models for human motion
behavior. It includes a computational model of human motion behavior within an
infrastructure based on its known geometry, and a computational model to
simulate human motion in a known geometry. The underlying methods leverage
concepts of human behavior from the fields of psychology and sociology, and
employs computer science optimization techniques to predict human behavior. This
team believes that the proposed methods can fulfill or alleviate current
industry needs related to effective surveillance at reduced costs to realize
actionable data. In realizing the above, the team will identify existing video
surveillance system providers, designers, and integrators; will perform customer
interviews and validate their needs and identify functional features that could
be developed in a minimal viable product (MVP). The team will also identify the
development resources and facilities necessary to develop the prototype MVP and,
if possible, work towards integrating developed methods into a prototype product
following agile development methods.