* 1623358
* Planning Project: Data Science and Analytics Advancing STEM Education at North Carolina A&amp;T State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Zakiya Wilson-Kennedy, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) provide support to design,
implement, and assess strategies that can lead to comprehensive institutional
efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate degrees in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality
of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research. This project
seeks to establish the foundation for a program for "Data Science and Analytics
Advancing STEM Education at North Carolina A&amp;T State University". The goal
of this integrated, multidisciplinary undergraduate program is to use data
science and analytics to train undergraduate students in data science and
analytics through computationally intensive tools and global research and
education experiences. This project seeks to transform teaching and learning
through evidence-based STEM gateway course reform.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Activities that are part of this project are: broadening student
access and participation in data science education; strengthening undergraduate
research experiences in data science; engaging faculty in research and
scholarship; and developing an educational research pilot project. The project
will be guided by an on-going evaluation and external and internal steering
committees. Since African Americans are severely underrepresented in this field,
the project can have great impact on diversifying the workforce.