* 1623541
* Meetings of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Alexander Volfovsky, Institute of Mathematical Statistics
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 93,000.00

The University of Wisconsin will host a conference for new researchers in
statistics and probability from July 28-30, 2016. (See
http://www.stat.wisc.edu/imsnrc18/index.html.) The meeting is organized by the
IMS Committee on New Researchers and held for junior researchers working in
different areas of Statistics and Probability. The primary objective of the
conference is to provide a much needed platform for interaction among new
researchers, as well as opportunities to seek mentorship from leading
researchers in the field. This conference series is explicitly aimed at training
the future leaders and researchers in probability and statistics. This award
provides partial funding for the 2016 conference, as well as for the 2017 and
2018 conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Committee on New Researchers of the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics will hold its 2016 conference at the
University of Wisconsin, July 28-30, 2016. Each participant will give a brief
introduction to his/her research, as well as a poster presentation. Plenary
talks will be given by established researchers. There will be panel discussions
on teaching and mentoring, publishing, funding, and finding collaborators. NSF
is providing funding to partially support this conference for the next three
years.