* 1623276
* EDU: Collaborative: Using Virtual Machine Introspection for Deep Cyber Security Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Irfan Ahmed, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Cybersecurity is one of the most strategically important areas in computer
science, and also one of the most difficult disciplines to teach effectively.
Historically, hands-on cyber security exercises helped students reinforce basic
concepts, but most of them focused on user level attacks and defenses. Since OS
kernels provide the foundations to the applications, any compromise to OS
kernels will lead to an entirely untrusted computing. Therefore, it is
imperative to teach students the practice of kernel level attacks and defenses.

Over the past decade, there has been great interest in using virtualization to
profile, characterize, and observe kernel events including the security
incidents. Inspired by the great success from virtual machine introspection
(VMI), this project aims to provide an advancement by directly building
practical VMI tools and libraries (or toolkit) on top of virtualization, and
applying them for deep cybersecurity education. The deepness comes from the
study of the lower level system internals such as OS kernels. The project will
further provide a number of seed contents to teach both instructors and students
on utilizing the toolkit to be used for studying not only traditional user level
attacks such as buffer overflow, but also defenses inside the OS kernels. The
outcome of this project (i.e., the toolkit and the cybersecurity exercises) will
contribute to the health, safety, and economic well-being of our society by
helping to improve the state-of-the-art in cybersecurity education, especially
for effectively performing hands-on cybersecurity exercises.