* 1623490
* MAKER: Making Opportunities for Baltimore Inner City Youth in a 3D Print Shop
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Foad Hamidi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2021
* USD 308,425.00

Real-world problem solving through Making is a new and popular way to engage
youth in STEM education. Since it is often difficult to infuse Maker curriculum
into students' schedules, this frequently occurs in after-school programs.
Unfortunately, not all youth are able to participate in after-school activities
due to financial pressures and may instead take jobs in non-technical fields
such as food service or retail. These non-technical jobs take time away from
Making, designing, and tinkering, which can leave them behind their peers who
are honing skills for a technical career path. We propose to create a living
laboratory "print shop" at the Digital Harbor Foundation (DHF) Tech Center in
Baltimore to study the impact of Maker employment with inner city youth.
Research will be conducted to understand how their experiences in the print shop
maintain their engagement with STEM. The result of the project will be a new
model to keep underserved youth on a pathway towards a STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While integrating Making in formal and informal learning is an active
research topic, little is known about how to support Making in youth employment.
This research will answer questions crucial to deepening youth engagement in
Making such as: 1) How do youths' perceptions of STEM careers and STEM education
change with a Maker job? 2) How does real-world client work impact youths'
interest in Making and their "design thinking"? 3) What impact does a youth-run
3D print shop have in the local community? 4) What are the generalizable
recommendations for designing and teaching digital fabrication software to
individuals with diverse skills? &lt;br/&gt;We will answer these questions by
conducting interviews, observations, and workshops, with DHF youth, support
staff, and the print shop's customers. All software, training tools, and
supporting technology will be evaluated through longitudinal deployments in the
print shop. We will track youth's engagement in the print shop and measure how
their attitudes towards technical employment, STEM fields, and Making change
through the research. We will share our experiences, tools, training materials,
and strategies to continue to diversify Making and provide novel employment
opportunities with the Maker and academic community.