* 1623775
* RAPID: The effect of an extreme El Nino event on tropical forest seedling regeneration
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Stuart Wright, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 165,000.00

This research will explore how trees in eight tropical forests respond to an El
Niño event. The 2015-16 El Niño is among the three strongest since 1950. Strong
El Niño events bring climate anomalies worldwide, including increased
temperatures, reduced cloud cover, decreased rainfall, and drought over a large
portion of the Tropics. The eight forests in this study occur along a steep
rainfall gradient from the wet Caribbean to the dry Pacific coast of Panama. The
project capitalizes on previously mapped populations of seedlings and trees in
each of these forests. Although the 2015-16 El Niño initially benefitted trees
by reducing cloud cover and increasing light availability during the 2015 rainy
season, the dry season began earlier than normal, which likely means a severe
drought lies ahead. The project will test several hypotheses about how tree
species in normally wet and dry forests respond differently to reduced rainfall.
The net effect of drought and increased light on the health of seedlings and
adult trees will determine which species regenerate, potentially altering long-
term composition of the forests. This project is important because tropical
forests play a vital role in global carbon and water cycles and are the most
biologically diverse ecosystem on the planet. Also, a deeper understanding of
how plant species respond to El Niño events will provide insight into how
forests will respond to long-term climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the 2016 El Niño event, researchers will survey an existing network of tree
seedling plots within eight forests that span a pronounced rainfall gradient in
central in Panama. Censuses will measure seedling recruitment, growth and
survival across two size classes and (1) determine which forest sites and tree
species are most affected by an extreme El Niño event, (2) examine the relative
roles of reduced soil water availability and increased light on seedling
performance, (3) evaluate the predictive value of functional traits for seedling
responses to El Niño, (4) measure the size distribution of El Niño-related
seedling mortality, and (5) provide a baseline for modeling the effects of
extreme El Niño events on tropical forests through assessing minimum soil and
leaf water potentials and their variation across forests and species. The
project is among the most comprehensive studies of the effects of an El Niño
event on tropical forest regeneration to date and will provide insight into
variation of responses within and among species, seedling size classes, and
forests. The research will improve projections for consequences of global
climate change for these forests, as well as for vegetation-climate feedbacks,
which will be important for forest management under current and future climate
conditions. The project will also facilitate future research efforts both in
Panama and in other tropical regions by providing research infrastructure and
data from a relatively new set of plots in Panama and by gathering comparative
performance data for a wide range of species. Data will be made publically
available online.