* 1623554
* EAGER: MAKER: Inspiring the Flathead Indian Reservation's Next-Generation Workforce through Mobile, Cultural Making
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Lisa Blank, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,943.00

Makerspaces provide powerful opportunities for STEM and role-model engagement
with youth but remain scarce in rural, tribal communities. This project will
create a mobile makerspace that weaves together conventional and cultural
making, rich with American Indian STEM role models and traditional tools and
practices of the Salish, Kootenai, and Pend d'Oreille tribes. The project
pursues the research question: does pairing cultural and conventional makerspace
activities advance design thinking and community capacity in making? The project
is designed to develop a national model for community-driven making in rural,
tribal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating a mobile, cultural
makerspace and a cultural making curriculum and engagement model to share with
the informal science education and maker fields, this project seeks to enable
cultural tools and knowledge to increase making capabilities in rural, tribal
communities. Through visits to each of the communities on Montana's Flathead
Indian Reservation, the project aims to increase K-12 students' interest in and
awareness of cultural making and design thinking; their access to cultural role
models engaged in design thinking; and their creative confidence, experimental
mindset/mindshift, and design thinking skills. Designed in partnership with
cultural heritage experts, craftspeople, and tribal elders, the project's mobile
makerspace will engage an estimated 5,000 K-12 youth in an array of school and
community settings. All of these efforts pursue the end goals of instilling a
sense of belonging in STEM, design thinking, and making, as well as empowering a
homegrown, American Indian STEM workforce on the Flathead
Reservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to introduce
and engage a wide range of learners, including meritorious students, from a
rural American Indian community to making specifically, and to STEM more
broadly, in a culturally aware way. The planned sustainability of the proposed
program also ensures continuity of potentially engaging all learners, including
those of high merit but insufficient means; therefore, S-STEM co-funding is
deemed appropriate for this project. This in-context engagement/introduction to
making will present a pathway for learners to pursue STEM degrees. This project
is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL) portfolio (NSF 15-086), a
collaborative investment of Directorates for Computer &amp; Information Science
&amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR) and Engineering
(ENG).