* 1623190
* IUSE/PFE:RED: A Model of Change for Preparing a New Generation for Professional Practice in Computer Science
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,919,843.00

In order to thrive and even survive in the globalized marketplace of ideas and
innovation, the U.S. must aggressively meet the challenge of increasing the
number of students who complete degrees in computing areas. It is critical for
our economic and social health, as well as national security, to maintain a
globally competitive computing workforce. The Bureau of Labor Statistics
predicts that employment of computer and information technology occupations is
projected to grow faster than the average for all occupations (12% from 2014 to
2024). In order to keep our nation on the cutting edge of technology, we must
retain more domestic students in computing programs. A 2012 report on
undergraduate STEM education from the President's Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology (PCAST) cites "uninspiring" introductory courses and an
unwelcoming atmosphere from faculty as major factors contributing to attrition.
The project at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) aims to address the
PCAST findings by re-imagining what it means to learn, whose knowledge counts,
and what counts as knowledge in the context of Computer Science (CS). The UTEP
model transforms faculty into change agents and fosters the development of
positive student identities early in the curriculum to impact students'
trajectories in CS and beyond. As important, the acquired skills and knowledge
from the proposed effort are expected to transfer to other subjects in students'
studies, decrease students' time to degree, and strengthen their preparedness
for entry into the computing workforce. Further, the development of inclusive
environments with members who value multiple and diverse experiences and
perspectives is needed to address global challenges and
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
cultivate socially conscious connectedness among students, faculty, and
industry. This will be accomplished by expanding a curriculum centered on
heightened social interaction driven by an understanding and appreciation for
the cultural contributions of diverse students to CS in a globalized world. The
project objectives are to (1) transform the CS curriculum (i.e., content,
pedagogical principles, social interaction, and faculty beliefs) to one that
builds students' identities as computer scientists and considers societal and
global contexts in problem solving; and (2) develop a climate of connectedness
through a shared sense of purpose among faculty focused on establishing cultural
competence and inclusive environments. The outcome will be twofold: (i) a
program of study that motivates, connects, and immerses students from diverse
backgrounds in the profession throughout their plan of study; and (ii) faculty
with deep cultural competence who use professional practice-based learning to
foster systemic change. The resulting model transforms CS teaching and learning
through deep change to curriculum grounded in social consciousness, cultural
competency, and practice informed by the department's unique expertise and
experiences as a Hispanic-serving institution and leader of the Computing
Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI). The theoretical underpinnings
of the project are framed on theories of learning informed by situated
cognition, derived from sociocultural theory. In order to generate new knowledge
about a process-oriented approach to deep educational change in CS, the effort
includes ethnographic research on the change process and the education process
paying particular attention to diversity, inclusion and professional practice.