* 1623550
* EAGER: MAKER: The Design and Engineering of Scientific Instrumentation as a Pathway for Introducing Making into High School Science Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,957.00

As part of an overall strategy to enhance learning within maker contexts in
formal and informal environments, the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) and Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
programs partnered to support innovative models for making in a variety of
settings through the Enabling the Future of Making to Catalyze New Approaches in
STEM Learning and Innovation Dear Colleague Letter. This Early Concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) will test an innovative approach to bringing making
from primarily informal out-of-school contexts into formal science classrooms.
While the literature base to support the positive outcomes and impacts of
design-based making in informal settings at the K-12 level is emerging, to date,
minimal studies have investigated the impacts of making design principles within
formal contexts. If successful, this project would not only add to this gap in
the literature base but would also present a novel model for bridging the
successful engineering design practices of making and tinkering primarily found
in informal science education into formal science education classrooms. The
model would also demonstrate an innovative, highly interactive way to engage
high school students and their teachers in engineering based design principles
with immediate real-world applications, as the scientific instruments developed
in this project could be integrated directly into science classrooms at
relatively minimal costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a multi-phased design and
implementation model, high school students and their teachers will engage deeply
in making design principles through the design and development of their own
scientific instruments using Arduino-compatible hardware and software. The first
phase of the project will reflect a more traditional making experience with up
to twenty high school students and their teachers participating in an after-
school design making club, in this case, focused on the development and testing
of scientific instrument prototypes. During the second phase of the project, the
first effort to transpose the after school making experience to a more
formalized experience will be tested with up to eight students selected to
participate in two week summer research internships focused on scientific
instrument design and development through making at Northwestern University. A
two-day summer teacher workshop will also be held for high school teachers
participating in the subsequent pilot study. The collective insights gleaned
from the after school program, student internships, and teacher workshop will
culminate to inform the full implementation of the formal classroom pilot study.
The third and final phase will coalesce months of iterative, formative research,
design and development, resulting in a comprehensive pilot investigation in up
to seven high school physics classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multi-
phased, mixed methods exploratory design-based research approach, this 18-month
EAGER will explore several salient research questions: (a) How and to what
extent does the design &amp; making of scientific instrumentation serve as
useful tasks for learning important science and engineering knowledge,
practices, and epistemologies? (b) How engaging is this making activity to
learners of diverse abilities and prior interests? What can be generalized to
other types of making activities? (c) How accessible is the Arduino hardware and
coding environment to learners? What combination of hardware and software
materials and tools best support accessibility and learning in this type of
digital making activity? and (d) What types of scaffolding (for students and
teachers) are required to support the effective use of maker materials and
activities in a classroom setting? Structured interviews, artifacts, video
recordings from visor cameras, student design logs, logfiles, and ethnographic
field notes will be employed to garner data and address the research questions.
Given the early stage of the proposed research, the dissemination of the
findings will be limited to a few select journals, teacher forums and workshops,
and professional conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER is well-poised to
directly impact up to 125 high school physics students (average= 25
students/class), approximately 7 high school physics teachers, 6-8 high school
summer interns, nearly 20 high school students participating in the after-school
design making club, and indirectly many more. The results of this EAGER could
provide the basis and evidence needed to support a more robust, expanded future
investigation to further substantiate the findings and build the case for
similar efforts to bring making into formal science education contexts.