* 1623141
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Defining the Frontiers of Bioengineering Education at Illinois and Beyond
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Rashid Bashir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,998,057.00

In this proposed departmental revolution, the Bioengineering Department at the
University of Illinois is aligning its undergraduate curriculum with medical
practice and education by designing the curriculum around a simple message, "no
solution without a need." The rising cost of healthcare, the increased role of
technology in medicine, and emerging ethical dilemmas created by an increasing
and aging population require that all bioengineers and healthcare providers
understand the social and ethical context of their work to derive solutions that
can meet these complex needs. However, students are typically isolated from
these social contexts during their technical training, limiting their ability to
identify and understand the needs of society and healthcare providers.
Consequently, these students are limited in their ability to derive optimal
engineering or technological solutions. The Bioengineering curriculum is being
changed to achieve four objectives: 1) redesign the curriculum so that societal
needs for healthcare and medicine drive the technical content, 2) integrate out-
of-class experiences so that students receive hands-on practice with identifying
and understanding societal and healthcare provider needs, 3) translate medical
assessment practices to align clinical experiences with the curriculum, and 4)
develop faculty teaching skills to meet these new challenges by engaging their
intrinsic motivations to revolutionize the department. This revolution is driven
locally by the creation and launch of the first Engineering-Based College of
Medicine in the nation in fall 2018 that will integrate instruction in
engineering with clinical and biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalyzed by the Grinter Report, engineering
education was previously revolutionized by aligning its practice and education
with science. This alignment created a social-technical duality in engineering
where the technical skills were elevated and social skills were relegated. In
response, calls have risen for holistic training of engineering students who
understand the societal needs and the societal implications of their practice.
This change can be accomplished by aligning sub-disciplines of engineering with
other holistic disciplines. The next revolution in bioengineering education can
be brokered by realigning with healthcare and medicine - areas of impact and
practice that holistically integrate social and technical aspects. This revised
curriculum integrates clinical experiences that provide a context for students
to learn ethnographic methods for user-oriented needs identification and problem
scoping. While traditional curricula organize courses by their technical
content, the new curriculum organizes courses by the needs that the curriculum
will empower students to solve. Needs such as age-related disease, global
health, and cancer provide the starting point for students who are navigating
their curriculum. The use of new assessment tools such as competency-based
models and e-portfolios integrate these new curricular tracks with the clinical
experiences. Finally, to help faculty learn how to execute this new curriculum,
the Bioengineering faculty are organized into Communities of Practice to execute
course and assessment revisions. This process is driven by departmental
administration who are guided and supported by organizational change
researchers. This revolution is being spread beyond the Illinois campus through
accreditation agencies and technical societies.