* 1623884
* Collaborative Research: An Examination of Behavioral and Biological Change in an Extended Chronological Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Lindsay McHenry, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 75,088.00

Drs. Jackson Njau of the Indiana University, Bloomington and Lindsay McHenry of
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, along with colleagues from the US, Europe,
and Tanzania, seek to understand the relationships between Earth system history
and human ("hominin") evolution by investigating the environmental contexts in
which early ancestors of humans evolved. Previous researchers have postulated
that climate-driven environmental changes on the African continent strongly
influenced such evolution over the last several million years. Whether (and how)
humans and other species adapt to changing climate is a scientific subject that
has captivated public interest. Archaeology is well placed to link climate and
environmental history to hominin records by integrating paleoenvironmental
datasets archived in the sediments of ancient lakes near paleoanthropological
sites. In addition to generating new scientific data, this project will open new
interdisciplinary research frontiers across the earth sciences and anthropology
that will impact the scientific debates on human origins research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate how and when climate and
environmental forces influenced adaptation during the critical times of human
evolution. Do changes in morphology, innovation, sociality, and behavioral
traits reflect changes in the local ecology, such as habitat, food, predation
pressure, and the availability of resources on the landscape? These questions
will be addressed by linking the detailed paleoclimatic record recovered from
drilled sediment cores to excavated archeological sites. Four recently acquired
cores from the ancient lake at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, covering over 2 million
years of sedimentation, will be compared to key nearby archeological layers that
document records of evolving hominin species and changes in stone tool
technologies. Lake sediments archive climate history through time, therefore
providing an unprecedented paleoclimatic record of the paleoanthropological
material from the prehistoric Olduvai lake basin. These paleoenvironmental data
will inform models of hominin land use behaviors and elucidate how climatic
change drove hominin adaptations in morphology and cultural behaviors that
allowed them to better adapt to variable environmental conditions. Using the
composition of volcanic ash layers and detailed examination of the sedimentary
units preserved in both cores and outcrops, the team will examine whether times
of significant environmental change (as determined in the cores) correspond to
times of significant cultural or biological change (in the outcrops and
excavations). This project will provide research opportunities and training to a
diverse group of American and Tanzanian scholars, provide educational outreach
opportunities, and foster international collaboration and understanding.