* 1623131
* EDU: Collaborative: Branching Interactive Graphic Stories for Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Laurin Buchanan, Applied Visions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 162,262.00

The purpose of the Branching Interactive Graphic Stories for Cybersecurity
Education (BIGSCE) project is to determine how a technology for creating
branching ("choose-your-own-adventure") comic book stories, called Comic-BEE,
can be used to teach middle school students about cybersecurity. BIGSCE is
potentially transformative, informing the development of new approaches to
teaching and learning cybersecurity: branching graphic stories can incorporate
culturally relevant pedagogy, and therefore have the potential to reach a
broader and more diverse body of students. The goal of BIGSCE is to explore how
this innovative technology can enhance cybersecurity education, with the
following aims. 1) Attract a broad and diverse workforce to the field of
cybersecurity, starting in middle school. 2) Use expert-created comics to
evaluate a learner's knowledge, skill, and ability in the area of cybersecurity.
3) Deepen students' understanding of cybersecurity challenges and consequences
using a comic creation activity. BIGSCE will also contribute new understanding
of how to effectively use branching graphic stories as a learning and assessment
tool for middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIGSCE will be conducted
at a community center in an economically-challenging district in New York state
--New Cassel of Long Island. Over a 2-week period, students will read stories
created by cybersecurity experts, and then create their own stories about
cybersecurity using Comic-BEE, guided by instructors. Learning will be
determined by observing students in the classroom, and evaluating the choices
that they make in the stories, and the stories that they create. Students will
also fill out pre- and post- questionnaires determining their sense of self-
efficacy and interest in cybersecurity careers.