* 1623694
* Workshop: Training the Trainers in Pre-Research Coursework
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Shelley Pressley, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2018
* USD 7,995.00

This project is supporting a workshop to nationally disseminate the educational
materials and lessons learned during the PIs' earlier NSF-funded project, "EURO:
Enhancing Undergraduate Research Opportunities" (award 1123068). In this earlier
project, faculty from 3 large institutions collaborated in developing coursework
to provide lower division undergraduate STEM students with research experiences
that were less costly than traditional methods involving labs. EURO met the
considerable challenge of increasing participation in early undergraduate
research in an affordable way. This was done through the creation of courses and
programs designed to teach general research skills, rather than only engaging
students in specific disciplinary research activities. By focusing on "research-
oriented" or "research skills" experiences, more students can engage research
early in their undergraduate studies without major increased expense. The target
audience for the current project is comprised of faculty and administrators
interested in increasing the number of students involved in undergraduate
research at their institution. The workshop organizers are drawn from the EURO
team. All of them have taught these courses over the past four years. The
workshop has a capacity for 27 participants who are expected to become trainers
in this method. The organizers are committed to following up with the
participants to support adaptation of this approach at the participants' home
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team is continuing to solicit and
develop modules and information to share with practitioners of undergraduate
research. Workshop participants will be expected to contribute to the research
concept inventory problems previously developed, adding content from a broad
range of institutions. By holding the workshop concurrently with the short
course taught at the lead institution, the PI team is also planning to measure
the effectiveness of this method of dissemination and determine if it is more
effective than the conventional methods. If most of the participants follow
through and set up their own regional training programs, using materials that
the project team will make accessible, the train-the-trainers aspect of this
project will have a substantial impact and also become self-sustaining.