* 1623566
* Building Cyber Capacity in the Northwest and Beyond
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Corrinne Sande, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,998.00

Whatcom Community College (WCC) proposes to expand upon its cybersecurity
programs and workforce capacity-building efforts through a trio of interrelated
efforts that support the student pipeline from high school through college and
university, including online learning. The project will build the pipeline
through high school camps and competitions that offer mentorship opportunities
for college students, opportunities for high school students to earn college
credit, and exposure to industry, with the ultimate goal of embedding programs
in regional high schools for maximum impact. WCC has been designated by the
National Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security as a National
Center of Academic Excellence in cybersecurity. It is also the lead institution
for Cyber Watch West, a regional center for cybersecurity education funded by
the NSF's Advanced Technological Education program. The proposed efforts will
leverage these projects and prepare students for emerging topics in key
cybersecurity industry sectors including industrial control systems, secure
cloud computing, mobile technology, and web development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: (1) develop and offer an
online bachelor of applied science degree in networking, which will include
security-infused coursework, embedded certificates, and remote lab
accessibility; (2) develop an upper division support/navigator program for
students pursuing their programs at WCC or at nearby Western Washington
University; and (3) leverage current cybersecurity camps for high school
students by including participation in the national high school competition
Cyber Patriot. The project will provide employers in both industry and
government with qualified networking and cybersecurity professionals to meet the
workforce demands. It will offer college credit to high school students
successfully completing the cybersecurity camp and will ensure industry
participation in curriculum and program development. The program emphasizes
study and soft skills using a human-centered design approach that focuses on the
individual needs of each student and emphasizes interpersonal skills, critical
thinking, and customer service.