* 1623034
* Collaborative Research: Mantle to Crust Fluid Transfer in an Active Flat-slab Subduction Zone - Insights from Peruvian Thermal Spring Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Dennis Newell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,647.00

Fluids play a prominent role in tectonic processes associated with plate
tectonic subduction zones including mountain building, volcanic activity, fluid-
fault interaction, and earthquakes. Most of what is known about fluid sources
and flow pathways is from geochemical characterization of hot springs and
fumaroles near active volcanoes located along subduction zone arcs (e.g., the
Pacific Ring of Fire). In contrast, the source and composition of fluids along
subduction zones segments that lack active volcanism is not well known. This
project investigates the source and chemistry of fluids in this type of setting
using an innovative set of geochemical techniques applied to hot springs in the
Peruvian Andes. This part of the Andes is targeted because it is the best
example on Earth today of ?flat-slab? subduction, that manifests as a prominent
gap in volcanic activity along an arc. Research on fluids in this geological
setting is important for the fundamental understanding of their role in this
stage of the subduction cycle, and this work is transportable to other ancient
and modern subduction zones worldwide. Springs can contain high concentrations
of metals, and this research will identify spring systems that pose potential
water quality issues for the Peruvian public. Beyond these scientific and
societal impacts, the project is contributing to training of graduate and
undergraduate students and workforce development in a STEM discipline. It is
facilitating scientific collaboration between U.S. and Peruvian scientists, and
is providing training opportunities for Peruvian students in field and
analytical methods. The project will also support a workshop on water quality
and geothermal issues in the western U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research goal is to map the distribution of mantle- and slab-derived volatiles
in the crust above a flat-slab subduction setting using the isotope geochemistry
of thermal springs in Peru. This proposal builds on the prior results that
identified up to 25 percent of mantle-derived helium in Cordillera Blanca hot
springs with a geochemical sampling transect from the Cordillera Blanca (~9°
South), southward including the Cordillera Huayhuash, a proposed 'slab-tear',
the Nazca ridge, and the transition to steep subduction beneath the Altiplano
plateau (~15° South). These data test the primary hypothesis that mantle helium
in fluids above the Peruvian flat slab segment are geochemical manifestations of
slab foundering north of the Nazca Ridge and ongoing slab dehydration and fluid
transfer to the overriding lithosphere. A secondary goal targets the role of
fault/shear zones in transferring fluids to the surface by comparing spring
geochemistry and the paleofluid geochemistry preserved in fault rocks in the
Cordillera Blanca versus the Cordillera Huayhuash. Multiple analytical tools
will be used to address these objectives, including thermal spring water and gas
chemistry, helium isotope ratios (3Helium/4Helium), 129Iodine, stable isotope
analysis of fluids (carbon, nitrogen, chlorine, oxygen, and hydrogen) and fault
rocks (hydrogen isotope ratios of micas), and fluid inclusion analysis of fault
rocks. This project addresses the data gap on the nature of fluids in a flat-
slab subduction setting, potentially identifying segments of the Peruvian trench
that have subducted sediments, and providing a surface geochemical test for a
proposed slab tear north of the Nazca ridge identified by geophysical
investigations. Outcomes of this project may also serve as a modern analog for
the role of fluids in ancient flat-slab subduction systems such as the Farallon
slab under western North America.