* 1623241
* Synthesis and Directed Assembly of Bio-Hybrid Materials with Membrane-Protein-Mediated Transport Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Hongjun Liang, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 398,321.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to Colorado School of Mines aims to overcome
the materials challenge on harnessing membrane protein (MP) functions in
engineered systems. MPs represent a family of biologically-derived and bio-
renewable high-performance nanomaterials that are largely unexplored. These
proteins are the "gate-keepers" of cells, and are involved in critical life
processes, such as energy conversion, matter transport and information
processing. These same MP-mediated functions are also highly coveted
nanoengineering feats in synthetic systems. Exploiting MPs for nanoengineering
may help understand, predict, and ultimately control recognition and transport
at the nanoscale, but is greatly impeded by the fluidic and labile nature of
biomembranes. This study bridges the gap between biotic and abiotic systems by
developing chemically versatile synthetic membranes to support MP functions. The
successful outcome of this study will help unleash the full potential of MPs to
create novel nanotechnologies ranging from solar conversion to high throughput
diagnostics. With respect to broad impact on education, this project builds a
multi-tiered education program on renewable materials. The objective of this
program is to bring societal awareness on sustainability, and motivate
undergraduate and K-12 students to pursue career paths on bio-renewable
materials. A focused outreach component, "Summer Experience @ Mines", targets
minority students at a local high school by hosting their first exposure to
engineering studies and college life, and develop curriculum materials for their
Biotechnology class. A broader outreach component includes training K-12 science
teachers and dissemination of the curriculum materials to local and nearby
school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to develop bio-hybrid materials with
membrane-protein-mediated transport performance. Membrane proteins (MPs) are
biologically-derived and bio-renewable high-performance nanomaterials. Despite
numerous proof-of-concept demonstrations of MPs' great potential in engineered
systems, little is known on how to design synthetic MP-supporting membranes that
balance a dichotomy between fluidity and stability, and how to direct
spontaneous MP reconstitution into these robust membranes to form 2-dimensional
(2-D) or 3-D proteomembrane arrays. Using proteorhodopsin, a light-driven proton
pump as a model, this study will elucidate: (1) the directed assembly principles
to reconstitute proteorhodopsin into hierarchically organized proteomembrane
arrays; and (2) the roles of synthetic membranes in shaping proteorhodopsin
function. Since proteorhodopsin has a common seven transmembrane (7 TM)
architecture of G protein-coupled receptors, a large family of MPs that regulate
energy conversion, matter transport and biosensing. The guiding concepts learnt
from this study have the potential to benefit a broad range of MP-based
nanotechnologies. This multidisciplinary study provides ample opportunities to
train students at the interdisciplinary area of materials engineering, synthetic
chemistry, biophysics, and protein engineering. With this award, this research
group will design a multi-tiered soft matter education program entitled
"Renewable Materials for Sustainable Future". This program aims to: (1) improve
educational components on soft matter by course development; (2) support
undergraduate students from the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program, the
Society of Women Engineering, and International Exchange Students Program to
have "hands-on" research experience; and (3) build regular and systematic
outreach activities to K-12 students in local and nearby school districts.