* 1623201
* Targeted Infusion Project: Security Pedagogy Across the Curriculum: A Model to Integrate Cybersecurity into the Social Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Cheryl Hinds, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 479,818.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Norfolk State University seeks to infuse cybersecurity
within the social science undergraduate curriculum through experiential
learning. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and grounded in a
theoretical framework, and a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation
is part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project
will be developing, implementing and assessing a set of laboratory and lecture
modules which will integrate cybersecurity into sociology and criminal justice
courses. The project has the specific objectives to: integrate cybersecurity
into existing undergraduate sociology and criminal justice courses; host
workshops to train social science faculty to teach cybersecurity content;
replicate the modules beyond sociology and criminal justice programs; and create
a new socio-cybersecurity course. The project will provide increased learning
opportunities for an academically diverse population of undergraduate students
in cybersecurity as these student do not usually pursue cybersecurity courses.
The project has a strong collaboration with the Department of Computer Science.