* 1623299
* EDU: Collaborative: HACE Lab: An Online Hardware Security Attack and Countermeasure Evaluation Lab
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Fareena Saqib, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This project addresses the need to train students, researchers, and
practitioners on diverse hardware security and trust issues as well as emergent
solutions. The primary goal is establishing a set of hardware security
courseware and enabling adoption of these courseware through the development of
an online Hardware Attack and Countermeasure Evaluation (HACE) Lab. The lab will
be amenable for remote access and hence will help instructors adopt a curriculum
aimed at training students with skills in various aspects of hardware security
and trust including Trojan attacks, supply chain issues, side channel attacks,
reverse engineering, piracy, and trustable design solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HACE laboratory platform is expected to enhance
existing cybersecurity curricula for both undergraduate and graduate students by
including key hardware security topics. It will facilitate adoption and
distribution of practical hardware security training modules with an easy-to-use
interface that gives users unified access to experimental platforms, software
tools for security analysis, metrics, and benchmarks. Students will be able to
remotely access the specialized hardware, which are often expensive to acquire
or require special training to install/use, to investigate various hardware-
based attacks and countermeasures and to get practical understanding on these
topics. The project can significantly impact the cybersecurity education through
well-designed hardware security training modules and experiment platforms to
universities and community colleges nationwide that will vastly increase the
pool of well-trained hardware security professionals. The results of the project
assessment and student learning outcomes will be shared with the educational
community through the HACE website and the Trust-Hub web portal.