* 1623946
* NSF Workshop: Frontiers in Polymer Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2018
* USD 183,014.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project "NSF Workshop: Frontiers
in Polymer Science and Engineering" will examine outstanding new opportunities
for research and education at the forefront of the field of polymer science and
polymeric materials. This class of materials plays a central role in innumerable
items of commerce that directly affect the US economy, the daily lives, and the
health and welfare of our entire population. The workshop will draw together
approximately 70 scientists, engineers, and educators from around the nation,
working in universities, companies, and national laboratories, and representing
a broad diversity of areas of expertise. A central goal is to identify the most
promising opportunities and critical areas for future investment in the research
necessary to sustain national leadership in the science and technology that
underpins this vital and multidisciplinary field. Workshop participants,
representing a broadly diverse group of researchers and educators from around
the nation, will collectively shape a vision for future research and education
that will be captured in a comprehensive report, to be widely disseminated to
the broader community and to policy makers and administrators across the
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will address a comprehensive set of
topics aimed at identifying exciting and promising future opportunities across
the interdisciplinary field of polymer science and engineering. It will be a
decadal-type study across the horizon of the field, following up on its
predecessor, the 2007 NSF Workshop on Interdisciplinary Globally-Leading Polymer
Science and Engineering. Latest developments associated with advancing state-of-
the-art experimental, theoretical, and computational methods will be examined
with the goal of identifying the most important challenges, opportunities, and
emerging areas associated with polymer design and synthesis, molecular and
structural characterization, a wide range of material properties, processing,
and the impact of macromolecules on technology and society, including on related
fields that span other areas of science and technology. The two-day workshop
will begin with a set of plenary lectures designed to help shape detailed
discussions in subsequent break-out sessions, each involving a group drawn from
a diverse spectrum of participants. Collective inputs from each breakout
session, along with accompanying assessments of educational and related
opportunities, will be formed into a draft executive summary by the organizing
committee immediately following the workshop. A comprehensive report will be
prepared by the organizing committee detailing the findings and conclusions of
the workshop. This report will be widely disseminated and posted on a public
website. A summary of the report, highlighting the most important findings, will
be submitted for publication in a leading polymer journal.