* 1623543
* Making in The Colonias: Motivating STEM Participation through a Making as Micro-Manufacturing Model
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sharon Lynn Chu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 284,985.00

As part of an overall strategy to enhance learning within maker contexts in
formal and informal environments, the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) and Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
programs partnered to support innovative models in Making poised to catalyze new
approaches in STEM learning and innovation. Employing a novel design and
development approach, this Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
will test the feasibility of integrating Making concepts with real world micro-
manufacturing engineering principles within the context of intense, multi-year
team apprenticeship experiences for high school students. The apprenticeship
model is particularly novel, as current Making research and experiences
predominately take place in afterschool and summer programs for up to 25 youth.
The proposed apprenticeships will require a two year commitment by a small
cohort of Texas high school students, which will provide an opportunity to
examine the feasibility and impact of the effort longitudinally. The cohort will
learn to think critically, solve problems, and work together as a Making
Production Team (MPT) in a customized makerspace in their high school,
constructing engineering-based science kits for implementation in a local
elementary school. Not only will the students enhance their content knowledge
while developing design and development skills but the students will also
receive stipends which will address two very practical needs for the targeted
high need population - employment and workforce development. Few, if any,
efforts currently serve the targeted population through the contextualization of
Making within a supply chain management and micro-manufacturing framework that
extends the Making experience by integrating the student designed products into
elementary classrooms. As such, this project will contribute to essentially
unexplored areas of Making research and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six
high school students from high poverty, underserved Texas communities along the
Texas-Mexico border (colonias) will be selected for the Making Production Team
(MPT). In Years 1 and 2, the students will meet regularly during the academic
school year and over the summer with Texas A &amp; M University undergraduates,
graduate students, and the project team to learn key aspects of Making and
manufacturing (i.e., ideation, prototyping, design, acquisition, personnel, and
production) through hands-on making activities and direct instruction.
Concurrently, a research study will be conducted to explore: (a) the
actualization of the model in an underserved community, (b) the effectiveness of
problem-based learning to train students in the model, and (c) STEM knowledge
and self-concept. Data will be collected from multiple sources. An adapted
version of the Academic Self-Description Questionnaire will be administered to
the students to assess their STEM technical knowledge and skills as well as
their self-concept in relation to STEM domains. Remote and in person interviews
will be conducted with the students to track the evolution of the primary
dependent variables, STEM learning and self-concept, over time. Program
facilitators and partners will be interviewed to examine the feasibility of the
making experience within the given context and for the targeted students.
Finally, the students' diary reflections, products, and video recordings of
their work sessions will also be examined. Time-series quantitative tests and
in-depth qualitative methods will be used to analyze the data.