* 1623912
* Dynamics of Extreme Precipitation in the Northeast United States in Observations and Models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Mathew Barlow, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 453,807.00

Extreme precipitation and its related impacts, especially flooding, result in
significant loss of life, property and infrastructure damage, transportation
disruption, and storm water pollution, and have economic costs of more than $8
billion per year for the US. This project will undertake fundamental research
into understanding the causes of extreme precipitation in the Northeast US. This
is the most economically developed and densely populated region of the country.
Improved model representation of these processes is a crucial step in the
overall goal of improving forecasts and projections of these high-cost events,
thereby mitigating their impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes that cause
extreme precipitation over daily to weekly periods in the Northeast US will be
identified. The ability of current climate models to reproduce these processes
will be examined. The two motivating questions are: What types of storms cause
extreme precipitation in the Northeast? Do current models correctly reproduce
these storms types and their relationship to extreme precipitation? Using
observational data, storm types associated with extreme precipitation will be
identified by applying advanced analytic techniques. Characteristic patterns in
the jet stream and other storm features that occur in association with extreme
precipitation will be identified. This analysis will then be undertaken on the
climate model output to identify the storm types that are produced in the models
and compare the modeled types to the observed types. The differences will be
highlighted for use in model development and for providing context for model
forecasts and projections. The physical processes by which the extreme
precipitation are generated within each storm type will also be investigated.
The relative strength of different factors that are known to influence
precipitation, such as the amount of moisture in the lower atmosphere, will be
examined within each storm type. After the key factors are identified, their
influence will then be further tested in a regional, high resolution model by
changing the strength of individual factors and examining how the modeled
precipitation changes in response.