* 1623189
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Computer Science Professionals Hatchery (CSP Hatchery)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Dianxiang Xu, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Computer Science Professionals Hatchery seeks to transform undergraduate
education by replicating the best elements of a software company environment,
layering in moral, ethical, and social threads with entrepreneurship and
professional skills, to produce graduates who are not only technically adept and
effective team members, but also empowered as agents of positive cultural change
in their workplaces. Two critical curriculum features of the Computer Science
Professionals Hatchery are: (1) VERTICAL INTEGRATION. Instead of being siloed,
students at all grade levels will work with and learn from each other on
industry sponsored projects. By so doing, the Hatchery will unite faculty and
industry professionals to mentor student teams through exciting and relevant
projects, fostering a strong sense of community amongst students, faculty, and
industry. (2) Short, narrowly focused HATCHERY UNITS will complement regular
course work by presenting aspects of specific, foundational concepts or skills--
such as communication, software engineering collaboration tools or cybersecurity
--that cut across the curriculum, using a unique approach that overlays nimble
and lean Hatchery Units with regular courses. The Hatchery Units will also serve
as focal points for senior-level capstone teams to work with, mentor, and direct
teams at other grade levels. The Hatchery thus combines the flexible, skills-
based approach found in the best of the code schools with the depth and rigor of
knowledge best acquired in an academic setting, in a multi-team learning
environment that replicates the professional company
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Hatchery structure will enable
exploring methods for identifying and addressing moral and ethical issues
supporting professional work in computer science. It will research and develop
approaches for incorporating analytic philosophical principles of social justice
into undergraduate computer science curricula in order to bind moral and ethical
responsibilities to social justice, along with technical expertise,
revolutionizing undergraduate computer science education and producing graduates
who are better prepared for industry as members of agile and diverse development
teams. In addition, this project will determine effective practices for
affecting positive changes in department teaching culture, and serve as a model
for other Boise State departments and for departments at other institutions. The
proposed project is capitalizing on three factors that can apply in varying
levels to other departments as well. (1) DEEP PIPELINE. The Boise State CS
department has developed relationships throughout the learning pipeline from
K-12 to industry. Therefore, combining ongoing K-12 projects with work described
in this proposal will enable shaping a software development culture from an
early age and provide a model of effective transformation of a local software
ecosystem. (2) CULTURAL TRANSITION. In response to industry demand for talent
and unprecedented enrollment growth, over the past four years the CS department
has hired 21 full-time faculty and lecturers; this makes for an ideal
environment to develop methods for establishing desired new cultural norms. (3)
PHYSICAL TRANSITION. The CS department is moving to a new building co-located
with a large number of software companies, which presents a unique opportunity
to design the physical characteristics of the learning environment to maximize
industry and student interaction, promote diversity, and encourage teamwork.