* 1623288
* Acquisition of a VisCube C4-WU CAVE Immersive 3D Display Upgrade to Advance Undergraduate Teaching and Research in Spatial Visualization at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jeffrey Will, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 265,496.00

Today, flexible electronic circuits and printable nanomaterials based
chemical/biological (CB) sensors require versatile board printing systems to
support current and future initiatives in additive manufacturing and material
development. In addition to low cost, flexible electronics offers light-
weighted, thin-film electronics circuits capable of adhering on flexible and
conformal surfaces. Such technology is expected to bring revolutionary changes
to the current landscape of electronics, including thin-film cell phones,
window-stickable thin-film TV, and functional clothes or removal skin stackers
with various sensing, memory and communication
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is acquiring a versatile Optomec
Aerosol Jet 300 (AJ 300) printing system for flexible electronic circuits and
printable nanomaterials based chemical/biological (CB) sensors. The requested
state-of-the-art system is expected to provide new capabilities to promote
interdisciplinary research and education. The instrumentation, an additive,
high-resolution multi-layer printing system capable of uniformly delivering
fluid and nano-materials on almost any planar substrate or 3D surface with
precise multi-layer alignment accuracy, enables the researchers to perform
systematic research on fundamental issues of flexible electronics, such as
carrier (electrons and holes) transport on flexible surfaces, and circuit
performance variation under bending and strain due to changes in the band
structure, Fermi-level, carrier mobility, and threshold voltage. The instrument
acquired also provides a research platform for various flexible electronics and
optoelectronics devices such as conformal antenna, highly ordered self-
assembling polymer/clay nanocomposite, Terahertz radiation and detection, and
additive manufacturing. Furthermore, the instrumentation supports research in
scaling and integration of direct printing and investigate the couplings between
the deposition of the droplets, formation of the composite structure, and device
performance. The instrument can also serve in K-12 outreach programs in forms of
lab tours with live printed flexible electronics and printing system
demonstrations.