* 1623702
* EXP: Exploratory Study on the Adaptive Online Course and its Implication on Synergetic Competency
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Larry Johnson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 566,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program
funds&lt;br/&gt;efforts that support envisioning the future of learning
technologies&lt;br/&gt;and advance what we know about how people learn in
technology-rich&lt;br/&gt;environments. Cyberlearning Exploration (EXP) Projects
explore the&lt;br/&gt;viability of new kinds of learning technologies by
designing and&lt;br/&gt;building new kinds of learning technologies and studying
their&lt;br/&gt;possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using
them&lt;br/&gt;effectively. Most online courseware helps teach facts and
concepts,&lt;br/&gt;while a different type of online learning software called
intelligent&lt;br/&gt;tutoring systems can effectively teach skills in a way
that is&lt;br/&gt;tailored to each learner. Unfortunately, these two tools are
rarely&lt;br/&gt;integrated because of the expense and specialized expertise
required&lt;br/&gt;to create intelligent tutors. This project will close this
gap by&lt;br/&gt;building and testing a new scalable technology that will
allow&lt;br/&gt;teachers without years of specialized training to author
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;online courses that combine the best of both these
approaches. This&lt;br/&gt;scalable cyberlearning platform will provide students
with effective&lt;br/&gt;online instruction, provide learning engineers with an
efficient&lt;br/&gt;authoring environment to build adaptive online courses, and
provide&lt;br/&gt;researchers with a sharable corpus of big learning data that
they can&lt;br/&gt;use to develop and refine theories of how students learn in
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;online-course learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a web-browser-based
authoring environment that&lt;br/&gt;supports the creation cognitive tutors and
their seamless integration&lt;br/&gt;into online courses and will measure how
well the resulting adaptive&lt;br/&gt;online courses promote facets of student
learning such as synergetic&lt;br/&gt;competency and engagement. The central
hypotheses are: (1) that the&lt;br/&gt;SimStudent technology -- a machine-
learning agent that learns&lt;br/&gt;cognitive skills from demonstration -- can
be a practical authoring&lt;br/&gt;tool for cognitive tutors that can be easily
embedded into online&lt;br/&gt;courses; (2) that this technology can represent a
tight connection&lt;br/&gt;between learners' procedural competency and
conceptual competency by&lt;br/&gt;combining knowledge-tracing (a standard
method used by existing&lt;br/&gt;cognitive tutors) and text-mining (data-mining
latent skills from&lt;br/&gt;traditional online course instructions) into an
innovative&lt;br/&gt;student-modeling technique; and (3) that adaptive online
courses&lt;br/&gt;created with this technique can produce robust student
learning by&lt;br/&gt;promoting connections between their procedural and
conceptual&lt;br/&gt;understanding (synergetic competency). As part of the
overall research&lt;br/&gt;program, the project will: (a) develop a genetic
application&lt;br/&gt;programming interface (API) for an existing web-based
authoring&lt;br/&gt;technology to build cognitive tutors for online course
integration;&lt;br/&gt;(b) develop an adaptive instructional technology as a
generic control&lt;br/&gt;mechanism for adaptive online courses; (c) build new
adaptive online&lt;br/&gt;courses on Open edX and also convert an existing OLI
course into an&lt;br/&gt;adaptive online course; (d) conduct in-vivo studies
using the adaptive&lt;br/&gt;online courses to test their effectiveness; (e)
test the efficacy of&lt;br/&gt;the proposed adaptive online courses in
supporting students to achieve&lt;br/&gt;the aforementioned synergetic
competency. Successful completion of the&lt;br/&gt;project will yield the
following expected outcomes: (i) a scalable&lt;br/&gt;online course architecture
with efficient authoring tools for building&lt;br/&gt;cognitive tutors and
integrating them into online courses in order to&lt;br/&gt;make those courses
adaptive; (ii) a practical technique to identify&lt;br/&gt;relationships between
procedural competency and conceptual competency;&lt;br/&gt;and (iii) an expanded
theory of how students learn with the adaptive&lt;br/&gt;online course, and in
particular of how students achieve robust&lt;br/&gt;learning with synergetic
competency.