* 1623969
* Learning to See, Seeing to Learn: A Sociotechnical System Supporting Taxonomic Identification Activities in Volunteer-Based Water Quality Biomonitoring
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2022
* Marti Louw, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,889,574.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This project will develop and study a cyber-
enhanced informal learning environment to improve observational practices and
classification skills among citizen scientists. The project will focus on the
taxonomic identification skills needed by volunteers to provide high-quality
data for water quality monitoring of local streams, lakes, estuaries, wetlands,
and ground water resources. To make the task of identifying freshwater insects
easier and more engaging, the project will develop an innovative educational
resource, the Macroinvertebrate Identification Training Environment, that will
use zoomable high-resolution images, interactive media, and annotations of
diagnostic features to improve perceptual skills. The goal is to increase the
confidence and accuracy of volunteers engaged in identification tasks, while
also increasing the reliability and quality of the data they are generating for
purposes of scientific research and conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary design research and
development project will use networked gigapixel image technology to create a
visual environment where users can move seamlessly from full panoramic views of
macroinvertebrates to extreme close-ups, with embedded text, images, graphics,
audio, and video at various locations and zoom levels. This system will be
developed in concert with a cognitive apprenticeship training model designed
through a series of design studies. The design studies will be conducted over a
two-year period and will include examination of the distinguishing features of
various biomonitoring programs, reviews of existing training materials and
strategies, expert performance analysis of professional entomologists, and
development of user interface features. Project developers will collaborate with
five regional volunteer biomonitoring organizations to engage a diverse set of
volunteers in the design process, including rural populations, older adults,
urban youth, and the trainers who support them. The project work will consist of
four integrated strands of activity: design-based learning research, creation of
an entomological teaching collection, cyberplatform development, and the
external evaluation of the training system. The resulting Macroinvertebrate
Identification Training Environment will be evaluated in terms of its impacts on
volunteer accuracy, confidence, and engagement in taxonomic classification
activities related to macroinvertebrates. The impacts of the learning system on
trainers and volunteer biomonitoring organizations will also be examined.