* 1623253
* EDU: Automated Platform for Cyber Security Learning and Experimentation (AutoCUE)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Vassil Roussev, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,977.00

One of the main obstacles in providing extensive hands-on experience in
cybersecurity classes is the substantial amount of manual work involved in
creating and grading the exercise. Combined with the frequent need to update the
exercises, this obstacle effectively limits that amount of hands-on work that
gets incorporated into cybersecurity education. This project seeks to eliminate
such barriers, and to greatly improve the efficiency of the educational process
by automating the most time-consuming tasks.

This project makes two main contributions to cybersecurity education: the
development of a specification-driven, dynamic environment for implementing
realistic cyber defense and forensic analysis exercises; and the advanced
support for class management and automated evaluation. The platform, AutoCUE,
provides a high-level specification language, and an execution runtime that
enable instructors to easily and efficiently run realistic scenarios that result
in customized environments; based on the same methods, the system also be used
to automatically create of realistic experimental data sets. The infrastructure
provides an automated class management component, which consists of: a)
deployment automation module, which guarantees consistent student lab
environment, and central control by the instructor; b) scenario personalization
module, which can generate customized exercises for each student (for evaluation
purposes); and c) automated grading module, which combines ideas from capture-
the-flag competitions and environment sensors to track student progress and
automate the grading process. The project also provides ready-to-use seed
content for two classes: digital forensics and network penetration testing.