* 1623452
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: MAKER: Studying the Role of Failure in Design and Making
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Adam Maltese, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 184,324.00

While the term 'failure' brings to mind negative associations, there is a
current focus on failure as a driver of innovation and development in many
professional fields. It is also emerging from prior research that for STEM
professionals and educators, failure plays an important role in designing and
making to increase learning, persistence and other noncognitive skills such as
self-efficacy and independence. By investigating how youth and educators attend
to moments of failure, how they interpret what this means, and how they respond,
we will be better able to understand the dynamics of each part of the
experience. The research team will be working with youth from urban, suburban
and rural settings, students from Title I schools or who qualify for
free/reduced-price lunches, those from racial and ethnic minority groups, as
well as students who are learning English as a second language. These youth are
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM and in making, and research
indicates they are more likely to experience negative outcomes when they
experience failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
centers on establishing a baseline understanding of how failure in making is
triggered and experienced by youth, what role educators play in the process, and
what can be done to increase persistence and learning, rather than failure being
an end-state. The research team will investigate these issues through the use of
qualitative and quantitative research methods. In particular, the team will
design and evaluate the effectiveness of interventions on increasing the
abilities of youth and educators in noticing and responding to failures and
increasing positive (e.g., resilience) outcomes. Research sites are selected
because they will allow collection of data on youth from a wide range of
backgrounds. The research team will also work to test and revise their
hypothesized model of the influence of factors on persistence through failures
in making. This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL)
portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for Computer
&amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR) and Engineering (ENG).