* 1623690
* EXP: Bridging Learning in Urban Extended Spaces (BLUES) 2.0
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Rogers Hall, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects design and build new kinds of learning technologies
in order to explore their viability, to understand the challenges to using them
effectively, and to study their potential for fostering learning. This EXP
project will continue collaborations (begun under an EAGER award) among learning
sciences researchers, exhibit designers, and curators in library and museum
organizations with extensive cultural heritage collections, and community
organizations serving the regional area of Nashville. The goal is to develop and
study mobile digital technologies that bridge public urban spaces and curated
museum / library collections in order to create new types of learning
activities. These technologies will enable youth and other city residents (or
visiting tourists) to Nashville to create and share digital spatial story lines
(DSSLs). DSSLs use personal narratives to map the archival media from the
aforementioned curated collections onto city neighborhoods at a walking or
biking scale. DSSLs are narrative index and media delivery structures that make
vibrant aspects of past and present cultural heritage (e.g., American Roots
Music and Civil Rights activism) available at a personal, embodied
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As active participation in emerging technologies of
this sort becomes an increasingly important means of civic engagement, a
critical challenge for democratic societies will be to develop new forms of
learning and teaching through which citizens, and especially youth, become
fluent with them. This research will further develop theories of the learning
processes through which people make places for future activity (e.g., creating
tours of historic places, gathering and geocoding data on the ground to
influence neighborhood development). The project will further develop archival
material as digital sandboxes for storytelling at a regional scale in the Music
City, and it will identify and develop concepts in data curation, digital
mapping, and spatial analysis for explicit use in making and sharing DSSLs. and
design and study how authoring DSSLs can be used to learn about public history,
data curation, and digital mapping and analysis. The project will also explore
how DSSLs can be leveraged to help users learn not only about public history but
also about the concepts and technologies (data curation; digital mapping and
analysis) that under-gird the DSSLs themselves. The focus on mobile technologies
and digital mapping will advance the understanding of human/computer/environment
interactions.