* 1623758
* The Role Of Markets In The Development Of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Leah Minc, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 179,785.00

Dr. Leah Minc, of Oregon State University, and an international team of
collaborators will explore the origins of market-place exchange and the specific
political and social conditions fostering market systems in ancient economies.
Although markets are a fundamental part of modern economy, scholars question
whether similar commercial exchange systems developed in ancient societies and
debate which factors stimulated their emergence and growth in non-western
economic traditions. From the perspective of modern microeconomic theory, some
researchers have argued that commercial exchange and a complex division of labor
evolved naturally in complex societies as an efficient solution to provisioning
large populations with essential goods, once political stability ensured freedom
of movement and rule of law. Other scholars, in contrast, dispute the
applicability of the modern mind-set (including assumptions of economic
rationality, competition, and profit motive) to non-western or pre-industrial
societies. For example, some historians question whether in highly stratified
societies, where control over the means of production (land and labor) was
firmly held by the ruling class, production and exchange built on profit
incentives could reasonably develop among the peasantry, or whether in these
cases alternative forms of exchange (such as extended family networks) might
provide a means for acquiring needed commodities. Archaeology is well poised to
evaluate the universality of micro-economic assumptions, by examining the
evidence for market exchange in the distant past, as well as the political and
social context for its development and the possible persistence of alternative
forms of exchange that supplied communities with necessary materials.

This collaborative project will examine a pristine case of market system
development by using nuclear science and geochemical techniques to trace
exchanges of basic, utilitarian goods. The project will focus on the Valley of
Oaxaca, Mexico, home to one of the best documented early state societies in the
New World, and will explore how key political events affected regional economic
interaction and integration through time. Drawing on excavated collections of
domestic pottery from communities throughout the valley, the research team will
use robust methods of trace-element analysis (instrumental neutron activation
analysis) to establish where ceramic vessels were manufactured, map their
movement from producer to consumer, and assess the spatial scale, organization,
and intensity of intra-valley exchange across key periods of state emergence and
consolidation (from ca. 700 BC through 550 AD). The observed distribution
patterns will provide a sound foundation from which to re-assess specific models
of market system evolution, as well as a means for future studies to address how
these economic changes affected households' production, consumption, and
exchange decisions. Further, the intersection of archaeology and nuclear science
will create opportunities for STEM education and professional training for
students in the social sciences; at the same time, due to its "human appeal,"
archaeometric research can build support for nuclear science, engaging public
interest and justifying infrastructure and lab equipment upgrades.