* 1623653
* City and County Cross Jurisdiction Cybersecurity Collaboration Capacity Building
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jean Pierre Auffret, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,935.00

While the nation's cities and counties are often closest to residents in
providing citizen services, public safety and critical infrastructure such as
public health and transport, many have limited staffing, expertise and
cybersecurity budgets. Not only are the residents and cities and counties
themselves potentially at risk, public safety, public health and critical
infrastructure systems are part of larger connected state and national systems.
For example, counties own 45% of the U.S. road miles, 40% of the bridges and
operate of 30% of public airports and 1,550 health departments. City and county
cybersecurity is an important yet under-focused aspect of our national
cybersecurity efforts. Further, current cybersecurity education programs are not
addressing some of the special but critical needs facing local governments. This
project is contributing to addressing the local government cybersecurity
challenges by developing and providing local government specific cybersecurity
education and training modules that can augment existing cybersecurity curricula
or be provided on a standalone basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes
regional workshops for local government executives to address: (1) How can
cybersecurity for local governments, especially those with limited budgets and
cybersecurity expertise, most effectively be addressed?; and (2) What are the
most effective strategies, models and approaches for cybersecurity cross
jurisdictional sharing for local governments? Lastly, the project is developing:
(1) a Local Government Cybersecurity Toolkit covering cybersecurity leadership
and governance issues relevant for local government; and (2) a Local Government
Cross Jurisdiction Capacity Sharing Roadmap providing local governments with
guidance for developing and undertaking cybersecurity cross jurisdiction
collaborations.