* 1623781
* I-Corps Teams: AskMe Now Enabling live affordable video customer support over off the shelf technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Bienvenido Velez-Rivera, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The significance of this I-Corps technology lies in its potential to
dramatically facilitate and thus multiply the deployment of direct 2-way
video/audio communication between a single control center and several
geographically dispersed remote locations to fulfill a wide variety of business
needs. This technology facilitates real time live video customer support as well
as customer engagement; something that customers seek as shown by the increased
use of chat or live video tools at company websites. This project enables more
organizations to leverage the benefits of live video conversations to
effectively support their clients and expand their markets by better serving
their customers and becoming more competitive in the global markets. To
facilitate this proactive detection of potential customers the technology will
provide continuous video feeds from all the remote locations to the control
center. In situations where expert advice is scarce and/or an expensive
resource, this technology could dramatically increase the utilization,
availability and accessibility of this resource at a cost significantly lower
than that of deploying personnel to every location.

This I-Corps team believes that the proposed product will be a novel
subscription-based web technology enabling organizations to establish and manage
interactive real-time two-way video/audio conversations using off-the-shelf
portable devices over Internet access. This team further believes that the
product could provide a simple web-based solution enabling a myriad of
applications such as; Interactive Marketing, Security Concierges, Mall
Directories and Live Customer Support among many others. The team intends to use
the I-Corps funds to participate in related industry conferences and to conduct
customer interviews in different sectors of the USA market. The ultimate goal of
the team is to validate, at a national level: the need and acceptance of the
proposed technology, that customers are willing to use video solutions as a
means for a customer solution, and that retail stores in the USA have a need for
a customer service solution.