* 1623417
* CAREER: Modeling and Optimization of Next Generation Feedstock Development for Chemical Process Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Selen Cremaschi, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 01/31/2017
* USD 96,308.00

1055974&lt;br/&gt;Cremaschi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass has great potential for weaning the chemical
process industries (CPI) from fossil based&lt;br/&gt;feedstocks. As a renewable
and locally available resource, the use of biomass as a CPI feedstock will have
a synergistic effect on the U.S. economy by supporting the agricultural sector
and promoting future innovation and growth of the CPI. The switch from current
fossil fuel based CPI to a future CPI that utilizes biomass feedstock will
require substantial amounts of research &amp; development (R&amp;D) and capital
investments for technology development both by the CPI and the government. There
is opportunity for investigating how these investments will impact the evolution
of the biomass feedstock system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to develop novel
models and computational methods that are capable of predicting the impact of
R&amp;D and capital investment decisions (how much to invest and in which
technology and when) on the evolution of biomass conversion technologies for CPI
feedstock development. Two characteristics of this system, uncertain decision-
dependent endogenous technology evolutions and game theoretic issues, limit the
applicability of existing representations and methods. Drawing analogies to the
R&amp;D pipeline management and graph theory, the PI proposes two frameworks to
analyze this problem. First, the PI will investigate the effectiveness of these
frameworks for the investment problem with respect to four criteria: easy
scalability, universality, ability to represent the uncertain evolution paths of
different technologies, and amenability to community upkeep and expansion. The
PI will next develop simulation-based optimization approaches to the investment
problem assuming perfect information sharing among the government and CPI
agents. Lastly, the PI will develop an agent-based framework embedding
simulation-based optimization approach as decision models in the agent-based
framework and investigate the impact of game-theoretic issues on the investment
decisions when complete information is not available to any party. This research
to study the biomass-to commodity chemicals investment decision problem should
lead to advances in representation of technological developments and evolution
problems, large-scale solution capability of stochastic optimization problems
with exogenous and endogenous uncertainties, and fundamental understanding of
how game theoretic issues impact new technology development and evolution,
particularly for the biomass feedstock system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the education plan are to
integrate research and education and contribute to the diversity of the
engineering workforce and scientific community by training students in systems-
level thinking. These goals will be achieved by:&lt;br/&gt;1. Integrating
research themes and projects that require and promote systems-level thinking and
interdisciplinary work into traditional engineering undergraduate curriculum
courses,&lt;br/&gt;2. Expanding the undergraduate/graduate-level course, Risk
Management and Optimization (developed by the PI) and integrating projects from
this research into the course,&lt;br/&gt;3. Engaging and mentoring at least two
undergraduate students per year in this research project utilizing two
successful unique campus wide capstone programs that promote student
participation in original research programs, and&lt;br/&gt;4. Recruiting and
supervising at least two full time graduate students who will pursue advanced
degrees in chemical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in biomass
feedstock conversion could lead to advances ranging from hybrid and seed
engineering, to fertilizer and other agricultural techniques, to classical
chemical catalysis. Because of the importance to U.S. national and economic
security and the range of options available for evolving a complex biomass
feedstock system, this work has potential for scientific, technical and societal
impact. In addition to the dissemination of the results via scientific
publications and at national and international meetings, the developed models
will be made available for the use of the community through the World Wide Web.