* 1623357
* Targeted Infusion Proposal: Virginia Union University Undergraduate Research Training Program in the Biological Sciences
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Vernon Ruffin, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 379,787.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Virginia Union University
(VUU) seeks to develop and implement course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) in the biology education curriculum, provide access to
scientific research experiences for undergraduate students and increase the
research capacity of faculty in the biological sciences. The proposed program is
a strategy for increasing the capacity of VUU to produce more STEM graduates who
are competitive for graduate school and STEM careers. It is anticipated that
this program will enhance the quality of STEM education at VUU, leading to the
formation of a new research-intensive academic curriculum.

The goals of the project are to increase the number of competitive VUU biology
graduates entering STEM graduate programs and/or workforce, as well as the
faculty capacity for conducting STEM research at a small, liberal arts HBCU.
These goals will be accomplished through the following specific objectives: (1)
increase biology student exposure and competency in laboratory-based
technological advances that are most relevant to graduate training and/or the
scientific workforce; (2) increase student engagement in formal basic science
training and independent research experiences; and (3) enhance faculty
discipline-specific expertise and increase the capacity to conduct scientific
research. A 3-pronged approach will be used to fulfill these objectives: 1)
develop and implement course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) in
the biology education curriculum; 2) implement a set of extracurricular
activities targeting key aspects of faculty and student research development
needs; and 3) implement an Undergraduate Research Certificate Program in the
biological sciences.