* 1623810
* Collaborative Research: Vulnerability of carbon in buried soils to climate change and landscape disturbance
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Marie-Anne de Graaff, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,156.00

A greater understanding of the amount of carbon stored in soils and the risk of
its accumulation in the atmosphere is fundamental for improving predictions of
future changes in climate so that our society and agriculture can best adapt to
a changing environment. Over geologic time scales, the amount of carbon stored
and released from soils has influenced atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations
and global climate. On shorter time scales, the storage of plant carbon in soils
is estimated to have offset a fraction of carbon emissions from human
activities. To predict the vulnerability of soil carbon to landscape
disturbance, this project aims to identify the processes contributing to the
persistence or loss of ancient carbon from paleosols and quantify how quickly
previously protected carbon can be released to the atmosphere in response to
changing environmental conditions. Paleosols, or buried soils that represent
former landscape surfaces, can store more carbon than expected deep underground
and provide unique opportunities for asking questions relevant for modern and
future projections of interactions among carbon, disturbance and climate. The
proposed research will inform predictions of the response of soil carbon to two
realistic climate change impacts in the U.S. central Great Plains. More frequent
extreme rainfall events can lead to erosion and increase exposure of formerly
buried soils to modern surface conditions. Efforts to extend irrigation in
response to a drying and warming climate could trigger microbial activity in the
paleosol, releasing ancient carbon to the atmosphere. The project will provide
research and career training to three graduate students and at least four
undergraduates and foster new collaborations among a diverse team with expertise
in biogeochemistry, soil science, microbial ecology and geomorphology. The PIs
have a successful record of training students from historically underrepresented
groups in the geosciences and will provide professional development for early-
career researchers. Dissemination of the research will include traditional
venues, such as conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications, as well
as outreach activities to communicate the importance of soils to our climate, in
the form of a lab demonstration for schoolchildren and participation in a
science festival, free and open to the public.

The proposed research will test the potential for deep buried soil organic
matter to become a carbon source in response to changes in climate or land use
that affect the connectivity of buried soils to the atmosphere. The research
aims to understand (1) how soil burial contributes to the persistence of carbon
in the form of soil organic matter and (2) whether exposure to surface
conditions can trigger the decomposition of ancient carbon. The proposed study
site is located in the U.S. Great Plains, where climate-driven loess deposition
during the late Pleistocene and Holocene resulted in sequences of buried soils
in thick loess deposits. The molecular composition, state of oxidation, degree
of microbial processing and potential sources of organic matter in a buried
soil, or paleosol, and in the overlying modern surface soil will be
characterized using a suite of advanced spectroscopic methods and high-
resolution mass spectrometry. Soil physical, chemical and microbiological
properties will be measured to investigate the relative effectiveness of the
mechanisms that contribute to carbon persistence in the paleosol. The
vulnerability of ancient organic matter to changing environmental conditions
will be measured in two ways. First, changes in organic matter age, composition
and bioavailability will be quantified along eroding and depositional field
toposequences, where the paleosol exists at varying degrees of isolation from
the modern landscape surface. Second, laboratory manipulations will measure the
effects of carbon substrates, nitrogen availability, and microbial composition
on ancient organic matter decomposition and mobilization in gaseous and
dissolved forms. This study combines a geomorphic approach drawing from
paleoclimatic reconstructions with advanced geochemical, spectroscopic and
metagenomic techniques to generate new knowledge on environmental controls on
carbon biogeochemistry.

This project is jointly supported by the Ecosystem Science Program in the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Geobiology and Low-Temperature
Geochemistry Program in the Geosciences Directorate.