* 1623454
* RUI:   Three Dimensional Structure of the Nucleon in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Alexey Prokudin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Exploration of the internal structure of the nucleon, the proton or neutron in
the nucleus, is one of the main goals of modern nuclear physics. Our
understanding of the nucleon as an interacting system of yet more fundamental
particles, quarks and gluons, collectively called partons, is based on the
theory of strong interactions, Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD). Partons are both
confined and moving inside of the nucleon. The exploration of the nucleon
structure that incorporates the motion of partons will allow us to gain new
information on the three dimensional (3D) structure of the nucleon. Knowing how
the constituent parts combine together is essential to understanding the
properties of the nucleon that we observe. The PI will work towards an improved
phenomenological description of the 3D structure of the nucleon and will develop
a web interface server based at PSU Berks to make the results available to
researchers and the general public. Undergraduate students will be trained and
supported by this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of the
project are to extract precisely the Transverse Momentum Dependent distribution
and fragmentation functions (TMDs) that describe the 3D nucleon structure, from
the existing experimental data. TMDs are intimately related to the correlations
of parton motion and the spin of the parton and /or the spin of the nucleon and
generate Spin Asymmetries in scattering processes. The project is intended to
unify existing formalisms of the description of the 3D nucleon structure, and
ultimately explore the origin of the Spin Asymmetries in various processes. The
data from past and existing facilities, such as HERMES (DESY), COMPASS (CERN),
and Jefferson Lab, BELLE (KEK), BaBar (SLAC), BESIII (Beijing), RHIC (BNL), LHC
(CERN), will be used in the studies. The results of the project will help with
planning future experiments at Jefferson Lab 12, and a future Electron Ion
Collider. The project will also lead to the extraction of fundamental charges of
the nucleon, in particular, the nucleon's tensor charge, which is important for
searches of Beyond Standard Model (BSM) physics and complements efforts of its
calculation in Lattice QCD.