* 1623248
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing an Honors Curriculum to Enrich the Undergraduate Research Experience in Psychological Sciences
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Michele Lewis, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,881.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Winston-Salem State University (WSSU) seeks to enhance
the quality and experience of underrepresented undergraduate students in the
psychology department with the goal of increasing the number of students
prepared for research careers. The project takes the novel approach of
integrating the psychology curriculum with natural science and infusing it with
cultural neuroscience, an emerging interdisciplinary field. The activities and
strategies are evidence-based. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
objectives to: establish an honors curriculum within the department; enhance the
curricular offerings within the psychology program at WSSU by improving the
biological/cognitive foundation area; and modernize and upgrade the
instructional and research equipment used by students and faculty. The project
is designed to keep students engaged in scientific discovery, promote
interactions between students and faculty, and expose students to current and
emerging technology. Demonstrating and evaluating a pathway for psychology
majors to the field of cognitive science and STEM research preparation could
serve as a model to other programs.