* 1623779
* An Institutional Model for Increasing Student Engagement through Course-embedded Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Judy Awong-Taylor, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,629,820.00

Through the project titled "An Institutional Model for Increasing Student
Engagement through Course-embedded Undergraduate Research Experiences,"
investigators at Georgia Gwinnett College will build upon a pilot project - Four
Year Undergraduate Research and Creative Experience (4YrURCE) - to increase
knowledge about the relationships between research and student outcomes such as
improved learning and increased career interest in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. They will do this by
supplementing traditional faculty-mentored research and classroom instruction
with Course-embedded Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs). Each Course-
embedded Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) will provide a scaffolding of
research skills, creative abilities, and core content knowledge (STEM
competencies). As students progress through multiple CUREs, they will build on
these competencies and gain the ability, confidence, and skills to conduct
independent research and to enter the STEM workforce. Key components of the
project will include a Peer Tutoring Intervention Program (PTIP) in freshman
gateway STEM courses as an integrated component of the 4YrURCE model; a Faculty
Development Institute will provide an opportunity to engage participants in
practicing evidence-based pedagogies, reflecting on the learning outcomes,
considering how all students - especially under-prepared and underrepresented
students - thrive in active learning environments and learn how to build student
metacognitive skills, resilience, and grit; and a research study on the efficacy
of the CUREs model using a systems approach framework. To increase broader
impacts, the project will provide stipends for faculty members at other
institutions to engage in the faculty development activities and mini-grants to
thirteen faculty members to pilot and test CUREs on their
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the project are to build
upon the on-going 4YrURCE pilot project designed to improve STEM learning and
engagement and to conduct a longitudinal study on the efficacy of the proposed
CUREs model. The specific objectives are to: (1) increase enrollment,
persistence, and retention rates of underrepresented and under-prepared students
in STEM disciplines; (2) provide research-based curricula founded on STEM
competencies that provide multiple research and creative experiences for all
students during all four years of matriculation; (3) provide leadership to a
diverse group of students through peer mentoring and peer tutoring
opportunities; and (4) provide diverse faculty that use evidence-based
pedagogies to engage students, promote learning, develop students' metacognitive
skills, and promote resilience among students. Mixed methods will be used to
evaluate the project both formatively and summatively. Results are anticipated
to show the extent to which the interventions (i.e. PTIP, CURE, etc.) impact
student performance and student success including demonstrated increases in STEM
competencies, engagement, retention, and completion and the extent to which the
faculty development strategies improve adoption of effective pedagogical
strategies.