* 1623431
* Eager: Maker:Researching A School District's Integration Of The Maker Movement Into Its Middle And High School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Cynthia Tananis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The beginning of the 21st century saw the rise of Maker Spaces or informal
community workshops where people of all ages engage in a variety of creative
design and fabrication activities with materials and equipment that would
otherwise be out of reach for the average person. The grass roots nature of the
Maker movement reflects the general public's strong interest and engagement in
informal science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning
activities. Given its power to engage learners, K-12 educators and school
leaders are considering how the Maker Movement might be integrated into formal
school settings. Yet, integration is challenging because some of the very
characteristics that make Maker spaces successful are problematic in formal
education settings, such as voluntary versus compulsory participation, grades,
and the structure of schooling into discrete content areas. Research that
uncovers tangible ways to successfully integrate Making into schools has the
potential to foster teacher and student learning, and to inspire students to
strive toward STEM careers. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers program that supports projects that build
understandings of best practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to engaging students in learning and developing interest in STEM,
information and communications technology, computer science, and related STEM
content and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses case study
methodology to articulate how the Elizabeth Forward School District (EFSD)
integrates the Maker movement into its secondary schools. Serving a semi-rural
community in the Pittsburgh area, EFSD has given the area's historic "maker"
roots of heavy industry and manufacturing a 21st century twist. For example,
since 2013 EFSD has used a variety of Making tools and approaches to promote a
project-based curriculum that integrates art, technology education, and computer
science at the middle school level. In its high school the district has used FAB
Lab, which houses digital fabrication technology, such as laser cutters, 3D
printers, and various 2D and 3D software applications. Using mixed methods
(i.e., interviews, surveys, observations and student work), Year 1 of the
project articulates and tracks EFSD's internal efforts and processes, and
collaborations with various external partners. Year 2 of the project focuses on
specific teacher and student outcomes while also making comparisons to
historical data and to comparable districts that do not incorporate Making.
Intellectually, the project is important because it examines the intersection of
formal and informal learning environments. For example it explores how
introducing Maker activities into formal STEM education impacts teacher
practice, student engagement and learning, and community involvement. It also
offers insight into whether and how the essence of Making is modified by its
inclusion into formal settings. In practical terms, the research will offer
other school districts a timely example of the rewards and challenges involved
in Maker integration.