* 1623626
* Improving Vertical Velocity Retrievals from Doppler Radar Observations of Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Corey Potvin, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 599,408.00

Weather radars have a variety of functions, from sensing severe weather to
providing estimates of rainfall. One of the main duties of Doppler radar is to
retrieve the horizontal wind field. However, in meteorology it is very important
to know the vertical winds to determine how quickly air is rising or descending.
Radar meteorologists have used a variety of methods to estimate vertical winds
from radar data, but there is room for improvement. The researchers in this
project will develop advanced techniques to improve analysis of the three
dimensional wind field. The new techniques will benefit research studies on
severe weather topics such as supercell thunderstorms and tornadoes as well as
potentially improving the initialization of numerical weather models. The
project will also help to train the next generation of scientists by including
students in the data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
address several long-standing issues related to the processing and utilization
of radar meteorology products. This award is focused on minimizing the errors
due to non-simultaneous data collection and the derivation of vertical velocity
from radar measurements. Data will be collected from a variety of radar and
profiler systems at the Department of Energy's Atmospheric Radiation Measurement
site in Oklahoma to address the following research tasks: 1) Designing a new
spatially-variable advection-correction/analysis procedure to reduce errors in
radial wind analyses, 2) Investigating the utility of the anelastic vertical
vorticity equation as a constraint in variational dual-Doppler wind analysis,
and 3) Investigating the advantages and disadvantages of ensemble Kalman filter
(EnKF) wind analysis versus variational dual-Doppler wind analysis.