* 1623401
* EAGER: MAKER: Tracking Youth Interest and Engagement in Makerspace Learning Activities Using Wearable Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Victor Lee, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 299,911.00

The Maker movement is touted as being able to positively impact learning because
Making will generate interest and engagement in STEM. Yet, there is a paucity of
educational research that has actually examined if, when, how, and for whom
Making is engaging or a space for interest development. Also, very little
connection has been made to established psychological models of how interest
develops from triggered moments of situational interest to sustained personal
interests. Drawing on existing interest research, this work develops and tests
new methods for capturing moments of high youth engagement during Maker learning
activities and tracks their change over time with new wearable technologies. The
use of wearable technologies is especially well suited for Maker activities
where youth are often in constant motion and must complete immediate tasks that
prevent them from being able to offer conscious reports of their engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of the work is the use of wearable sensor
bracelets and still image cameras to measure psychophysiological indications of
heightened engagement. The work is well positioned in the existing knowledge-
based of human centered computing and appropriately references existing
research. The work overs a creative intellectual step in experimenting with
artifacts of human centered computing in the assessment of student engagement in
making.