* 1624203
* AGS-PRF: Wave-mean Flow Interactions in a Moist and Warmer Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Ray Yamada, Yamada                  Ray
* Fellowship Award
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

Weather systems in middle latitudes, such as cyclones and high pressure systems
that move along jet streams, could still exist even without clouds and
precipitation. These individual cyclones and high pressure systems do not just
passively loop along westerly jet streams that meander around the globe. Instead
they play important roles in determining the time mean intensity of the mid-
latitude westerly jet stream as well as its mean latitudinal position and span.
The interplay between the jet stream and weather systems that move along it is
referred to as "wave-mean flow interaction" in the literature. Nevertheless, the
hydrological cycle is an integral component of atmospheric circulations. Besides
its by-product, rainfall, that provides the main source of water for all human
uses and ecosystems, the hydrological cycle helps to cool tropical ocean surface
via evaporation and keep Polar Regions much warmer than what would be by just
considering the solar energy available there via poleward latent heat transport.

This project explores how latent heat release associated with rainfall produced
by individual storms also contributes collectively to the time mean intensity of
mid-latitude westerly jet, as well as its temporal and spatial variations. It
also concerns how the strengthening of hydrological cycle in a warmer climate
would alter the intensity, mean latitudinal position and span of mid-latitude
westerly jet. The PI developed a new diagnostic tool for studying moist wave-
mean flow interactions in his dissertation research. Here he uses this newly
developed tool to diagnose moist wave-mean flow interactions and contract them
against the counterparts without considering latent heat release using both
observational data and atmospheric general circulation model outputs.

Since the future global warming projection uncertainties are highly related to
future projections of hydrological cycle strength, a better understanding of the
underlying dynamics of moist wave-mean interactions may help to reduce the
global warming projection uncertainties. In addition, the project supports a
postdoctoral researcher who is at the beginning of his scientific career,
thereby providing for the future scientific workforce in this area.