* 1624169
* RCN-UBE-Incubator: Environments and Metrics in Biology Education and Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Uwe Hilgert, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,997.00

The Environments and Metrics in Biology Education and Research (EMBER) RCN-UBE
Incubator Project seeks to generate innovative measures to increase retention
and diversity in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
workforce by capitalizing on the unique insights and collaboration of interested
educators from a multitude of relevant disciplines including biology, education,
psychology and sociology. Addressing STEM student retention is crucial to avoid
the projected deficit in qualified workers required for a growing STEM-based
economy. The US population and workforce are becoming increasingly diverse yet a
lack of diversity in STEM fields is stubbornly persistent. Nationwide efforts to
boost education in STEM and address the projected deficits in the STEM workforce
have had mixed results. Like other STEM disciplines, approximately half of
undergraduate students that enter biology majors complete their degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing retention and diversity will require innovative
solutions that capitalize on the contributions from a variety of fields
including psychology, sociology, education and STEM. The broader impacts of the
project lie in forming a network that brings together experts from these fields
to study the environment of the current biology STEM pipeline, and establish and
assess benchmarks for inclusivity at critical points along this career
trajectory. The activities of the EMBER Research Coordination Network include
organizing and building a collaborating network of experts by hosting a
workshop, developing a website, publishing insights generated in the workshop
session, and drafting a full Research Coordination Network-Undergraduate Biology
Education proposal. The focus of the project will be on retention in biology
degree programs but new metrics and paradigms developed by EMBER collaborators
are expected to be broadly applicable to other STEM disciplines and to STEM-
based businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange/finalreport/. This
project is also co-funded by the Division of Human Resources Development (HBCU
UP) in the EHR directorate.