* 1624605
* I/UCRC: Site application to join I/UCRC known as CHMPR
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Gregg Rothermel, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 06/30/2020
* USD 198,829.00

Nearly every research field and industry sector is struggling with managing and
extracting useful information from massive data sets, that are commonly referred
to as Big Data. Modeling, data management, and analytics are key elements in
understanding and using these data sets, and their importance in academia and
industry is predicted to grow exponentially. One central challenge can be
expressed as follows: Given specific analysis tasks and specific constraints on
the available Big Data, how do we enable productive, efficient, and secure end-
to-end value extraction from the data? To address this challenge, we propose to
join industry members with participating academic centers in a new site of the
existing Center for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research (CHMPR) I/UCRC, at NC
State University (NCSU) in Raleigh, NC, with the goal of conducting trans-
disciplinary translational science and research of enabling better decision
making in presence of Big Data. The fundamental research done at CHMPR/NCSU will
be translated into technology developments, delivering practical solutions to
hard problems. This translation will apply to federal agencies, government
organizations, and industry sectors struggling with hard Big-Data problems, thus
contributing to the progress of science and advancing the future Big-Data needs
of the industry and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in solving the
problem of extracting value from massive data hinges on balancing fundamental
research, technological know-how, and commercial market intelligence. We propose
both to address recognized aspects of this problem and to develop the science
and training that will address future aspects of this problem. The CHMPR/NCSU
effort toward end-to-end enablement of data will focus on developing
technologies and tools for bridging the time gap between the acquisition of data
and real-time and long-term decision making. CHMPR/NCSU research projects will
be addressing the issue of what are appropriate technologies for: storing and
cleaning the data; modeling the data; making the data secure; asking the right
analysis questions; pre- and post-processing the data with regard to the
analysis; and, finally, making the analysis results useful. The resulting
techniques will be applicable across multiple industry sectors, including
national security, health care, manufacturing, energy, and business
intelligence. The research being done at NCSU will contribute to the
computationally intensive analytics-research program of CHMPR, while
complementing its portfolio by the NCSU big-data transformation and analysis
expertise. The technologies and tools resulting from the proposed work will
change the results that can be obtained from the data, as opposed to just
obtaining the results faster. The ultimate success of this paradigm shift by the
Big-Data-analysis industry will rest on the ability of universities such as NCSU
to prepare experts in taking advantage of the data-enablement science and
technologies to solve a variety of real-life applications.