* 1624536
* Phase II I/UCRC Virginia Polytechnic Institute: Center for Wood-Based Composites (WBC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Charles Frazier, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2022
* USD 528,316.00

This project advances the utility, performance, and sustainability of the wood
composite products used to build American homes and consumer products. The
subject matter, composite materials derived from wood, is often overlooked
because for the average person wood composites are as commonplace as trees
themselves. However for the scientist, wood is an incredibly complex biomaterial
for which contemporary scientific methods are now revealing insights that lead
to better performance for the homeowner, improved efficiency for the industry,
and greater sustainability for society. A sustainable society must include
timber products and the future requires a marriage between this ancient material
and the most sophisticated scientific and technological methods. This is a team
effort among three critical partners: industry, federal government, and
academia. The federal government joins the partners into a mutually beneficial
collaboration that leverages resources and skills. The industry defines the
ever-changing technological challenges, and guides the required research.
Academia conducts the research with students that employ cutting edge methods
within a practical context. At Virginia Tech, we provide expertise in polymer
synthesis, adhesive characterization, and wood polymer chemistry. Along with our
partner, Oregon State University, we provide industry-directed, pre-competitive
research, and a pathway for students to become future leaders in sustainable
U.S. manufacturing, innovation, and management
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science and technology of wood composites
continually evolves as the industry adapts to changing economic cycles,
legislative pressures, and raw material supplies. Consequently the goal is to
advance knowledge in adhesives, adhesion, wood/adhesive interactions, and wood
chemistry as these topics influence wood rheology, heat and mass transfer, and
fracture mechanics while processing wood, manufacturing composites, and
evaluating product performance. A parallel goal is to identify fundamental
phenomena, and reduce them to definable quantities that may be described
numerically for purposes of modeling, simulation, and performance prediction. At
Virginia Tech, we focus on chemical transformations associated with composite
production, which includes transformations of the adhesive and the wood. In the
latter case, wood transformations include the generation of biogenic
formaldehyde and understanding this process is a major industry goal that
impacts compliance with federal emissions regulations.