* 1624207
* Collaborative Research Belmont Forum: VULnerability of Populations under Extreme Scenarios
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 02/28/2021
* USD 449,824.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a six-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a group of the world?s major and
emerging funders of global environmental change research. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international environmental research most urgently needed to
remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. Each partner organization provides funding for
researchers from their country to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in a
Collaborative Research Action, the six partner organizations have provided
support for research projects that utilize a strong inter- and trans-
disciplinary approach to examine climate, environmental, and related societal
change in mountain regions. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers
to cooperate in a consortium of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that brings together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to use
fossils, ancient and modern DNA samples from Morocco, Cameroon, South Africa,
China, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Brazil, and modeling techniques to investigate
how ecosystems in mountain ranges have changed over the past 21,000 years and to
establish an index of vulnerability which can be used across different mountain
ecosystems. This information will contribute to an understanding of how social
and ecological changes may impact food security in these regions. &lt;br/&gt;