* 1624112
* I-Corps:  Easy-to-Use Software for Automation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Amy LaViers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Automation can make repetitive or boring physical tasks ? like moving boxes onto
a conveyor belt-a trivial component of life; however, small businesses and
consumers that want to use automation in their workspace and/or home face
insurmountable challenges to enter a highly technical field. Typically, external
companies called robotic integrators are employed for designing and implementing
such systems. While the hardware used in this process is getting cheaper and
cheaper, the physical labor of highly trained technical engineers needed to
build and program these systems is not. This I-Corps team is developing easy-to-
use software that will allow nontechnical users to design and implement their
own automated systems that are customized to their own needs without having to
hire costly robotic integrators. The new, proposed technology is lowering the
barrier to entry for small business owners and home consumers through a web-
based software platform where users can build their own programs for automation
through a nontechnical, intuitive user interface. This initial prototype
leverages a way of thinking about automation in terms of action and sensing
primitives that derives from a university robotics research lab. The proposed
technology has the potential to dramatically transform the population of people
to whom automation, and its well-documented benefits, is available. The approach
taken in this technology could bring simple, moving machines into many more
environments.

Expanding the use cases of industrial automation to smaller batch sizes and
narrower profit margins is a key challenge toward realizing the vision of the
Internet of Things. This challenge is due in large part to the high cost of
technical expertise required for the integration of available, cost-effective
sensors, actuators, and algorithms. However, relatively inexpensive software can
be developed to help users adapt existing technology to their environment. The
proposed technology utilizes two key technical areas. One area is the
computational architecture of the product and the development of a scalable code
architecture and support for a larger number of so-called sensing and action
primitives. Another area is in human factors where the ability of an untrained
user to move from a contextualized use-case to specific logic design is key.
Here, a relatively complex process must be distilled to essential steps that an
untrained user can relate to a familiar process in a particular environment.
Participation in the Innovation Corps will allow the team to identify and
research the appropriate market in which to develop and launch a first product.
In particular, the team will explore which customer base ? ranging from at-home
hobbyists to small-to-medium sized industrial companies-is a good fit, in terms
of feasible application of the technology as well as market demand and pricing,
for the proposed technology. The team's participation will influence parallel
development of technology and inform a business plan that will allow for
commercialization of the technology.