* 1624509
* Doctoral dissertation research:   Factors influencing generalization and maintenance of cross-category imitation of Mandarin regional variants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Cynthia Clopper, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,968.00

People change their own language production when hearing others' speech that
differs from their own, a process known as phonetic imitation. Imitation of
others' speech has been observed between speakers who speak the same dialect and
also between speakers who speak different dialects. Previous studies have found
that adult speakers who move to a new speech community can partially acquire the
accent of the new community. What is less understood, however, is the mechanisms
that facilitate or constrain long-term imitation of second-dialect properties.
The goal of the current project is to explore the linguistic, situational, and
cognitive factors that influence the degree to which imitation of linguistic
properties of another dialect is maintained beyond exposure and generalizes to
novel words.

This project will focus on the imitation of dialect-specific properties across
two Mandarin regional varieties spoken in Jianshi and Laifeng counties, China.
The first experiment will investigate how imitation generalizes to novel
monosyllabic words, to reveal the mental representations underlying word
processing in Mandarin, i.e., syllables, tones, consonants, vowels, or
subsegmental features. The second experiment will examine how the number of
token repetitions and lexical contexts containing the variant affect the degree
of imitation maintenance and generalization, to reveal the relative
contributions of exposure amount and variability to long-term phonetic
imitation. The third experiment will use different instructions during post-
exposure reading as a way of influencing participants' conscious effort, to
investigate the role of automaticity in mediating imitation maintenance and
generalization.

The results of this project will reveal the mechanisms underlying cross-dialect
imitation that enable or constrain speakers to maintain and generalize imitation
after various exposure environments and in response to different requirements.
The results will also provide new insights into the automatic and controlled
aspects of imitation, and the representational units connecting speech
perception and production. This project has broader implications for the role of
phonetic imitation in long-term sound change, and for methods to facilitate
second dialect acquisition by improving individuals' ability to imitate,
maintain, and generalize new dialect features.