* 1624000
* Life-Maker-Space:   Creating a hands-on environment for Undergraduate Biology Education & Next-Gen STEM Training through innovative design and Community Engagement
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Siddharth Ramakrishnan, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of the Life-Maker-Space incubator network is to create a unique
learning environment for undergraduates to have a concept-to-creation-to-
community experience, where they will learn biological principles in the
classroom, design experiments to test hypotheses, prototype solutions for
innovative ideas and create tools for implementation. Student learning will go
beyond the classroom and involve engagement with the community and local schools
to foster active exchange of resources, skills and experiences. This environment
will be created through access to equipment from 3D-Printers to small
electronics, via community-based workshops with designers, engineers and
scientists, and opportunities to prototype designs developed in classrooms.

Maker-Spaces has been shown to encourage the drive for innovation and the
production of novel tools. This Life-Maker-Space will provide a novel way to
engage students in life-science education, where they will be exposed to hands-
on innovation, design practices and technology. Undergraduate biology students
will be provided with opportunities to work on real world applications through
nuanced problem solving while collaborating with a wide range of people ranging
from designers to engineers and community members. Undergraduates will learn to
explain concepts to as well as collaborate with and mentor younger counterparts.
This initiative will bring scientific work to the larger community and allow
young students to interact with a non-academic audience in a "safe" environment.
It will also allow students to think about how science fits within the larger
context of the community.

A collaborative effort by the University of Puget Sound, the Tacoma Art Museum
and the Science and Math Institute, The Life-Maker-Space will be a place where
undergraduate and K-12 students can become innovators - applying their life-
science knowledge towards developing novel instrumentation, prototypes and
technologies that are affordable, educational and scalable. A shared space is
envisioned where young life scientists will learn alongside engineers, designers
and artists; an open space where knowledge and resources will be shared with the
partners, local schools and the community; an innovative space - where new ideas
will be tested and implemented.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).