* 1624645
* A marine Unoccupied Aircraft Systems (UAS) facility: Building capacity for high-resolution remote sensing and analysis of marine and coastal ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Cindy Van Dover, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,385.00

The use of Unoccupied Aircraft Systems (UAS), also known as drones, in marine
science is growing, filling a gap between shoreline or boat-based surveys and
aerial imagery collected by occupied airplanes and satellites. Drones enable on-
demand, high resolution data collection across ocean environments, while
reducing costs and human risk. The potential applications for promoting the
progress of marine science are vast, including studies of changing coastlines,
measuring ocean water quality, counting animals such as seabirds and sea
turtles, assessing the health and behavior of animals, and even sampling the
breath of individual whales. Despite their demonstrated utility for marine
science and conservation missions, there is little support for researchers to
integrate drones into their scientific studies. Similarly, there are few
programs designed to train students to use drones in marine science and
conservation programs. This project addresses these gaps by establishing a
research and training facility that will enhance the capacity of NSF-funded
researchers, and other portions of the scientific community on the US East
Coast, to use drones for the study and conservation of coastal and marine
systems.&amp;#8232; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will i) repurpose and
renovate an existing building to create engineering, computational, and
visualization/training/outreach laboratories for UAS research, ii) diversify a
fleet of UAS to increase capabilities available to the scientific community in
the region, iii) develop a data analysis, visualization, and storage framework
for products generated by the facility. Numerous challenges associated with
operating UAS will benefit from this centralized regional marine facility,
including FAA licensing and permitting, development and deployment of marine-
specific sampling methods, maintenance of the social license to operate,
centralized data archiving, and by establishing a locus for sensor,
computational, and visualization tool development in response to the scientific
needs of coastal and marine researchers. The UAS facility will enable studies of
the ecosystem consequences of human activities in marine habitats, including
dynamics and processes. This new sampling capability provides aerial imagery
from visible to infrared and hyperspectral wavelengths, as well as other geo-
referenced sensor data, including light detection and ranging (LIDAR) and
synthetic aperture radar (SAR). UAS are also now used to sample atmospheric
phenomena (wind, aerosols) and can even be used to sample breath from individual
whales. The potential coastal applications range from studies of changing
coastal geomorphology to population dynamics and behavior of marine vertebrates
such as seals and turtles. Archived, geospatially referenced data will be
invaluable for long-term studies of change related to storm events and sea-level
rise in coastal areas. The facility will enable hands-on sensor and
computational development experience for students in engineering and biology
programs at Duke, and will support a summer training course in research methods
open to professionals as well as undergraduate and graduate students. The
facility will also support marine science interaction in the local community and
established STEM outreach initiatives including local public school aviation
clubs and summer programs at local the Boys and Girls Clubs.&lt;br/&gt;