* 1624370
* SBP: A Cross-National Experimental Study of Attitudes about Women in Government and Leadership.
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Nehemia Geva, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2019
* USD 205,831.00

General Summary

This project elucidates factors influencing inclusion of women in government in
established democracies like the United States, where women have high levels of
education and employment yet continue to hold fewer elected and appointed
positions than men. Previous studies have sought to explain differences in
representation of women among countries based on electoral institution design,
economic development, and culture, but those factors leave much of the variance
unexplained. This study collects and interprets new data utilizing a carefully
designed experiment to assess perception of women's suitability for specific
types of political posts and in different policy areas. The research design also
allows findings to be assessed by established theories from psychology
explaining attitudes individuals have of political candidates because of
existing stereotypes of gender, similarity to oneself, or lack of attributes
considered necessary to lead. The study is conducted in eight countries,
differing in electoral institutions, national priorities, and prior inclusion of
women in government. This set of countries enables comparisons of numerous
factors such as candidate's political party and candidate gender, type of post
and policy area, prior inclusion of women in key government posts, and voter
attributes such as sex, socio-economic status, political ideology, and gender-
role attitudes. This study will provide knowledge needed to strengthen democracy
throughout the world by enhancing understanding of the challenges for inclusion
in government of historically under-represented groups.

Technical Summary

This project conducts an experiment to collect comparable cross-national data
about societal attitudes about the capacity of women, compared to men to govern
in varying levels of posts and policy areas. The experiment, which has already
been carried out in Costa Rica and Israel, will be replicated in Canada, Chile,
England, Sweden, the United States, and Uruguay. These countries are all
established democracies, but they vary in inclusion of women in government,
institutional rules, and in the centrality of social welfare vs. defense issues
on the government's policy agenda. The experiment uses a candidate speech of
about 500 words, plus a brief candidate biography as the treatment. In this
context the sex of the candidate as well as the party she/he represent are
introduced as experimental treatments. We use the effect of the party
affiliation of the candidate as means to gauge the magnitude of the impact of
gender on candidate evaluations. In each country, the experiment participants
will be randomly assigned to a treatment group. After reading the speech,
participants complete a questionnaire that ask them to evaluate the candidate
for various posts and in diverse policy areas. The questionnaire also contains
items about the background of the participant for conducting post hoc analysis
to explore whether people from different demographic or ideological backgrounds
exhibit different attitudes about the capacity of women and men to be leaders in
government. Finally there is a battery of questions for conducting a sex role
analysis, also for use in post hoc analysis and cross-national comparison.