* 1624774
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer at Fairfield University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Matthew Kubasik, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 271,407.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Jillian Smith-Carpenter from Fairfield University and colleagues Matthew
Kubasik, John Miecznikowski, Aaron Van Dyke and Catherine Andersen have acquired
a matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer
(MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer). In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the
key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. A laser impinging on the inert
matrix embedded with the sample, vaporizes and ionizes the sample. The ions pass
into the mass spectrometer where the masses of the parent ion and its fragment
ions are measured. In a time-of-flight instrument the ions are accelerated by an
electric field to allow further characterization. MALDI TOF combines gentle
ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic
acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized species)
with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between sensitivity and
accuracy across a wide mass range. The collision-induced dissociation
facilitates fragmentation of molecular ions in the gas phase. This highly
sensitive technique allows identification and determination of the structure of
molecules in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students in research and research training
with this modern analytical technique and is shared with students at the
University of Bridgeport and numerous laboratories in Southwestern Connecticut.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) obtaining the polymeric distribution of disulfide cross-
linked peptide oligomers and aggregates; (b) exploring small molecule strategies
for protein labeling; (c) understanding the role of high-density lipoproteins in
the regulation of immune activity; (d) developing solid-phase peptide synthesis
of alpha,alpha-dialkylated amino acids and (e) developing aqueous transition
metal catalysts.