* 1624431
* Collaborative Research: Waves in Volcanic Conduit-crack Systems and Very Long Period Seismicity at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 09/30/2018
* USD 52,922.00

An overarching goal of volcanology is to characterize eruptive activity and link
this to the physical processes governing magma ascent and eruption, which are
generally hidden from direct observation. This proposal will develop a modeling
framework to image the inner workings of active volcanoes, such as at Kilauea,
Hawaii, USA. Kilauea represents a unique natural laboratory: it exhibits
frequent eruptions, a dense instrumental monitoring network to record these
eruptions, and a long history of scientific study. Recent activity at the
Halemaumau vent, from 2008 to the present day, is the primary observational
target. Rock falls from the crater walls onto the active lava lake generate
oscillations of the magma and gas within the conduit, explosions, and lake
height variations, as evidenced through oscillatory ground motion recorded on
the local sensor network. Models for this behavior must explicitly consider
bubble growth, complex conduit geometry that includes branching cracks, and
stratified, multiphase fluid flow to achieve consistency between seismic data,
video of lake level fluctuations, chemical data that constrain gas contents, and
textural data that constrain near-surface magma density and bubble content.
Theoretical understandings of magma flow, gas solubility laws, and bubble growth
gained as a result of this study should benefit the study of active volcanoes
generally, as well as diverse applications arising in Earth science and industry
that involve flow of bubbly fluids through networks of cracks. Both the modeling
tools and results could ultimately be used to monitor active volcanoes,
understand their dynamics, and inform eruption forecasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a framework for the study of
volcanic activity and interpretation of seismic observations at active, open
vent volcanoes. The primary application is to short term (tens of minutes)
unrest episodes at Kilauea volcano, Hawaii, associated with rock falls from the
crater walls onto the active lava lake surface, which induce oscillations of the
magma and gas within the conduit, explosions, and lake height variations, as
evidenced through oscillatory ground motion recorded on nearby seismometers and
tilt meters. These natural experiments provide a unique test for unsteady
conduit flow models, which depend critically on knowing conduit geometry and
fluid properties of magma (rheology, multiphase character, volatile content,
solubility law), all of which are generally hidden from direct observation. The
project team will develop a numerical modeling framework for multiphase flow, at
much shorter timescales than typically studied, with seismic wave propagation
through bubbly magma in conduits that include branching dikes and sills at
depth, as is expected at many volcanoes. Pressure changes in the conduit-crack
system cause elastic deformations of the conduit and crack walls. Coupling to
the solid Earth enables prediction of seismic signals associated with waves and
resonant oscillations of the magmatic system. Buoyancy, compressibility, viscous
drag, and non-equilibrium bubble growth and resorption ? all of which vary with
depth ? must be accounted for to predict mode properties. Branching dikes/sills
at depth partially control mode periods and ground displacement. Observable
periods and decay rates of seismic signals are thus linked directly to the
evolving depth distribution of gas, conduit architecture, and viscous drag.
Inversion of these signals will provide new constraints on the shallow magmatic
system and total volatile content at Kilauea, and a new framework for probing
unsteady eruptive processes.