* 1624170
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Testing Models of Passive Margin Rejuvenation in the Eastern U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* William Amidon, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 135,708.00

The eastern North American continental margin was established during the
Jurassic Period (about 145 to 200 million years ago) during the opening of the
Atlantic Ocean and is thought to have remained tectonically stable since that
time. However, recent evidence suggests tectonically driven uplift and erosion
events occurred between 100 and 130 and between 15 and 2 million years ago, long
after the rift episode. Similar events have been recognized on the margins of
other continents bordering the Atlantic. The objective of this project is to
determine the timing and spatial distribution of these events in eastern North
America with the goal of establishing the relationship with events on other
continents and, ultimately, provide constraints on possible tectonic mechanisms
to explain synchronous events. The project will advance desired societal
outcomes by the development of a grade 9-12 earth science module in
collaboration with local schools with class visits and visits to Middlebury and
intensive involvement of undergraduate students in research.

This project aims to understand rejuvenation of the Eastern North American
margin, which remains virtually unknown compared to relatively well-documented
rejuvenation events on the coasts of Africa, South America, Europe, and the
north Atlantic. Preliminary data (increased sediment flux to the Baltimore
Canyon Trough; thermochronology in the White Mountains, New Hampshire) suggest
that at least three rejuvenation events occurred along the Eastern North
American margin: Early Cretaceous (130-110 Ma), Late Cretaceous (85-65 Ma), and
the Mio-Pliocene (15-0 Ma). Results from other Atlantic margins highlight two
periods, the Late Cretaceous and Mio-Pliocene, in which rejuvenation may have
occurred synchronously across multiple circum-Atlantic margins. This coincident
timing raises the question of whether a common forcing mechanism can rejuvenate
multiple passive margins at the same time? Two end-member hypotheses include:
(1) lateral stresses transmitted long distances through the lithosphere, or (2)
dynamic mantle stresses beneath passive margins (e.g. dynamic topography). On
the large scale, a complete picture of which margins were synchronously
rejuvenated and how they are geometrically related may be used to infer
Atlantic-scale forcing mechanisms. On the local scale, delineating the
spatiotemporal pattern of rejuvenation of the Eastern North American margin may
reveal stress orientations or local fault mechanics, thus constraining the
underlying forcing mechanism. This project uses both of these approaches to
clarify the pattern of post-rift exhumation in the central Eastern North
American margin (New England, New York, and New Jersey). The research team will
determine time-resolved exhumation histories by using apatite and zircon U-Th/He
and apatite fission track thermochronology in bedrock drill cores and sediment
provenance using trace element composition of heavy minerals and U-Pb dating of
zircon and rutile and provenance of sediments in offshore drill cores from the
Baltimore Canyon Trough. These two approaches are complementary;
thermochronology provides the timing and magnitude of exhumation at a point,
whereas detrital provenance integrates a broad range of possible source regions
and can detect exhumation events too small to reset thermochronometers.