* 1624049
* I-Corps: PWP (Personal Wheelchair Platform)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Jacob Rammer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Mobility independence is vital to the quality of life of manual wheelchair
users. There are approximately 3.6 million adult and 67,000 pediatric manual
wheelchair users in the United States, according to the 2012 U.S. Census. As of
2014, the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center estimated that 85% of
these patients experienced some level of upper extremity joint pain or injury,
and research has correlated these ailments with the substantial strain of
wheelchair use. Injury prevention starts with high quality, effective therapy
and training based on current research. Physical therapists provide this care
and rely on clinical knowledge and tools to diagnose and treat these patients.
There is a need for more objective and reliable methods to evaluate and train
manual wheelchair users. Currently available options, such as treadmills and
bike trainers, pose safety concerns and lack the capacity to collect
quantitative metrics of function, while integrated measurement systems are often
cost-prohibitive. Time and financial limitations, as well as the increasing
demand for their services, add to the challenges already faced by physical
therapists. By investigating the needs, obstacles, and complications in the
physical therapy practice, technology can be designed to maximize the impact on
clinical and research outcomes in this field. Technological enhancement in this
area will not only improve the quality of life of wheelchair users by reducing
risk of pain and injury, but will improve daily mobility efficiency, as well as
provide increased access to healthcare.

The Personal Wheelchair Platform (PWP) is a cost-effective and easy-to-use
stationary roller system for use in physical therapy practice. It allows manual
wheelchair users to wheel safely in-place, simulating over ground bilateral
propulsion based on user anthropometry. Accurate biomechanical metrics,
monitored and recorded by integrated hardware and software, can be used by the
clinician to develop treatment and training strategies in order to increase
propulsion efficiency and reduce risk of injury to the upper extremities.
Originally developed as a tool to assist in wheelchair biomechanics research,
this product is uniquely positioned to bridge the gap between research and
clinical care while improving the quality of life and mobility of these
patients. PWP allows wheelchair fitting, propulsion assessment (starting,
stopping, turning, and steady-state), and customized training to be completed in
the demanding clinical environment, promoting mobility independence, community
integration and activity participation of wheelchair users while reducing
healthcare costs related to sustained pain and injury. This project proposes to
complete a comprehensive assessment of the needs of the physical therapy market,
specifically targeting therapists who contribute to the care of manual
wheelchair users. This will be accomplished through extensive customer
discovery, with interviews systematically conducted to sample a distribution of
the physical therapy market across the United States. Customer acquisition and
clarification of the key value propositions for a minimum viable business
product will assist in furthering business model development and launching PWP
to the physical therapy market.