* 1624185
* Collaborative Research:  Community Sourcing of Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,745,593.00

The Introductory Physics for Life Science (IPLS) Portal will enhance the
education of hundreds of thousands of life science students each year by
providing engaging and effective IPLS instructional materials and helping IPLS
instructors use these materials. This collaborative effort of the American
Association of Physics Teachers and eight colleges and universities, including a
community college and a Hispanic-serving institution, will create an open-
source, peer-reviewed, and innovatively structured environment for IPLS content.
Initially containing materials from multiple NSF-funded research and development
projects, the Portal will become a development platform for IPLS curricula. The
site will serve as both an archive and a dissemination tool, including a course-
building interface for faculty. Instructors will be supported in creating
innovative and individualized courses, mixing and matching from multiple sources
tuned to their needs, offering a flexible and low-cost alternative to
traditional textbooks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the objectives and features
of the project are innovative. Hence, the project also includes research
components of four critical and interacting elements: IPLS content, IPLS
pedagogy, the organizational structure of the site, including tagging and
taxonomy of all elements for appropriate selection to meet the needs of
individual users, and the user interface. Three overlapping research teams will
carry out this work: the User-Centered Design team, the Instructional Content
Design team, and the Community-Building and Professional-Development team. This
project focuses on engaging and expanding three communities: (1) physics and
biology education researchers, (2) IPLS contributors, and (3) IPLS adopters
wanting to use and adapt existing IPLS materials. Merging and expanding the
efforts of these communities will occur through a combination of workshops,
online support communities, and research to advance the understanding of faculty
professional development for IPLS education. The IPLS-Portal infrastructure,
once developed, could be used to provide a community-sourcing environment for
other STEM disciplines.