* 1624497
* Phase II I/UCRC Florida Atlantic University Site: Center for Health Organization Transformation.
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Hanqi Zhuang, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Phase II I/UCRC Florida Atlantic University Site: Center for Health Organization
Transformation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests Phase II funding for
the Florida Atlantic University (FAU) to establish a site for the Texas A&amp;M
University led Center for Health Organization Transformation (CHOT). The
research agenda proposed by FAU site coincides with the most expansive changes
in the healthcare industry in the U.S. Recent changes in healthcare system have
introduced a series of changes in the healthcare industry, including the
creation of new healthcare organizations such as Accountable Care Organizations
(ACOs) and new programs to improve healthcare quality, safety, and efficiency
through the promotion of healthcare information technology. There is also an
increased focus on disease prevention and wellness/health promotion. These
changes necessitate new research on healthcare processes, patient centered
healthcare delivery, and alternative payment models. The FAU site will build
upon the already established CHOT partnerships and provide further complementary
expertise. FAU?s proposed site will complement existing CHOT strengths by
contributing expertise from the domains of engineering, business, medicine and
nursing. The FAU site offers an interdisciplinary team of researchers to conduct
research in the areas of (1) patient centered care delivery (e.g. patient
satisfaction, community health, care coordination, wellness and preventative
care and transition of care, (2) healthcare information technology (e.g.,
clinical decision support systems, health information systems, big data
analytics, health applications, home health solutions), (3) medical technology
(e.g., medical devices, user-centered health devices, healthcare digital
infrastructure, sensors and robotics in healthcare), and (4) healthcare delivery
systems (e.g., economic and policy evaluation, alternative payments, population
health, vulnerable populations). The FAU site will create synergies with
existing CHOT sites and attract additional industry partners, expanding CHOT?s
collaborations between academic research and health-industry
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FAU site broadens participation of
underrepresented groups in several ways. FAU has a large Hispanic population
with more than 48% of undergraduate students currently enrolled in FAU?s College
of Engineering and Computer Science (CECS) are from underrepresented
populations. The project team will actively engage students in research that
enable research performed by the graduate and undergraduate students to be
shared with other students; the Center will expand opportunities of mentoring
and graduating students from multiple disciplines such as engineering, nursing
and business from under-represented populations at the BS, MS, and PhD levels.