* 1624898
* Collaborative Research: Moving Faculty from Experimentation With to Long-term Adoption of Engaged Student Learning in Analytical Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Thomas Wenzel, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 657,070.00

The goal of this project is to implement a national professional development
program that promotes the use of engaged student learning in the analytical
chemistry classroom and laboratory. Each instructor will participate in a two-
year process involving a national workshop, regional workshop, and site visit to
the individual's campus. An online community will be developed to sustain
engagement after the workshops. An education research project will examine the
(1) characteristics of professional development workshops and follow-up support
activities that result in effective sustained implementation of active learning,
(2) ways instructors adapt the materials to suit their teaching philosophies and
institutional environments, (3) impact of the implementation of active learning
modules on student learning, and (4) best practices for creating an on-line
community that supports sustained implementation of active learning. Formative
assessment of early workshops will be used to refine and improve the strategies
for later workshops and follow-up activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will promote and study the adoption of evidence-based, active teaching methods
by analytical chemical faculty members. Numerous studies show that small-group
collaborative learning and inquiry-based activities lead to statistically
significant improvements in student learning and increased student retention and
engagement, especially among women, underrepresented, and first generation
college students. However, wide-spread adoption of active learning pedagogies
remains an elusive goal. Intense and collaborative forms of professional
development are warranted to bring about changes in teacher knowledge, skills,
attitudes, and beliefs that lead to changes in classroom and laboratory
instruction. This project's process of networking in person and via an on-line
community will provide sustained interaction between participants and
facilitators with expertise in active learning leading to a shared vision and
substantive change in the teaching methods of participants. The result will be a
set of professional development experiences that support sustained adoption of
active learning strategies. This will lead to more effective instructors of
analytical chemistry courses and enhanced learning on the part of their
students.