* 1624430
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Next-Generation Computer Cluster to Advance Molecular to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Dunning, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 415,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities Programs, Professor Anne McCoy from the
University of Washington and colleagues Thomas Dunning, Xiaosong Li, W. James
Pfaendtner and Marshall Reschke have acquired a computer cluster with multicore
microprocessors. The acquisition enables computational scientists and engineers
to develop effective programming techniques for distributing the computational
workload over multiple cores (processor units) both within a microprocessor and
across microprocessors. The installed computer cluster advances the use of
computational technology to study a broad range of chemistry research questions
with users from across the campus from the physical sciences (chemistry,
biochemistry and physics) and engineering (chemical, electrical and
bioengineering). These researchers share research interests that focus on
molecular and nanoscale materials, systems and processes. This computational
resource is used in research and in course instruction in chemistry, applied
mathematics and astronomy to train undergraduate and graduate students in up-to-
date computational methods. The computer clsuter is also used in an outreach
program with students at Bellevue College.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in research projects at the University of Washington such as (a) multi-
dimensional molecular spectroscopy applications, (b) understanding and
predicting properties of defect-containing nanomaterials, (c) understanding
structure and dynamics at the bio/nano interface, (d) rationalizing the design
of materials and (e) advancing a number of other projects in chemistry, physics,
materials science and engineering.