* 1624228
* FSML: Improving Information Technology to Facilitate Research at the Pymatuning Laboratory of Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Corinne Richards-Zawacki, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 71,189.00

The Pymatuning Laboratory of Ecology (PLE;
http://www.biology.pitt.edu/facilities/pymatuning), located on Pymatuning Lake
in northwest Pennsylvania, is the University of Pittsburgh's field station. PLE
has been a site of research and education in biology for 85 years. This project
will improve internet access at the station's two main sites, Sanctuary Lake and
Housing, by replacing the current DSL service with optical fiber-based Dedicated
Internet Access (DIA). Consistent with its aim of providing a research
infrastructure on par with a Research-1 facility, this improvement will allow
PLE for the first time to provide its research users with fast, reliable, and
consistent access to the internet. These improvements will open up new
opportunities for PLE's education and outreach missions as well. The fiber-optic
DIA will be much better positioned to keep pace with the needs of PLE's
undergraduate and graduate students and will facilitate training in data-
intensive areas of biology, such as remote sensing, global information systems
(GIS), and bioinformatics. PLE's outreach mission offers a number of inquiry-
based learning opportunities for middle and high school students that take the
form of off-site student-designed experiments. Having a reliable virtual
connection to such students will allow for videoconferencing, which will
facilitate the growth of this type of outreach at PLE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to run optical fiber to PLE's two most heavily used sites, with the
goal of providing up to 20MB (upload and download) Dedicated Internet Access
bandwidth to PLE users. This represents a substantial increase in the bandwidths
PLE currently provides and will greatly reduce the potential for bottlenecks
during periods of high use, as occurs during the spring and summer months. With
these improvements, primary investigators (PIs) and their research teams will be
able to reliably access bandwidth-intensive applications, such as downloading
GIS, weather station, or metagenomics data from publicly available datasets,
moving Powerpoint or other large media files to and from cloud storage, or
uploading newly-collected datasets to data repositories. With increased
bandwidth PLE researchers will also be able to more effectively manage other
responsibilities while in residence at PLE, such as editing journals, submitting
manuscripts and grant proposals, and having virtual meetings with students and
colleagues.