* 1624409
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Disaster Migration and Civil Infrastructure: The Impacts of Sudden Population Influxes on Water and Sanitation Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Kasey Faust, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 02/28/2019
* USD 33,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) Grant project will explore the impact of
normative and cultural-cognitive perturbations on water and sanitation utilities
caused by sudden and large population influxes. Water and wastewater
infrastructures are necessary for the continued functioning of urban
environments. Large and sudden population influxes must be accommodated by this
infrastructure in order to avoid secondary public health disasters for impacted
populations. This research will create knowledge with implications for utilities
that find themselves serving transient, sometimes large populations
(particularly those which arise suddenly). This knowledge will enable more
resilient planning, policy, and technical design that can accommodate potential
disaster migration and other extreme population growth as
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify and explore changes in
the organizational structure and processes of utilities in response to the
European refugee influx, which has triggered an unprecedented flow of refugees
to various European nations. This situation provides a unique opportunity to
capture perishable data on the institutional impacts that sudden, disaster-
triggered population increases may have on established water and sanitation
utilities. This work will yield new insights into how normative and
cultural/cognitive forces can influence the shape and function of public
utilities. Data on both human and technological aspects of these phenomena will
be collected, to include interviews, observations and visual documentation, to
include decision makers in the water and sanitation utilities in the German
cities of Munich, Berlin, and Leipzig. Even under normal conditions, data on
these phenomena can be difficult to obtain. As such, immediate and focused
efforts are needed to collect the organizational data for this study, and to
situate these data within a holistic socio-technical context.