* 1624628
* Collaborative Research: Student Engagement in Mathematics through an Institutional Network for Active Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Robert Tubbs, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2023
* USD 324,500.00

Overwhelming evidence from education research has shown that active learning
instructional techniques generate significantly greater student learning than
traditional approaches in undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) courses. To date, though, few college and university faculty
employ active learning approaches in their introductory STEM classes. This
disconnect between practices with established higher effectiveness and actual
classroom teaching is particularly troublesome in mathematics because student
success in all STEM disciplines relies on a strong mathematics foundation. This
project will investigate environments at six institutions that have successfully
improved student learning in the Precalculus-to-Calculus 2 (P2C2) sequence by
employing active learning in mathematics (ALM). The results of this work will
lead to important strategies for adapting, implementing, supporting, and
assessing ALM in P2C2 courses. In order to meet the needs of institutions
wishing to improve their mathematics instruction, the project will produce
multiple options for implementation based upon case studies of the successful
institutions. Overall, the project will benefit the mathematical sciences
community by: improving student success in high-enrollment undergraduate
courses, better preparing those students who go on to STEM majors, and improving
the teaching of future faculty through the mentoring of graduate students.
Faculty members at the University of Colorado at Boulder (1624628), San Diego
State University (1624639), and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (1624643)
will collaborate with the Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
(APLU) (1624610) to research and advance how to influence and sustain
educational change in mathematics departments--ultimately, at national scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of the project is to develop a better
understanding of how to enact and support institutional change for implementing
ALM in undergraduate learning environments. The underlying research question is:
What conditions, strategies, interventions and actions at the institutional,
departmental and classroom levels contribute to the initiation, implementation,
and institutional sustainability of ALM in the undergraduate P2C2 sequence
across varied institutions? Project team members will work as part of APLU's ALM
Research Action Cluster to advance understanding of the factors that influence
and enhance institutional change as manifested through implementation of models
of ALM in the P2C2 sequence. Research will follow a design research methodology
linking qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis to capture the
iterative and cyclical processes of institutional change. The project will be
carried out in two phases, with Phase 1 consisting of the aforementioned case
studies at six institutions and Phase 2 consisting of longitudinal case studies
of nine diverse institutions that set out to infuse and institutionalize ALM in
the P2C2 sequence. Phase 1 will offer the field a retrospective account of ALM
models of change that worked, and Phase 2 will develop theory and insights into
the processes by which change focused on ALM can unfold over time, along with
the affordances and constraints related to institutional change. The project
will proactively disseminate its results and findings across APLU's large
network of member institutions and beyond to promote adoption of ALM approaches.