* 1624211
* Metalloradical Catalysis for Stereoselective Carbene and Nitrene Transfers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/06/2015,05/31/2016
* Peter Zhang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 05/31/2016
* USD 115,101.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation Professor X. Peter Zhang of the University of
South Florida will develop metalloradical catalysis and will seek applications
for stereoselective radical reactions. Metalloradical catalysis represents a
fundamentally new approach for controlling reactivity and selectivity of radical
reactions of both C- and N-centered radicals. Stable metalloradicals such as
cobalt(II) porphyrin complexes are capable of activating diazo reagents and
organic azides to cleanly generate C- and N-centered radicals, respectively,
with nitrogen as the only byproduct in a controlled and catalytic manner. The
initially formed C- and N-centered radicals, which remain complexed with
cobalt(II) porphyrin complexes and are termed as cobalt-carbene and -nitrene
radicals, respectively, can undergo common radical reactions such as radical
addition and atom abstraction, but with effective control of reactivity and
stereoselectivity by the porphyrin ligand environment. Several factors including
the low and appropriate bond dissociation energy of Co-C/Co-N bonds are key for
the successful turnover of the Co(II)-based catalytic carbene and nitrene
transfers. Through the support of porphyrin ligands with tunable electronic,
steric, and chiral environments, this general concept of Co(II)-based
metalloradical catalysis will be applied for the development of various radical
processes, including a number of stereoselective carbene and nitrene
transfers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of metalloradical catalysis may have
a far-reaching impact in several areas of research, including carbene, nitrene
and radical chemistry. Its establishment will stimulate further development of
metalloradical catalyst systems with different combinations of open-shell metal
ions and chiral ligands for various stereoselective radical reactions, which
have a number of inherent synthetic advantages in comparison with ionic
reactions. Since metalloradical catalysis can generate radical intermediates
catalytically without the need of stoichiometric initiators such as the commonly
employed organotin reagents, it will have a positive environmental impact as
well. The biological and medical relevance of porphyrin ligands, together with
the well demonstrated practical applications of chiral compounds as
pharmaceuticals, flavor and aroma chemicals, agricultural chemicals, and
specialty materials, will make the planned study an excellent theme to promote
science among the general public, to provide education resources for K-12
teachers, and to stimulate scientific interests of K-12 students.