* 1624927
* Polaris: Catalyzing Demographic Change in the Arctic Research Community through an Immersive and Sustained Undergraduate Research Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paul Mann, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,414,831.00

This project is integrating scientific research in the Arctic with education and
outreach, with a strong central focus on engaging undergraduate students and
visiting faculty from groups that have had little involvement in Arctic science
to date. Science and society in the United States will be stronger in the long-
term if the scientific workforce more closely reflects the racial, ethnic, and
cultural diversity of its residents. The Arctic research community currently
does not. Of the Principal Investigators funded by NSF's Arctic programs in the
past five years, only 1% were African American, Hispanic, Native American, or
Alaska Native. This project is catalyzing change in these demographics by
engaging faculty from Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and a diverse group
of undergraduate students in cutting-edge Arctic research and providing them
encouragement, mentoring, and opportunities to continue pursuing Arctic studies
in subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central element of the project is
a month-long research expedition to the Yukon River Delta in Alaska. The
expedition provides a deep intellectual and cultural immersion in the context of
an authentic research experience that is paramount for "hooking" students and
keeping them moving along the pipeline to careers as Arctic scientists. The
overarching scientific issue that drives the research is the vulnerability and
fate of ancient carbon stored in Arctic permafrost (permanently frozen ground).
Widespread permafrost thaw is expected to occur this century, but large
uncertainties remain in estimating the timing, magnitude, and form of carbon
that will be released when thawed. Project participants are working in
collaborative research groups to make fundamental scientific discoveries related
to the vulnerability of permafrost carbon in the Yukon River Delta and the
potential implications of permafrost thaw in this region for the global climate
system.