* 1624447
* Developing a strategic plan for Pepperwood Preserve
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Elisabeth Micheli, Pepperwood Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

Pepperwood is a leader in advancing science-based conservation throughout the
Northern California region and beyond (see www.pepperwoodpreserve.org). The
purpose of this project is to build on Pepperwood's experience using its
3120-acre research reserve to advance long-term climate research and
environmental education for all ages. Pepperwood will use NSF funds provided by
this award to develop a five-year strategic plan to increase its impact in terms
of publishing scientific results, engaging diverse students, and forging
conservation applications with land and water management partners. The
Pepperwood team will seek input from the scientific community, business leaders,
and technology experts. The results will be integrated into a comprehensive
planning document that addresses how to achieve targeted science and education
outcomes in partnership with the California Academy of Sciences, the Santa Rosa
Junior College, University of California, federal and state agencies, and
others. This project will strengthen Pepperwood's role in improving the health
and prosperity of the region and the nation as a whole through science.

Pepperwood will develop a five-year strategic plan for its center of operations,
the Dwight Center for Conservation Science, and its 3120-acre research reserve
located in California's Coast Ranges. The goal is to advance the station's role
as an emerging leader in real-time climate change research and applications for
the region. Proposed planning activities include 1) consulting with scientific
advisors to define a century-scale vision for making a scientific impact, 2)
locating models and selecting best practices for excellence in field station
management and operations, 3) seeking expert advice on data management to
incorporate resilient hardware, software and communications networks to store
and disseminate research results and long-term monitoring data, 4) consulting
business experts on how to leverage revenue generation strategies specific to
our non-profit context, and 5) synthesizing these planning elements into a five-
year comprehensive strategic plan in concert with research, education,
community, and government stakeholders.