* 1624623
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ENSO and Tropical Rain Forest Soil Carbon (CH4, CO2) Fluxes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2018
* USD 126,247.00

Carbon management is essential to reduce the intensity and impact of climate
change. While high-latitude climates show the largest temperature changes,
tropical forests take up and sequester forty percent of the anthropogenic and
natural carbon exchanged with the atmosphere. Soils in these forests are the
largest pool of terrestrial carbon. Under high water, low oxygen conditions,
decomposition results in the production and release of methane gas (CH4)by
microorganisms known as methanogens. During dry seasons, deeper rainforest soils
remain wet, but dry at the surface. When that happens, a different group of
microorganisms consume the methane and convert it to carbon dioxide. Methane gas
has a ten to one hundred-fold greater greenhouse warming effect compared to that
of carbon dioxide (CO2). Consequently, the relative release of these two gases
in tropical rainforests has a large impact on the warming of climate. An
unusually strong El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event is beginning to
impact North America in 2015 and 2016. It is predicted that this ENSO will
result in a major drought in tropical forests of Central America. Given the
governing role of precipitation in soil carbon cycle, the impact of the drought
from the developing ENSO is likely to be substantial. This RAPID project will
test the idea that the ENSO cycle controls much of the year-to-year variability
in the global carbon dioxide and methane cycle, by turning tropical forest soils
from a strong source for methane during the normal rainy season, to a year-round
sink for methane and source of carbon dioxide during El Niño-induced drought
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil carbon dynamics have been measured through
imaging of root and microbial production and turnover, and direct measurements
of CO2 production and efflux. However, even with detailed measurements of
outputs, the carbon budget developed for the Costa Rican rain forest near La
Selva Biologcial Station fails to account for nearly ten percent of the total
fixed C. One potential missing component in these measurements is methane (CH4).
Tropical forests are both consumers and producers of CH4. During normal wet
years, increased activity of methanogens relative to methanotrophs in anoxic,
wet soil conditions results in methane release. Then as soils dry between
storms, methanotrophs may dramatically increase rates of methane oxidation,
resulting in the release of higher amounts of respired soil CO2. An unusually
strong 2015-16 ENSO event has been detected in North America. ENSO-associated
drought in tropical forests of Central America are likely to be extreme at the
La Selva site. Specifically, it is hypothesized that: (1) large amounts of CO2
produced underground during normal, wet rainy seasons are converted to CH4,
which is eventually released to the atmosphere; (2) the anaerobic soil
conditions of wet rainy seasons cause even greater CH4 release through
methanogenesis coupled to decomposition, and (3 during a strong El Niño event,
drier conditions will result in an increase in methane oxidation by
methanotrophs in these soils. To test these questions, CO2 and CH4 will be
continuously measured, through the pre-ENSO, ENSO, and post-ENSO climate
conditions. qPCR and RT-qPCR will be used to quantify the abundance and activity
of both methane-producing (methanogens) and -consuming (methanotrophs)
microorganisms. These measures will be coupled with root, understory and litter
surveys to compare living and dead plant biomass that contributes the C to these
microbes.