* 1624242
* Collaborative Research: Magnesite Deformation and Potential Roles in the Slip and Seismicity of Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Caleb Holyoke, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 195,035.00

Intermediate (70-300 km depth) and deep (300-700 km depth) focus earthquakes of
great magnitudes are common in subduction zones. Though many ideas have been
advanced, the cause of earthquakes at these depths remains as one of the most
significant unresolved problems in the earth sciences. Researchers from
University of Akron, Texas A&amp;M University, and Brown University are
exploring a new mechanism that might explain these enigmatic events: magnesite,
a magnesium carbonate commonly observed in altered basalts and peridotite
(primary constituents of the subducting plates), could initiate deep focus
earthquakes. In this project, the research team is carrying out laboratory
experiments in which magnesite is deformed under very high pressure and
temperature conditions. Their recent experimental work demonstrated that
magnesite is considerably weaker than peridotite, which indicates that veins of
magnesite could act as nucleation points for earthquakes. In this project, they
will experimentally investigate how two fundamental parameters, grain size and
pressure, affect the strength of magnesite and incorporate the results in a
computational model of earthquake nucleation. The project would advance desired
societal outcomes by potentially shedding light on the causes of earthquakes and
providing research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grain-size sensitivity of diffusion creep and
the pressure sensitivity of magnesite deformation mechanisms in all three creep
regimes (diffusion, dislocation and low-temperature plasticity) need to be
quantified in order to apply experimental flow laws to models of creep and shear
instability. These parameters are critical considering that diffusion creep is
the dominant deformation mechanism in magnesite at many natural conditions and
may cause strain localization and possibly seismicity at high pressure in
subducting slabs. In this project, the research team will: (1) quantify the
grain-size sensitivity of magnesite strength when deforming by diffusion creep
and limited plasticity mechanisms; (2) determine the pressure sensitivity of
magnesite deformation mechanisms; and (3) model dynamic slip by ductile
instabilities in magnesite, applying the shear-heating model. Hydrostatic
experiments will be performed to investigate the grain growth kinetics of
magnesite. Deformation experiments with different grain sizes over a wide range
of pressures will be carried out to determine the grain size and pressure
sensitivities of magnesite deformation mechanisms, as identified by scanning and
transmission electron microscopy. This will be achieved using state-of-the-art
high-pressure deformation apparatuses, such as the D-DIA coupled with X-ray
synchrotron radiation for in-situ strain and stress measurements. The results
will allow accurate determination of the rheology of magnesite, evaluation of
its effects on the bulk rheology of subducting slabs, and prediction of
conditions for shear instability where carbonates are subducted.