* 1624141
* Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD) International Conference, May 22-26, 2016, Porto, Portugal
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Athanassios Panagiotopoulos, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2017
* USD 22,000.00

1624141&lt;br/&gt;Athanassious Z. Panagiotopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project supports attendance of U.S. researchers at the Properties and Phase
Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD) international conference this
coming May, 2016 in Porto, Portugal. The PPEPPD conference is the premier
worldwide conference in the area of molecular thermodynamics as related to
chemical process and product design. By subsidizing airfare for attendance of
both senior and junior academic researchers at the conference, the award will
foster exchange of scientific ideas and the latest advances in this important
area of chemical research focusing on thermophysical properties and phase
equilibrium data needed to lower costs and improve efficiencies across a broad
spectrum of chemical products and processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PPEPPD 2016
will bring together international researchers in the application of molecular
thermodynamics to industrially relevant product and process design. The
conference will provide a forum for interactions between both junior and senior
researchers at the cutting edge of techniques for thermophysical properties and
phase equilibrium measurement and estimation, and identify the challenges in the
growing areas of alternative energy resources and storage, gas and oil upstream
and downstream processing, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, marine and saline
systems and processes, nanotechnology, and sustainability. One of the primary
goals of PPEPPD is to provide interaction between academic, government, and
industrial researchers on how molecular thermodynamics (experimental and
computation) can benefit real-world industrial product and process design. The
meetings are the most important gatherings for molecular thermodynamicists from
all over the world - typically attracting 200-300 participants from North
America, South America, Europe, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. The topics
selected by the International Organizing Committee of the 14th PPEPPD include
both fundamental aspects of molecular thermodynamics (thermodynamics and
transport properties, surfaces, interfaces and confinement effects, quantum
calculations and force fields, and molecular and multiscale simulations),and
applied aspects (product and process engineering, gas and oil downstream and
upstream processes, alternative energy resources and storage, environmental
processes, sustainability and risk management, carbon capture and storage,
pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, food processing, agrochemicals and biomass,
marine and saline systems, materials, and nanotechnology).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of PPEPPD is the sharing of state-of-the-art
techniques to further product and process design that will fuel world-wide
economic growth in the chemical and related industries, and allow the modeling
of new separation processes for meeting lower greenhouse gas emission goals.
U.S. participation is essential for making contributions to the general
knowledge base, for building awareness of global activities, and for fostering
international collaboration. The requested funding would provide air fare
support for a few senior invited U.S. lecturers and members of the international
organizing committee, but will mainly provide support for approximately 16 young
researchers who would not be able to attend without such support. From an
educational standpoint, this represents a unique opportunity for young attendees
to network with peers from around the world and experience the latest worldwide
perspective on research trends in the areas of thermodynamics, transport
properties, phase equilibria, etc. as related to a broad range of chemical
processes and products.