* 1624025
* WORKSHOP: The Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Alan Borning, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 22,875.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 15
promising graduate students, along with a panel of about 3 distinguished
research faculty mentors (this award will support 12 of the students and 2 of
the research faculty) . The event will take place in conjunction with the ACM
2016 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2016), which is
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI) and will be held May 7-12 in San Jose,
California. The annual CHI conference is the leading international forum for the
presentation and discussion of human-computer interaction (HCI) research and
practice, and is attended by approximately 3,400 HCI professionals from around
the world. Research reports published in the CHI Conference Proceedings and the
CHI Extended Abstracts are heavily-refereed and widely cited; they are among the
most scientifically respected and impactful research publications in the field
of HCI. More information about the conference is available at
https://chi2016.acm.org/wp/. The annual CHI doctoral consortia traditionally
bring together the best of the next generation of HCI researchers, allowing them
to create a social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at
a critical stage in their professional development. Applications are encouraged
from all doctoral students whose research is HCI-related, regardless of the
fields in which they are earning their degrees. The event's organizers are
committed to diversity. Due to timing issues, the student participants for 2016
have already been selected; there are 8 men and 7 women, and there is only one
student from any given university.

The Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused meeting that has taken place
annually at the CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the careers
of many outstanding HCI researchers. Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having
experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. During
the two full days of the Consortium on May 7-8, each student participant will
have a 45-minute time slot in which to make a formal presentation about his or
her doctoral research and to receive feedback both from the faculty panel and
the other student participants. The feedback is geared to help students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other HCI
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Follow up activities
including two poster sessions, are planned during the technical program of the
conference on May 9-12. Extended abstracts of the students' work will be
published in the CHI 2016 Extended Abstracts. SIGCHI's conference management
committee will evaluate the doctoral consortium, and the results will be made
available to the organizers of future consortia. The CHI doctoral consortia have
been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial socialization into
the field of young doctoral scholars; many of today's leading HCI researchers
participated as students in earlier consortia.