* 1624335
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: NILE-NEXUS: Opportunities for a sustainable food-energy-water future in the Blue Nile Mountains of Ethiopia
* GEO,ICER
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Benjamin Zaitchik, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2021
* USD 280,308.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a six-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a group of the world?s major and
emerging funders of global environmental change research. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international environmental research most urgently needed to
remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. Each partner organization provides funding for
researchers from their country to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This project is also supported by the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering Global Venture Fund.

Working together in a Collaborative Research Action, the six partner
organizations have provided support for research projects that utilize a strong
inter- and trans-disciplinary approach to examine environmental and related
societal change in mountain regions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in a consortium of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that brings together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry).

This research will identify options to address emerging food-energy-water
pressures in the rapidly changing Ethiopian Blue Nile Mountains. This project
will engage stakeholders at local, regional, and national level to define system
components and dynamics, identify favored adaptation strategies, and develop
scenarios of probable and of possible futures under externally forced and
locally driven change.