* 1624503
* I/UCRC: Center for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research (CHMPR) - Rutgers Site
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Basit Shafiq, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,974.00

As a research site of the NSF I/UCRC for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research
(CHMPR), the mission of the Rutgers Institute for Data Science, Learning, and
Applications (I-DSLA) is to advance research and education in the area of Big
data management and analytics. The multidisciplinary research program in
collaboration with the industry partners, focuses on addressing research and
development challenges in application domains that span healthcare; e-government
and e-commerce; and community resilience and public safety. A key objective of
this project is to integrate research and education by providing student
opportunities to work on real world problems with industry partners. The
emphasis on real problems is particularly suited to attracting individuals from
diverse backgrounds, broadening participation in computer science and
informatics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda of the
Rutgers I-DSLA site is complementary and synergistic to that of CHMPR. The
research projects at I-DSLA span several themes (data analytics, machine
learning, data management, information security and privacy, social media, Web
services, and semantic Web) and domains. In the healthcare domain, the
multidisciplinary research program involves researchers from the Rutgers New
Jersey Medical School Cancer Center, Rutgers I-DSLA, and Rutgers Center for
Information Management, Integration, and Connectivity (CIMIC). The program
leverages the complementary expertise of the team members to develop data
analytics-based approaches that enables discovery of optimal treatment regimens
and identification of patient and disease characteristics that permit responses
to specific therapeutic combinations and modalities. In the e-government and
e-commerce domains, the research work addresses fundamental problems related to
secure information sharing, business process composition and management, and
privacy-preserving data analysis. In the community resilience and public safety
domain, the research work focuses on disaster management, critical
infrastructure protection, and smart cities.