* 1624944
* MRI: Acquisition of Side-Channel Measurement and Analysis System
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Todd Andel, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 409,288.00

This project, acquiring a Riscure Inspector system to provide advance
instrumentation for side-channel measurement and analysis, aims to provide the
country with a unique capability within the Gulf Region to engage in
cybersecurity research of side channel vulnerabilities, countermeasure
development and analysis, and fault injection testing for security and
reliability of critical infrastructure devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Side
channels are unintended information paths that occur as a side effect due to
physical implementation properties, electrical devices that could contribute to
information assurance (IA) and cyber security research and education to an
institution with a track record in these areas. Unintended side channels
introduce significant cyber security risks to computing systems and critical
infrastructure. This instrumentation enables a significant expansion in its
capabilities in side-channel security research critical to securing embedded
devices used in cryptographic applications, medical devices, and smart
cards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation enables faculty and students to
be at the cutting edge of critical cyber security research issues. USA's School
of Computing (SoC) is a fast growing academic unit on campus with a core focus
in cyber security research collaborating on security-focused cross disciplinary
initiatives. Hence, this system is expected to position the institution towards
becoming a national leader in cyber security research and education support. The
university traditionally meets the needs of a diverse student body with a high
percentage coming from rural or financially depressed areas. It has higher than
60% of female students, and more than 1/3 non-while student population. The
students will be afforded hands-on opportunities in research and classroom
activities directly utilizing the side-channel system. The skills gained are
expected to lead directly to internships and permanent employment. The
instrumentation also provides opportunities for doctoral students in both SoC
and CoE and offers opportunities for cohort activities for CoC?s current
Scholarships for Service program. It additionally supports existing K-12
outreach through Center to Center for Forensics Information Technology and
Security (CFITS).