* 1624546
* Evaluating the Role of Fluid and Melts in Mediating Element Recycling and Exhumation During Retrograde Metamorphism Following UHP Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stacia Gordon, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2021
* USD 328,169.00

Nontechnical Abstract Plate tectonics introduces a feedback loop in which
subduction of crustal material at convergent plate margins continually injects
less dense rocks formed at the surface back into Earth's dense mantle. As this
crustal material is subducted, it interacts with the mantle, exchanges elements,
and continuously drives the geochemical evolution of Earth. In order to
determine the effect of element recycling during the exhumation of subducted
rocks, it is necessary to investigate the chemical reactions that occur during
the exhumation of crustal rocks back to Earth's surface. Ultrahigh-pressure
(UHP) terranes contain rocks that were carried down to mantle depths via
subduction and then returned to the surface. Some of the rocks within UHP
terranes preserve "pristine" mineral assemblages that equilibrated at mantle
depths. Typically the outermost rind of these rocks contain new or
"retrogressed" mineral assemblages that formed as the rocks were being exhumed
to the surface. By comparing the chemistry of the "fresh" to the "retrogressed"
UHP rocks, the chemical changes that are triggered by exhumation will be
examined and their impact upon the geochemical evolution of Earth will be
assessed.

Technical Abstract Mass transfer within subduction zones remains poorly
understood. In particular, there is limited knowledge of the P-T conditions at
which elemental recycling occurs and of what transporting agents drive the
elemental-recycling processes. Many field-based studies have focused upon
exhumed high-pressure and ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) terranes to better understand
the devolatilization reactions and products that occur along the prograde path
as crustal rocks are subducted deep within Earth. In contrast, the retrograde
reactions that transpire during the exhumation of these deeply subducted rocks
have largely been ignored despite the fact that peak temperatures generally
occur along the retrograde path and devolatilization and melting reactions are
common. Retrograde metamorphic reactions and associated mass transfer may thus
have a great influence on elemental-recycling processes in subduction zones and
may also dictate the nature of the exhumation processes that bring crustal
material from UHP depths to the surface. This integrated field and laboratory
study of the Western Gneiss Region will reveal whether large-scale elemental
recycling occurs during retrogression of UHP crustal rocks and whether these
processes influence the rates and mechanisms by which UHP terranes are exhumed
back to Earth's surface.