* 1624329
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: ClimateWIse: Climate-Smart Watershed Investments in the Montane Tropics of South America
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Kate Brauman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2020
* USD 398,477.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a six-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a group of the world?s major and
emerging funders of global environmental change research. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international environmental research most urgently needed to
remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. Each partner organization provides funding for
researchers from their country to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in a
Collaborative Research Action, the six partner organizations have provided
support for research projects that utilize a strong inter- and trans-
disciplinary approach to examine climate, environmental, and related societal
change in mountain regions. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers
to cooperate in a consortium of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that brings together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout South America,
millions of people depend on water from high-elevation water sources, which are
under increasing pressure from land-use and environmental change. This project
seeks to enhance sustainable water management by improving scientific
understanding of the hydrologic impacts of land-use and environmental changes in
tropical mountains, increasing the scientific foundation for ecosystem services-
based management, and advancing outcomes for water users throughout the region.
The findings will be of direct use for water management within and beyond South
America.