* 1624046
* I-Corps: Commercialization of Novel Materials for Agricultural Ammonia Filtration
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Krista Walton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

AmmoniaShield aims to transform the poultry industry through a simple and
effective new adsorbent technology. One of the most difficult problems raising
poultry in a traditional poultry house environment is the large concentration of
ammonia gas resulting from ureic acid excreted from the birds. As birds are
tightly packed within a poultry house; ammonia concentrations inside can quickly
rise to dangerous levels resulting in increased mortality, decreased growth, and
increased susceptibility to disease outbreaks. The motivation behind this
project is to transfer an adsorbent technology originally developed for human
respiratory protection to the agricultural industry. Successful technology
transfer would greatly improve current ammonia mitigation methods that either
rely on house ventilation, incurring ventilation and heating costs, or metal
salts, many of which are corrosive, difficult to reapply, and classified as
pesticides. Effective ammonia filtration within a poultry environment would
remove the significant expense of external ventilation and heating costs.

The proposed innovation consists of a novel class of carbonaceous material
called carbide derived carbons (CDCs) for adsorbing ammonia. The method to
synthesize CDCs consists of selectively etching out metal atoms from particular
metal carbides with chlorine gas. Our group has developed specific etching
conditions to leave a tailored metal species and a very tightly defined pore
size distribution within the material. The particular patent pending CDCs
developed by this research group at Georgia Tech are specifically designed to
capture ammonia due to its high surface area and active metal sites tuned to
maximize interactions with ammonia. This team has further developed this
technology to improve ammonia adsorption using lower cost precursors, aiming for
true commercial viability. Both generations have been provisionally filed with
US Patent Office. The goal of this project is to determine the most adaptable
method for our technology, and the greatest benefits over existing methods for
the agricultural industry. As opposed to current ammonia mitigation technology,
the proposed materials can be fitted into the existing internal air circulation
systems inside poultry houses. A non-invasive, low cost, filtration based method
as opposed to the current multiple methods used for ammonia abatement would be
transformative for the meat production industry.