* 1624618
* AGS-PRF: Constraining Ammonia Emission Sources in Urban Areas Utilizing Nitrogen Stable Isotopes
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Wendell Walters, Walters                 Wendell        W
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2018
* USD 172,000.00

Ammonia emissions that produce and neutralize aerosols are increasing in the US
. While the agricultural ammonia sources from fertilizer use dominate and are
well studied, field studies show that ammonia produced from fossil fuel use in
urban areas is underrepresented in current models. This may be a result of the
use of various catalytic NOx scrubber technologies in vehicles and power-plants
to reduce air pollution that can increase ammonia production, particularly in
urban areas. The proposal will use isotope specific ammonia measurements to
quantify the fossil fuel related sources in Rhode Island, Indianapolis and
Philadelphia. The results will help determine how fossil energy use and and
pollution abatement technologies are affecting urban ammonia sources and human
health.

The research will use isotopic (15N/14N) studies to develop fingerprinting tools
for fossil ammonia sources from automobile engines, power plants, and catalytic
NOx scrubbers, agricultural and oceanic sources. Field studies in Providence,
Indianapolis, and Rhode Island will be performed to quantitatively attribute the
ammonia sources using the 15N/14N observations of ammonia. State of the art
instrumentation will be used for the measurements and the results will resolve
the outstanding debate on how much fossil combustion is contributing to the
ammonia budget and how catalytic NOx scrubber technologies are affecting them.