* 1624007
* Collaborative Research:  Community Sourcing Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Nancy Donaldson, Rockhurst University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 67,388.00

The Introductory Physics for Life Science (IPLS) Portal will enhance the
education of hundreds of thousands of life science students each year by
providing engaging and effective IPLS instructional materials and helping IPLS
instructors use these materials. This collaborative effort of the American
Association of Physics Teachers and eight colleges and universities, including a
community college and a Hispanic-serving institution, will create an open-
source, peer-reviewed, and innovatively structured environment for IPLS content.
Initially containing materials from multiple NSF-funded research and development
projects, the Portal will become a development platform for IPLS curricula. The
site will serve as both an archive and a dissemination tool, including a course-
building interface for faculty. Instructors will be supported in creating
innovative and individualized courses, mixing and matching from multiple sources
tuned to their needs, offering a flexible and low-cost alternative to
traditional textbooks.

Many of the objectives and features of the project are innovative. Hence, the
project also includes research components of four critical and interacting
elements: IPLS content, IPLS pedagogy, the organizational structure of the site,
including tagging and taxonomy of all elements for appropriate selection to meet
the needs of individual users, and the user interface. Three overlapping
research teams will carry out this work: the User-Centered Design team, the
Instructional Content Design team, and the Community-Building and Professional-
Development team. This project focuses on engaging and expanding three
communities: (1) physics and biology education researchers, (2) IPLS
contributors, and (3) IPLS adopters wanting to use and adapt existing IPLS
materials. Merging and expanding the efforts of these communities will occur
through a combination of workshops, online support communities, and research to
advance the understanding of faculty professional development for IPLS
education. The IPLS-Portal infrastructure, once developed, could be used to
provide a community-sourcing environment for other STEM disciplines.