* 1624820
* Integrated Analytical Laboratory and Specialized Storage Renovation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Mark Borrelli, Center For Coastal Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 288,617.00

Over the last 40 years, the Center for Coastal Studies (CCS) on outer Cape Cod,
Massachusetts has advanced understanding of marine and coastal ecosystems,
including: the biology of endangered species; the impacts of pollution on
productive embayments; the effects of sea level rise on coastal resources and
development; and the impacts of a changing ecosystem on marine mammals and
fisheries. This award provides funds to expand research capability through the
creation of a new Integrated Analytical Laboratory to facilitate research and
opportunities for collaboration. Facilities for sediment analysis will help
scientists understand complex coastal processes and help to guide adaptation and
coastal resiliency actions that coastal communities must make. Such research is
vital in light of the fact that sea levels are rising more dramatically in the
northeast Atlantic than almost anywhere else in the world. Data from long-term
population biology and ecology studies provide an invaluable foundation for
assessing climate change impacts over the past 30 years and projecting into the
future. They are particularly essential for understanding the remaining
population of the endangered North Atlantic right whales that feed and nurse
their young along the heavily industrialized and developed shore of eastern
Massachusetts.

The improvements will more than triple the size of current laboratory space, and
expand opportunities for collaboration with other scientific and academic
institutions. The new laboratory will consist of facilities for water quality
analysis, biological sample analysis and sediment analysis. Expanded laboratory
capacity for water quality analysis will be essential in helping the region
implement its EPA 208 Water Quality plan and remedy issues of nitrogen pollution
in Cape Cod?s bays, inlets and harbors. The new laboratory facilities will also
protect sensitive research archives generated by the Center?s multi-decade
history of marine mammal research. The improved facilities will increase
opportunities for graduate students, interns and apprentices, and enhance CCS?s
unique ability and opportunity to interact with the public, thanks to its
prominence in environmental education and outreach in a popular tourist
destination. CCS?s STEM-based school programs, more than 100 annual public
programs, public kiosk and Marine Discovery Center, and other outreach directly
impacts nearly 20,000 people of all ages each year. The products of research
will also help resource managers to better protect threatened and endangered
environments and species. For more information about the Center for Coastal
Studies, please visit the website at: http://coastalstudies.org/.