* 1624296
* RAPID: Risk Perception, Threat, and Anxiety Decay in Lone-Wolf Terrorist Events in the US
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jeryl Mumpower, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 186,016.00

This project studies risk perceptions among the American public regarding
domestic terrorism, with a particular focus on so-called "lone-wolf" terrorist
attacks. The study surveys a nationally representative sample of U.S. residents,
then re-surveys them at a later time. This enables the investigators to study
risk perceptions relating to domestic terrorism and, particularly, how those
risk perceptions increase or decrease over time. The survey measures a number of
characteristics associated with perceptions of various types of terrorism
attacks, including so-called lone-wolf attacks. The second survey will measure
the same characteristics approximately six months after the first survey. The
combined data from the two surveys will contribute to a better understanding of
the correlates of risk perceptions of terrorist events and how and why those
perceptions change over time. Better understanding of the specific and
potentially unique risk and threat perceptions associated with lone-wolf
terrorist attacks has implications for public policy and institutional
responses.

More specifically, the project will employ a two-wave panel survey of risk
perceptions relating to domestic terrorism among a nationally representative
sample of U.S. residents. This two-wave design will enable the investigators to
test theoretically and practically important hypotheses about the dynamics of
perceptions of risk in lone-wolf attacks, how these perceptions change over a
6-month period of time, including the character of perceived risk "decay" and
"social amplification," and how these changes compare with risk perceptions of
other kinds of threat. The investigators hope to get the first wave into the
field in as close time proximity as possible to the focusing events of 2015 in
San Bernardino (December 2), Colorado Springs (November 17), Paris (November
13), Chattanooga (July 16), and Charleston (June 17). Wave 1 of the survey
measures perceptions of various types of terrorism attacks, including an effort
to identify which of a number of events respondents consider to be lone-wolf
attacks. The questionnaire will be administered over the internet to a
nationally representative sample. The wave 1 sample will consist of
approximately 1,700 respondents. The wave 2 survey will consist of re-interviews
of an estimated 1,200 of these 1,700 respondents 6 months after the initial
interviews The difference in number of respondents is due to expected attrition.