* 1624790
* I/UCRC: Phase I: Computing and Genomics-An Essential Partnership for Biology Breakthroughs (CCBGM)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2024
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 766,000.00

The application of genomics across the life sciences industries is currently
challenged by an inadequate ability to generate, interpret, and apply genomic
data quickly and accurately for a wide variety of applications. Major
Innovations in the applicability, timeliness, efficiency, and accuracy of
computational genomic methods are needed, and these innovations will develop
best when an interdisciplinary team of scientists, engineers, and physicians
from academia and industry, spanning computer systems, health
care/pharmaceuticals, and life sciences, work together. The University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and the Mayo Clinic are building on their
longstanding collaboration to form the Center for Computational Biotechnology
and Genomic Medicine (CCBGM), which will bring together their excellence in
computing, genomic biology, and patient-specific individualized medicine.
Working closely with industry, the CCBGM's multidisciplinary teams will use the
power of computational genomics to advance pressing societal issues, such as
enabling patient-specific cancer treatment, understanding and modifying
microbial communities in diverse environments related to human health and
agriculture, and supporting humanity's rapidly expanding need for food by
improving the efficiency of plant and animal agriculture. The CCBGM will
leverage UIUC's long-standing prowess in large-scale parallel systems, big data
analytics, and hardware and software system design, to develop new technologies
that enable future genomic breakthroughs. A key element of the Center's vision
is to advance breakthroughs at the interface of biology and computing to
transform health-care delivery while enhancing efforts that focus on the health
science needs of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCBGM will bring together an
interdisciplinary team to address the colossal genomic data challenge.
Academia/industry partnerships will enhance research, education, and
entrepreneurship while performing important technology transfer. The Center will
achieve transformational computing innovations on three fronts. (1) It will
innovate computing and data management to deal with issues of scaling to the
ever-growing volume, velocity, and variety of genomic data. It will concentrate
initially on scaling the computation of epistatic interactions (interactions
between two or more genes or DNA variants) in genome-wide association study
data, generating lists of genomic features that are maximally predictive of
phenotypes, and information-compression algorithms for genomic data storage and
transfer. (2) It will revolutionize the generation of actionable intelligence
from multimodal structured and unstructured data, to generate knowledge from big
data. The emphasis will be on the processing and integration of genomic and
multi-omic data, and on the merging of unstructured phenotypic data with
information from curated data sources (e.g., electronic medical records,
annotation databases). The integration of these diverse data types will improve
discovery research, predictive genomics, diagnostics, prognostics, and
theranostics. Application areas include targeted cancer therapy,
pharmacogenomics, crop improvement, and predictive microbiome analysis. (3) It
will achieve systems innovation by designing computer systems specially suited
for computational genomics, providing unprecedented speed and energy efficiency
while preserving the accuracy of the analytics. The systems will be used to
quantify and improve the accuracy of detecting genomic variation and, more
generally, to optimize computing architectures for the execution of genome
analysis workflows.