* 1624368
* I-Corps: Atomic High Magnetic Field Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The pursued technology is based on a measurement approach that utilizes vapor
cells containing atoms in highly excited states (Rydberg states) that function
as sensors for strong magnetic fields. Key features of the atomic high magnetic
field sensor are: (1) since the invariable response of atoms is used for the
field detection, the operation of these sensors is intrinsically calibration-
and drift-free, (2) the sensors exhibit high precision and a large measurement
range, (3) metallic components that may be problematic with sensing magnetic
fields are not present in the sensor head (all-optical signal readout), (4) the
sensors have high-spatial-resolution imaging capability, and (5) the sensors are
immune to electromagnetic interference (EMI) effects. High magnetic fields in
the range of 1-100 Tesla are becoming increasingly important in science and
engineering settings. There is growing demand for such fields at university
laboratories and government-funded research facilities around the world, and for
use in improved industrial processing techniques. In medicine, strong magnets
continue to drive improvements in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) products and
systems. Advances in high-magnetic-field science and applications continue to
benefit directly from improvements in the detection and control of strong
magnetic fields, driving demand for devices capable of sensing and measurement
in different high-magnetic-field environments with ever-more stringent
requirements on the device?s performance capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is planned to develop a high-magnetic-field sensor with a sensor head that is
electrode-free, metal-free, and based on atomic spectroscopy. The response of
the Rydberg atoms to the fields to be measured is detected using
electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT), a quantum-optics method that
allows all-optical measurements of Rydberg energy levels without need for vacuum
systems and particle detectors. Much of the infrastructure required for
measuring strong magnetic fields using Rydberg-atom EIT (lasers, electronics,
data acquisition and processing) is already present in the laboratory from
previous work. The team has already prepared a setup consisting of strong
permanent magnets (field about one Tesla) surrounding the spectroscopic cell.
The testing will include the useful field range, the resolution and accuracy,
and the detection bandwidth. It is planned to perform one or two test runs
within a strong superconducting magnet that can provide 6 to 9 Tesla of magnetic
field. The team believes that the sensor technology to be developed can have
distinct competitive advantages over current sensors on the market. The
potential contribution of the work to science, scientific applications and
eventually to the market is the development of atomic sensors for strong-
magnetic-field measurement and imaging applications, with performance
characteristics that address limitations of existing high-magnetic-field sensor
and measurement technologies. The potential customers include national
laboratories with high-magnetic-field capabilities and detection needs, such as
particle colliders, plasma physics labs, and the National High Magnetic Field
Lab, industrial materials manufacturers, medical MRI research and development
centers, and electromagnetic compliance (EMC)/EMI testing laboratories in the
aerospace, automotive, and defense industries.