* 1624516
* Fractionation of Rare-Earth and High-Field Strength Elements by Melting of a Re-equilibrated Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Yan Liang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 250,875.00

The abundance and distribution of rare earth elements (REE) and high field
strength elements (HFSE) in mafic and ultramafic rocks provide important clues
to understanding the origin and evolution of igneous rocks. A fundamental
observation in geochemistry is that there is relative depletion of HFSE compared
to REE and other trace elements such as thorium in basaltic magmas erupted along
continental margins. Geochemists have used this observation to unravel magmatic
processes in the subduction zones. However, the mechanisms leading to this
relative depletion are still poorly understood. This project is designed to test
if the relative depletion of HFSE in arc magmas is caused by redistribution of
REE and HFSE between mantle minerals during subsolidus re-equilibration and
subsequent partial melting in the subduction zone. The project would advance
STEM education by providing research opportunities for undergraduate students
and serving as a training ground for a graduate student.

Disequilibrium melting happens when the kinetics of chemical exchange between a
residual mineral and partial melt is sluggish compare to the rate of melting. It
is more likely to take place during hydrous melting because the solidus
temperature is lower. The primary objective of this proposed study is to assess
and quantify the roles of subsolidus re-equilibration and subsequent
disequilibrium partial melting of spinel lherzolite in the fractionation of HFSE
from REE during magma genesis. The project has two closely related components:
(1) experimental calibration of parameterized lattice strain models for the
partitioning of HFSE between pyroxene and basaltic melt and between
orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene, and (2) numerical and theoretical studies of
HFSE and REE fractionation during disequilibrium mantle melting. Results from
the proposed pyroxene-melt partitioning experiments will also be used to update
existing partitioning models for REE and HFSE in pyroxenes. Temperature and
composition dependent partitioning models allows the investigators to use self-
consistent initial conditions for HFSE and REE abundances in starting pyroxenes
in their melting model, and to conduct simulations along a melting path where
temperature and mineral major element compositions change systematically.
Forward and inverse geochemical modeling will be conducted to critically assess
the geochemical consequences of melting of subsolidusly re-equilibrated mantle.