* 1624594
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Catalysis: From Theory to Commercialization
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Christopher Marshall, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2016
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract (Marshall, 1624594)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests funds to
partially support registration fees and travel expenses for the participation of
early career scientists in the 2016 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Catalysis to be held June 11-17, 2016 at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NH.
The theme of the conference is Catalysis: From Theory to Commercialization,
reflecting the diversity of the field which requires fundamental knowledge of
chemistry, chemical engineering and materials science. The conference will bring
together a diverse group of speakers, promote cross-disciplinary fertilization
of ideas in catalysis, and create a sense of community by promoting interactions
of young scientists, underrepresented minority scientists, and junior faculty
with prominent senior investigators in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysis
continues to play a key technological role for improving the quality of human
life, for reducing the adverse impact of human activities on the environment,
and for securing the nation's energy supply. Catalysis also has a major economic
impact on the nation's role in manufacturing. The 2016 GRC on Catalysis will
continue the tradition of bringing together leading researchers from around the
world to discuss their latest, most exciting work in catalysis and future
directions for the field. The conference is organized into session topics on
Paraffin Upgrading, Organometallic Routes to Heterogeneous Catalysis, Model
Catalyst Systems, New Catalysts for Biomass Feedstocks, Elucidating Catalytic
Mechanisms, Non-Traditional Catalyst Supports, New Materials for Catalysis, and
Surface Chemistry of Catalytic Systems. The meeting will tap into the broad
experience level of a wide variety of scientists to explore how surface science
and reaction chemistry combine to create new catalytic materials that can be
used by industry to save energy, lower emissions, and reduce waste in chemical
processes. Specifically, the 2016 GRC in Catalysis will emphasize frontier
research in the areas of catalyst synthesis, in situ catalyst characterization,
and modeling of catalytic reactions. The Catalysis GRC plays an important role
in enhancing the development of researchers in early stages of their careers.
Among the various opportunities for participants to interact with colleagues,
the 2016 Catalysis GRC will introduce a new initiative to increase gender
diversity in the field of catalysis. To this end, a new Monday afternoon
session, titled "Power Hour: Committed to inclusion and the professional
development of women in science," will provide the female members of the
conference with a forum to discuss how to improve both their numbers and
effectiveness in the catalysis field.