* 1624770
* I/UCRC: Phase I: for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Paul Franzon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 782,000.00

The semiconductor industry is perennially one of America's top exporters.
Worldwide semiconductor sales for 2014 reached $335.8 billion, and the number of
U.S. jobs in this sector was estimated to be around 250,000 in 2013. More
broadly, the U.S. tech industry, which depends on semiconductor innovation to
spur new products and applications, is itself estimated to represent no less
than 5.7% of the entire U.S. private sector workforce (at nearly 6.5 million
jobs), and with a tech industry payroll of $654 billion in 2014, it accounted
for over 11% of all U.S. private sector payroll. Yet despite its success, the
industry must continue to innovate if the U.S. is to retain global leadership in
this highly competitive area. The complexity of modern microelectronic products
necessitates the use of computer tools to formulate and verify product designs
prior to manufacturing. When a product doesn't operate as intended or suffers
early failures, this can often be attributed to inadequacy of the models used
during the design process. In fact, the shortcomings of existing approaches for
system component modeling have become a serious impediment to continued
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced Electronics through
Machine Learning (CAEML) proposes to create machine-learning algorithms to
derive models used for electronic design automation with the objective of
enabling fast, accurate design of microelectronic circuits and systems. Success
will make it much easier and cheaper to optimize a system design, allowing the
industry to produce lower-power and lower-cost electronic systems without
sacrificing functionality. The eventual result will be significant growth in
capabilities that will drive innovation throughout the electronics industry,
leading to new devices and applications, continued entrepreneurial leadership,
and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While achieving those goals, CAEML
will also focus on diversifying the undergraduate engineering student body and
improving the undergraduate experience. Students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in engineering will be targeted for recruitment as
undergraduate research assistants. Member companies will provide internships and
mentors for participating students, and the diverse graduate and undergraduate
student researchers in CAEML will receive hands-on multidisciplinary education.
CAEML will also participate in all three site universities? existing avenues for
student and faculty engagement with local youth. In particular, university-based
summer camps are a tried and tested method of making high-school students
familiar with and comfortable on our campuses. NCSU runs engineering summer
camps for high-school students, with the Electrical and Computer Engineering
department providing an autonomous robotics workshop. CAEML undergraduate and
graduate students can serve as counselors or instructors for camps; the CAEML
team proposes to develop new activities and workshops for high-school campers on
all three sites' campuses. In addition, the MISO program (Maximizing the Impact
of STEM Outreach) at NCSU is a campus-wide program funded by NSF that provides
an innovative approach to evaluation across NC State's K-12 STEM education
outreach programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML) will create machine-
learning algorithms to derive models used for electronic design automation, with
the objective of enabling fast, accurate design of microelectronic circuits and
systems. The electronics industry's continued ability to innovate requires the
creation of optimization methodologies that result in low-power integrated
systems that meet performance specifications, despite being composed of
components whose characteristics exhibit variability and that operate in
different physical or signal domains. Today, shortcomings in accuracy and
comprehensiveness of component-level behavioral models impede the advancement of
computer-aided electronic system design optimization. The model accuracy also
impacts system verification. Ultimately, the proper functionality of an
electronic system is verified through testing of a representative sample.
However, modern electronic systems are so complex that it is unthinkable to
bring one to the manufacturing stage without first verifying its operation using
simulation. Today, simulation generally does not ensure that an integrated
circuit or electronic system will pass qualification testing the first time, and
failures are often attributed to insufficiency of the simulation models. With an
improved modeling capability, one could achieve better design efficiency, and
also perform design optimization. For system simulation, behavioral models of
the components' terminal responses are desired for both computational
tractability and protection of intellectual property. Despite many years of
significant effort by the electronic design automation community, there is not a
general, systematic method to generate accurate and comprehensive behavioral
models, in part because of the nonlinear, complex, and multi-port nature of the
components being modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML will pioneer the use of
machine-learning methods to extract behavioral models of electronic components
and subsystems from simulation waveforms and/or measurement data. The Center
will make 2 primary contributions to the field of machine learning: it will
demonstrate the application of machine learning to electronics modeling, and
develop the entire machine-learning pipeline. Historically, machine-learning
theorists have focused on the model learning and evaluation tasks, but CAEML
will focus on end-to-end performance of the pipeline, including data
acquisition, selection and filtering, as well as cost function specification.
CAEML will develop a methodology to use prior knowledge, i.e., physical
constraints and the domain knowledge provided by designers, to speed up the
learning process. Novel methods of incorporating component variability,
including that due to semiconductor process variations, will be developed. The
intended end-users are electronic design automation (EDA) tool developers, IC
design houses, and system design and manufacturing
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML consists of 3 sites: Illinois, Georgia
Tech, and NC State. The scope of research at each site encompasses both
algorithm development and the application of the derived models to a variety of
IC and system design tasks. Investigators at all 3 university sites have unique
skills and expertise while sharing interests in electronic design automation, IC
design, system-level signal integrity, and power distribution. To leverage the
cross-campus expertise, many of the Center's proposed projects involve
investigators from more than one site. The NCSU investigators have special
expertise in RFIC and digital design, process design kits, and circuit-level
surrogate modeling. All three sites have strong research records in the fields
of signal integrity analysis and electronic design automation.