* 1624827
* Burial, Uplift and Exhumation History of the Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 347,999.00

The Earth's crust is in dynamic motion, driven by plate tectonics and less
understood processes, like addition or removal of dense magmatic rocks in the
deep crust. One manifestation of these motions is the sinking of large
depressions that are continuously filled with sediment as they sink, creating
great basins of sedimentary rock, often hundreds of kilometers across and
reaching depths of 10 kilometers or more. Rocks in these basins experience
heating and reaction with percolating water, before uplifting and eroding due to
later crustal motions. These great cycles of burial and exhumation are
responsible for creating some of the most important records of earth history,
and are the crucibles where key geological resources are forged -- including
petroleum, natural gas and ore deposits. Perhaps the most important factor
controlling the geological processes in basins is the change in temperature with
time, which both reflects the underlying forces driving subsidence and uplift,
and controls the chemical processes associated with petroleum and ore formation.
This project will bring to bear a new tool for the study of the temperature
histories of sedimentary rocks exposed in exhumed basins, focusing on the
limestones of the Colorado Plateau, which are exposed in and around the Grand
Canyon. We will approach this problem using 'clumped isotope thermometry' -- a
technique that examines the extent to which rare, naturally occurring isotopes
of carbon and oxygen form bonds with one another in the atomic lattices of
mineral structures. These isotopic 'clumps' form in greater abundance at lower
temperatures, leading to a kind of thermometry. And, these isotopic clumps can
only form or disperse by atomic diffusion above a certain temperature,
introducing a second way in which differences in thermal history can be recorded
in differences in isotopic composition. This technique was invented about a
decade ago, but has only recently become well enough understood to be used as a
tool for unraveling the cryptic, often complex thermal histories of exhumed
basins. This research focuses on the Colorado Plateau because it is one of the
major tectonic and topographic domains of North America and its thermal history
has been studied extensively, yet its carbonate-dominated strata have not been
amenable to established techniques. The application of clumped isotope
thermometry to limestones of this region will complement and build on what has
been learned by earlier studies. Second, the exhumation of the Colorado Plateau
was associated with incision of the Grand Canyon, and our work will constrain
the timing and dynamics of the formation of this important landscape. This
project will also be a proving ground for a method that could be used to
reconstruct thermal histories in many resource-rich sedimentary basins,
expanding our understanding of petroleum and ore formation and of deep-seated
crustal waters. In addition to the scientific objectives of the research, the
project is contributing to other important societal goals, including the
training of postdoctoral scholar in a new and emerging isotopic technique, as
well as providing research opportunities for undergraduate and high school
students in a STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal examines burial, uplift and
exhumation history of the Colorado Plateau, using carbonate clumped-isotopes
thermometry. In burial and exhumation settings, the clumped-isotope compositions
of carbonate minerals constrain the thermal history of carbonate minerals,
possibly including both temperatures of discrete events (cementation,
recrystallization, vein formation) and temperature-time thresholds recorded by
isotopic mobility, which occurs at 90-180 degrees celsius in calcites and
~250-300 degrees celsius in dolomites. These temperature ranges are important in
the study of basin evolution and hydrocarbon exploration, but are only partially
covered by conventional, low-temperature thermochronometry. The principal
investigators research will bring new constraints that complement better known
tools such as fission track and Uranium-Thorium/Helium thermochronometry. In
particular, they will characterize the distribution of clumped-isotope apparent
temperatures in strata of the Colorado Plateau, including both vertical
transects through exposed and cored sections and regional scale horizontal
gradients. These data will be combined with existing experimental constraints on
the rates of clumped-isotope re-ordering to constrain peak-burial temperatures
and peak-burial thermal gradients (based on vertical transects); these derived
quantities will be used to infer the distribution of maximum burial depth and
total-exhumation pattern across the Colorado Plateau (where appropriate, in
combination with existing Uranium-Thorium/Helium and fission track data). More
generally, this will be the first detailed study of burial and exhumation of a
large-scale tectonic feature using clumped-isotope constraints. The proposed
work will advance understanding of the Colorado Plateau burial, uplift and
exhumation history, and more generally, of the interactions between tectonic
activity and surface processes.