* 1624662
* Northeastern University Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Title: Northeastern University Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Energy-Smart
Electronic Systems

Datacenters are being constructed daily across the United States at an ever-
increasing rate. Just in the first half of 2015, 94.8 megawatts of data center
environments were constructed. Financial services, technology, social media and
healthcare sectors are just a few of the drivers in this rapidly expanding
market. Given the ambitious goals of cloud computing providers and exascale
supercomputing, power-smart technologies are going to play a key role in order
to reach these aggressive computing targets. This project addresses datacenter
power usage. This planning grant will create a new I/UCRC Site at Northeastern
University, joining the existing I/UCRC Center for Energy-Smart Electronic
Systems (ES2). The Northeastern team brings critical research expertise to the
existing Center, and leverages the availability of the Massachusetts Green High
Performance Computer Center (MGHPCC). The ES2 I/UCRC is committed to engaging
women and underrepresented minorities students in research activities associated
with the Site through a research coop model, and through a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program.

Datacenters and supercomputing facilities struggle in terms of their effective
use of power and cooling resources. The addition of the Northeastern University
Site to the existing ES2 Center adds new research capabilities across the
computing stack, ranging from low-power mixed signal design to introducing
emerging memory technologies into the memory hierarchy, and from leveraging
accelerators to power-aware workload scheduling, that can be used to resolve
current and future challenges. The new ES2 Site joins the lead institution
Binghamton University, as well as Center partners at Villanova University,
Georgia Tech and University of Texas at Arlington. The existing Center partners
already have established 25 industrial partners in the Center. The addition of
Northeastern builds on this success, and positions the Center to expand in a
number of areas in a Phase II program. These areas include: i.) memory system
design and optimization, ii.) accelerators, both hardware and software, and
iii.) power-effective design.