* 1624171
* RCN UBE: MIRC and MB Research Coordination - Food, Energy, Water, Ecosystem Resources (FEWER)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 502,065.00

The Mississippi River and the Mekong River are among the largest river systems
in the world. Both provide food, energy, water, and ecosystem resources to
millions of people. The history of anthropogenic perturbations (e.g., dam
building) and challenges due to climate change continue to impact these river
systems and the ecosystems that they support. The purpose of the Food, Energy,
Water, and Ecosystem Resources (FEWER) Research Coordination Network (RCN)
project is to facilitate the networking of scientists within the Minority
Institute Research Collaborative (MIRC) - which consists of faculty-scientists
from more than 20 U.S. institutions and between MIRC-affiliated scientists and
faculty from institutions in Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, and Cambodia - to
address scientific problems of mutual interest. The FEWER RCN will focus on four
areas in biology: (1) Aquatic Biology and Ecosystem Science; (2) Traditional-Use
Plants and Natural Products; (3) Biofuel Feedstocks and Enzyme Systems; and (4)
Impact of Climate Change on Biodiversity in the Mekong Basin. Specific research
projects will be developed under one of these themes and research groups
consisting of faculty and students from more than one institution within the
network will submit position papers to the FEWER RCN steering committee so that
the initiation of projects may be scheduled during the term of the grant.
Faculty are expected to engage graduate students and undergraduates in this
research using a variety of mechanisms, including institutional funding for
undergraduates, REU funding that is available across the network, and other
funding sources. A few student internship awards will be available directly
through the RCN. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The FEWER RCN will enhance emerging
areas in food, energy, water and ecosystem resources and facilitate new research
collaborations between scientists within MIRC and between MIRC and the
international partners. From an academic development perspective, this project
aims to increase the number of minority and minority-serving faculty engaged in
international research. It will also address scientific problems of importance
to stakeholders within the Mississippi River system and the Lower Mekong Basin.
This project is aligned with the goals of the U.S. Department of State's "Lower
Mekong Initiative" and officials from governments within foreign partner
countries as well as the U.S. State Department are aware of and will be informed
on a periodic basis of results from this NSF-funded RCN effort. This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).