* 1624253
* Sea Education Association/SSV Corwith Cramer &amp; SSV Robert C. Seamans Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Paul Joyce, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2017
* USD 87,731.00

Sea Education Association (SEA) requests funding from the National Science
Foundation to update existing oceanographic equipment in its sailing research
vessel laboratories in order to continue training undergraduates in the marine
sciences, and to further collection of data from under-sampled areas of the
oceans for submission to national archives. The SSVs Corwith Cramer and Robert
C. Seamans operate in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, respectively, supporting
educational programs and oceanographic research. The equipment requested will be
used by undergraduate students and collaborating scientists from colleges and
research institutions throughout the country. All data generated will be freely
shared with the entire oceanographic community via submission to the NSF
Research Vessel data archive Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R). Although SEA
vessels are not operated through the UNOLS umbrella, the organization has
provided numerous examples of quality personnel both to the scientific and
technical support communities. Financial support of their efforts is necessary
to ensure this pipeline remains productive. This proposal requests fund for the
following Oceanographic Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two (2) SBE CTD
packages $44,747&lt;br/&gt;Two (2) LED epifluorescence packages
$31,562&lt;br/&gt;Two (2) UV/VIS Spectrophotometers $11,422&lt;br/&gt;
$87,731&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.