* 1624396
* University of Washington-Oceanography R/V Thomas G. Thompson Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 201,540.00

A request is made by the University of Washington to fund additional and
replacement instrumentation for the R/V Thompson, a 274? general purpose, global
class research vessel, and R/V Barnes, a 66-foot coastal research vessel, both
operated as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These platforms provide facilities for
conducting oceanographic research funded by the National Science Foundation and
other federal agencies. The instrumentation they propose to acquire will provide
operational flexibility to projects that are embarked upon both vessels and will
increase their capacity to do useful science and data collection during transits
between funded cruises. Thompson completed 275 days in 2015; 133 of these days
(48%) were for NSF. On Barnes, 9 of the 50 days (18%) were for NSF. In 2016,
Thompson is scheduled for 130 days and 49 (38%) are for NSF. The schedule is
light for Thompson because she goes into the yard for a mid-life refit in June.
Barnes is scheduled to sail 86 days in 2016, with 9 days (9%) funded by NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this proposal
includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Turner Fluorometer $9,278 &lt;br/&gt;2)
Upgrade of computer racks $29,953 &lt;br/&gt;3) Fume Hoods $62,582 &lt;br/&gt;4)
Computer network upgrade $67,993 &lt;br/&gt;5) Virtual machine server upgrades
$37,954 &lt;br/&gt;6) C-Nav 3050 Receiver $10,914 &lt;br/&gt;7) -80 C Chest
Freezer $7,776 &lt;br/&gt;8) WiFi distribution system upgrades $8,854
&lt;br/&gt; $235,304 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.