* 1624684
* Phase I I/UCRC Johns Hopkins University Site: Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 956,000.00

Phase I I/UCRC Johns Hopkins University Site: Advanced Mammalian
Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Johns Hopkins
University, University of Delaware, Clemson University, and University of
Massachusetts-Lowell have jointly established a multi-university, Phase I I/UCRC
entitled the Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC). Over
the past two decades, the biopharmaceutical industry has emerged as one of the
major manufacturing industries and engines of growth in the US economy.
Biomanufacturing represents nearly 2% of the total US GDP and its fraction is
expanding. Much of biomanufacturing involves the use of cells to make medicines.
Examples of these types of medicines include cancer medicines and vaccines. A
key element in developing these medicines is the need to establish complex
manufacturing processes. AMBIC will implement engineering innovations to enhance
the capabilities of our nation to manufacture these important life-extending and
life-saving medicines. Such improvements will improve the competitiveness of US
biomanufacturing in coming decades leading to more economic investment by these
companies and more jobs for American workers. &lt;br/&gt;The mission of AMBIC is
to develop enabling technologies, knowledge, design tools and methods that apply
and integrate high-throughput and genome-based technologies to fast-track
advanced biomanufacturing processes. AMBIC is the first I/UCRC dedicated to
mammalian cell culture upstream development focusing on Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells, the principal biopharmaceutical production host of industry. AMBIC
will bring together leading academic and industrial biotechnologists focused on
mammalian cell culture manufacturing at a pre-competitive research level to
address the complex problems in biopharmaceutical manufacturing. This multi-
university center will allow AMBIC to leverage the skills and the expertise of
many faculty members across the Sites. AMBIC will be a critical catalyst towards
maintaining national excellence in biopharmaceutical production by conducting
research in: 1) Understanding Industrially-Relevant Biology (e.g., all -omics,
bioinformatics, process and product quality, etc.); 2) Process Monitoring &amp;
Control (e.g., analytics, instrumentation, data mining and modeling); 3)
Consensus and Standardization Issues (e.g., standards, simple fingerprints, raw
material issues, regulatory issues, forensic bioprocessing, clonality). Through
systems-level biology analysis, novel cell line development, bioreactor
optimization, and advanced analytics, AMBIC will provide transformative
solutions that can lower biomanufacturing costs and improve bioprocessing
efficiency. Most importantly, these advances may ultimately serve to make more
biopharmaceuticals available to patients that need them and lower overall health
care costs for consumers. In addition, AMBIC will establish and maintain a
pipeline of educated and motivated students at multiple levels for careers in
biopharmaceutical manufacturing and development. Collaborations with corporate
partners will enable the students to work on the most pressing problems that the
industry faces. Furthermore, this center will serve to engage and excite
students from under-represented minority populations to pursue a career in life
sciences, engineering, or related STEM fields. An important part of the AMBIC
activities and a committed goal of the PIs is to increase the participation of
women and under-represented minorities in STEM disciplines by energizing
students from all backgrounds about the exciting opportunities to help others
through STEM careers in biotechnology and biomedicine.