* 1624108
* Workshop: Modeling of Infectious Diseases with a Focus on Ebola; March 6-7, 2016; Dakar, Senegal
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2017
* USD 99,639.00

This award will fund a two-day satellite workshop to the Next Einstein Forum
(NEF) in Dakar, Senegal. The workshop will be held on March 6-7, 2016, and will
focus on US-African collaborative research on infectious disease modeling for
informing public health preparedness. The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa
was a reminder that the world is ill-prepared for a severe disease epidemic or
any similar global sustained public emergency. The risk of future global severe
infectious disease outbreaks in an increasingly connected world is greater than
ever. The workshop will explore how mathematical models can be used to
understand and forecast disease transmission dynamics and to evaluate the effect
of different interventions and changing on-the-ground conditions on
epidemiological outcomes. The workshop will concentrate on the responses to the
recent Ebola outbreak, while gaining insight from responses to HIV/AIDS and
other epidemics within individual countries. To enhance local engagement, a
mini-symposium at the University Cheikh anta Diop of Dakar is also planned.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though modelers have analyzed ongoing epidemics before,
such as the 2003 SARS and 2009 Swine Flu epidemics, their response to the recent
Ebola outbreak enabled by online availability of epidemiological data, from WHO
and health ministries of the most affected countries, was unprecedented in
magnitude. Lessons learned from this outbreak will be fundamental for improving
the application for epidemiological modeling during outbreak of emerging and re-
emerging infectious diseases, engaging public awareness on the importance of
epidemiological modeling, and improving interaction between public health
authorities and modelers to the end of using mathematical/computational models
to inform preparedness strategies to mitigate future epidemics. The satellite
workshop and mini-symposium will catalyze collaborations among modelers and
policy makers in the US and Africa. Bringing together scientists from Africa and
the US should lead them to be better prepared to collaborate on the intertwined
problems posed for our societies by the threats of disease. Not only will this
enable US researchers to gain better understanding of routes of disease
transmission and effects of government policies in Africa, it will also expose
them to the modeling efforts in Africa and provide contacts for data and
interpretation. Such collaboration will open doors for US researchers to learn
of problems that are uniquely African, such as how best to optimize limited
resources to contain the spread of a disease in specific African populations.