* 1624793
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Advanced Forensic Science Research at University of South Alabama
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 14,993.00

Digital forensics is a critical area of forensic science research. New
electronic devices and systems are constantly being developed, and these are at
risk of being compromised by cybercriminals. The University of South Alabama
will bring together academic researchers and industry/agency partners to
identify specific projects in Digital Forensics Information Intelligence and
work towards establishing a research site that would be part of a larger, multi-
site Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science. The researchers will
focus on basic and fundamental research topics in digital forensics that will
support industry innovation, economic growth, and national security by making
new technologies safer and more secure. The University of South Alabama also has
multiple, established channels for dissemination of research findings, K-12
science outreach, undergraduate and graduate student training, and support of
diversity and the inclusion of underrepresented groups in the STEM
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of South Alabama will hold a
planning meeting with the goal of establishing a research site in an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Advanced Research
in Forensic Science (CARFS). The mission of the proposed Center is to provide a
multidisciplinary forum for advancing research, innovation, and training in the
forensic sciences. The University of South Alabama research site will focus on
Digital Forensics Information Intelligence (DFII), which is the development,
testing and implementation of novel approaches to detect and understand
compromises to electronic devices, information systems, and software. The
research site will undertake industry-collaborative, long-term research
addressing such topics as malicious software analysis, detection and
exploitation; and technology evaluation. Application areas include mobile
devices, additive manufacturing, medical devices, and transportation systems.
This is a critical area of research, given the constant development of new
electronic devices and systems and their risk of compromise by cybercriminals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is jointly supported by NSF and the
National Institute of Justice.