* 1624092
* Collaborative Research: Integrated He-CO2-N2 Isotope and Petrologic Study of Volatiles Cycling via the New Zealand Subduction System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Gray Bebout, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2022
* USD 173,582.00

Knowledge of the cycling of volatiles such as water (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2),
and molecular N (N2) at Earth's convergent margins is fundamental to
understanding the role of fluids in a variety of processes related to plate
tectonics on Earth. In order to fully assess the impacts of human-related
("anthropogenic") processes on our surface environment (atmosphere, oceans, and
biosphere), we must understand the natural (non-anthropogenic) processes
contributing to environmental change, at all time scales. There is no better
example of this need than that relating to the buildup of CO2 in the atmosphere
and its likely effect on global mean surface temperature and the myriad other
related processes (change in ocean surface water temperature, ocean circulation,
polar ice melting, etc.). Understanding these processes is predicated on a
quantitative assessment of the mass balance of volatiles entering subduction
zones versus the fraction returned to the surface in fore-arc, volcanic front,
or back-arc localities, versus the proportion transported into the deeper Earth
(to depths greater than 150 km, in the mantle). Huge uncertainties on flux
estimates of volatiles returned directly to the surface versus those subducted
to the deeper mantle remain, and prevent assessments of both long- and short-
term cycling histories of key volatiles between Earth's interior and external
reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the research team will
investigate the cycling of volatiles in the well-characterized New Zealand North
Island subduction system where input and output fluxes of specific volatiles
(CO2, N2, and noble gases such as He and Ar) can be well constrained. The
proposed study area, a combination of the Hikurangi Margin, Axial Ranges, Taupo
Volcanic Zone and Hauraki Rift Zone, comprises a forearc-volcanic front-backarc
profile providing a crucial test of the mass balance of these key volatiles
between sedimentary and oceanic lithosphere inputs at the Hikurangi Trench to
output via magmatic, geothermal and groundwater activity in various tectonic
regimes of the North Island. The volatile input characteristics will be
constrained using sediment cores from ODP Site 1124, DSDP Site 317, and an
upcoming IODP leg, whereas output volatile characteristics and fluxes will be
provided by extensive on-shore sampling of ~100 sites at strategically-placed
localities throughout the North Island. The approach will be underpinned by
thermodynamic modeling of slab volatile release utilizing Perple_X and other
software and composite profiles of incoming sediment/basement. Taken together,
the combination of combined petrologic-geochemical-geothermal approaches at the
NZ subduction zone offers the tantalizing prospect of providing well-constrained
solutions to the question of recycling efficiencies for key volatiles through
subduction systems, and a clearer understanding of fundamental processes (e.g.,
slab composition, P-T regime, plate-coupling and upper plate structure) involved
in controlling subducted volatile release/retention properties.