* 1624663
* Collaborative Research: "Double-Double Dating" of Detrital Monazite and Detrital Zircon: Quantifying Sediment Recycling in Tectonic Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2022
* David Moecher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 214,334.00

Many geoscientists have suggested that it is likely that sedimentary rocks are
"recycled", i.e. sediment is first eroded from pre-existing sedimentary rocks,
gets placed back into the hydrologic cycle, and then is once again deposited
into a basin to become a new sedimentary rock. Although this is an important
suggestion, there are limited data that quantify to what degree this process
occurs. This research will test a new approach, using a novel and relatively
inexpensive method utilizing chemical analysis and dating of uranium and thorium
isotopes in order to provide this needed quantitative data. If these new methods
are successful, they can be used by a wide variety of scientists to develop a
much better understanding of the history of a sedimentary basin - information
critical not only to academic scientists but to those in both the petroleum and
economic minerals industry as well. In addition to the scientific goals of the
research, the project train undergraduate and graduate students in an important
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) discipline, thus
contributing to the education of the next generation of scientists. In addition,
it will provide outreach to high schools for pathways for high school students
to go into the earth sciences in both central New York and Kentucky, and will
also facilitate the development of teaching modules for teachers and students
based on the results of the research. Results of the research will be
disseminated as peer-reviewed publications and as presentations at professional
society meetings. Analytical data will be made available through publicly
accessible online databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consideration of sediment
recycling in tectonic studies is critical for accurate assessment of tectonic
reconstructions such as terrane movement and collisional histories. Preliminary
research indicates that some detrital monazite grains exhibit textural evidence
of having formed diagenetically in an older clastic sequence (i.e. detrital
diagenetic monazite) and therefore must be recycled. The principal investigators
suggest that the detrital diagenetic grains are readily distinguishable, based
on textures and ages, from detrital monazite derived from crystalline rocks in
the source terranes. This project will test the effectiveness of this rapid
approach for detecting recycling compared to the much more expensive and labor
intensive method of "double dating" detrital zircon (i.e. Uranium-Lead
geochronology combined with (Uranium-Thorium)/Helium thermochronology of the
same crystal). The principal investigators will perform textural analysis, using
backscatter electron imaging of monazite crystals, to characterize grains
identified as diagenetic detrital monazite versus detrital metamorphic/igneous
monazite. These grains will then be dated using Thorium-Lead geochronologic
techniques followed by (Uranium-Thorium-Samarium)/Helium dating to
quantitatively establish if our rapid, qualitative approach is valid. The
researchers will also determine the Neodymium isotopic composition of the dated
single monazite grains to determine if this is a new and useful approach to
expand sedimentary provenance information. The isotopic methods will be applied
to Neoproterozoic and Paleozoic sedimentary strata from the eastern United
States.