* 1624853
* New approaches to address scaling issues for lateral flow of water in a layered snowpack
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Ryan Webb, Webb                    Ryan           W
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Ryan W. Webb has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at the University of Colorado - Boulder and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Dr. Webb will aim at better understanding
the lateral flow of water within a snowpack. The investigator will study the
formation and scales at which capillary and/or permeability barriers occur in
snow, and the applicability of laboratory scale parameters as input for
modeling. The investigation will provide fundamental insights into hydrological
processes that occur during spring snowmelt in multiple environments. Data
generated from this research will be made widely available through the
hydrologic database CUAHSI HIS. In addition to research, the investigator will
engage in education activities like mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students in numerous research opportunities and co-teaching a hydrology course
at the University of Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic processes that
occur during snowmelt create a complex environment where the lateral flow of
water has been shown to be hydrologically significant, though difficult to
model. To model this process accurately, representation of snowpack properties
at appropriate scales is necessary. Thus, the research seeks to: 1) determine
the variability in grain size and density between adjacent snowpack layers
required to produce significant lateral flow at the hillslope scale, 2)
determine the driving physical (topographic, land cover, etc.) and climatic
conditions required to produce these barriers, 3) produce a two-dimensional
numerical model capable of simulating layered porous media with temporally
varying properties, and 4) determine how suitable laboratory scale
investigations of snow properties are for applications at the hillslope scale.
Data will be collected across elevation gradients in the Boulder Creek CZO and
Niwot Ridge LTER using state of the science Global Positioning Systems and
Ground Penetrating Radar methods for non-destructive measurements of liquid
water content in snow, dye tracer experiments for larger scale flow path
development investigations, laboratory experiments for isolation of the effect
of slope, and inverse modeling for upscaling previously developed laboratory
scale parameters.