* 1624328
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Autonomy Protocols: From Human Behavioral Modeling to Correct-By-Construction, Scalable Control
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Behcet Acikmese, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 515,512.00

Computer systems are increasingly coming to be relied upon to augment or replace
human operators in controlling mechanical devices in contexts such as
transportation systems, chemical plants, and medical devices, where safety and
correctness are critical. A central problem is how to verify that such partially
automated or fully autonomous cyber-physical systems (CPS) are worthy of our
trust. One promising approach involves synthesis of the computer implementation
codes from formal specifications, by software tools. This project contributes to
this "correct-by-construction" approach, by developing scalable, automated
methods for the synthesis of control protocols with provable correctness
guarantees, based on insights from models of human behavior. It targets: (i) the
gap between the capabilities of today's hardly autonomous, unmanned systems and
the levels of capability at which they can make an impact on our use of
monetary, labor, and time resources; and (ii) the lack of computational,
automated, scalable tools suitable for the specification, synthesis and
verification of such autonomous systems.

The research is based on study of modular reinforcement learning-based models of
human behavior derived through experiments designed to elicit information on how
humans control complex interactive systems in dynamic environments, including
automobile driving. Architectural insights and stochastic models from this study
are incorporated with a specification language based on linear temporal logic,
to guide the synthesis of adaptive autonomous controllers. Motion planning and
other dynamic decision-making are by algorithms based on computational engines
that represent the underlying physics, with provision for run-time adaptation to
account for changing operational and environmental conditions. Tools
implementing this methodology are validated through experimentation in a virtual
testing facility in the context of autonomous driving in urban environments and
multi-vehicle autonomous navigation of micro-air vehicles in dynamic
environments. Education and outreach activities include involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in the research, integration of the research
into courses, demonstrations for K-12 students, and recruitment of research
participants from under-represented demographic groups. Data, code, and teaching
materials developed by the project are disseminated publicly on the Web.