* 1624118
* IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) 2016: Doctoral Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ming-Ting Sun, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This grant supports U.S. Ph.D. students to participate in the Student Program in
IEEE ICME (International Conference on Multimedia and Expo) 2016 in Seattle. The
support enables more graduate students to directly interact with senior
researchers as well as their peers from diverse research institutions. This will
provide important help to the graduate students at a critical stage of their
development and advance the state of the art in multimedia technologies. The
ICME 2016 Student Program provides an opportunity for Ph.D. students whose
dissertations are on topics related to multimedia, to present their research and
receive feedback from an invited committee of faculty and industry researchers
and from other students working in the related area. It is aimed to provide
students valuable exposure to outside perspectives on their work, a setting to
discuss and fine-tune their career objectives, and to identify development
needs.

Since 2000, ICME has been the flagship multimedia conference sponsored by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), serving as a forum to
promote the exchange of the latest advances in multimedia technologies, systems,
and applications from both the research and the development perspectives of four
IEEE societies: Circuits and Systems, Communications, Computer, and Signal
Processing. The topics of the conference span interdisciplinary areas including
content analysis, activity and event understanding, search and retrieval,
location-based media, social, user-generated and cloud-based media, immersion
and VR/AR (Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality), security and forensics,
multimodal interaction, networking and communication, signal processing, and
systems and applications. With about 700 submissions and 500 participants each
year, ICME has a highly selective acceptance rate: 15% for oral presentations
and the next 15% for posters. Further information on the ICME 2016 Student
Program can be found on the ICME 2016 web site (http://www.icme2016.org).