* 1624542
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Megathrust Earthquake Ruptures with Coastal Stratigraphy and Tsunami Simulations, South-Central Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Breanyn MacInnes, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 267,194.00

On February 27, 2010, a great earthquake of magnitude 8.8 struck the coast of
Chile. The uplift of the seafloor during the earthquake triggered a tsunami that
swept over the coast. More than 525 people were killed and estimates of total
economic losses were US $15-30 billion. Worldwide, only five great earthquakes
since 1900 have been larger, including the largest earthquake ever recorded,
which also occurred in southern Chile in May 1960. It is difficult to fully
understand the behavior and effects of great earthquakes based on the handful
that have occurred since scientific measurements began 100 years ago. A research
team from Central Washington University and Rutgers University are using the
long historical record (500 years) and geologic evidence of past earthquakes and
tsunamis in Chile to investigate the effects of great earthquakes and tsunamis.
Unusual sand deposits indicate that powerful tsunami waves swept landward
multiple times in the last 2,000 years. Changes in the soil above and below the
tsunami sand layers also indicate rising or sinking of the coastal landscape
during earthquakes. Microscopic algae (diatoms) that live in coastal sediments
are very sensitive to changes from fresh to salt water and vice versa. By
identifying changes in the fossil diatoms present within ancient sediment
layers, the amount of land-level change during past earthquakes can be precisely
determined. The researchers are also using computer models of tsunami waves to
calculate the locations and sizes of the fault ruptures that produced the past
earthquakes based on these results. This combination of evidence will improve
understanding of the frequency, location, and size of ancient earthquakes, and
thus of the long-term behavior of the ocean-floor faults that produce them. The
research team will engage in diverse activities to increase public awareness and
education about earthquake and tsunami hazards in both the U.S. and Chile that
include: production and distribution of a public service handbook in Spanish and
English on preparing for and surviving a tsunami; presentations to the public,
government officials, and local stakeholders; earthquake and tsunami activities
for U.S. grade school children; and workshops for Hispanic and low-income
students who are underrepresented in science careers. Graduate, undergraduate,
and postdoctoral researchers will gain valuable research experience in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physics of subduction-zone
deformation and accurately assessing the hazards from megathrust earthquakes and
their accompanying tsunamis requires earthquake and tsunami histories of
considerable detail over multiple earthquake cycles. Accurate and precise
estimates of the amounts and timing of coseismic uplift and subsidence over
multiple earthquake cycles are critical to understanding the long-term history
of strain accumulation and release at subduction zones. South-central Chile was
the site of two of Earth?s largest earthquakes (1960, Mw 9.5; 2010, Mw 8.8).
However, prior to the past century, the 500-year written history of earthquakes
and tsunamis provides limited information on rupture extent and magnitude. This
research project uses coastal stratigraphic evidence of subsidence, uplift, and
tsunami deposits to measure coseismic and interseismic vertical deformation and
construct tsunami chronologies at sites along 600 km of the south-central
Chilean subduction zone. Comparisons with forward simulations of tsunamis will
identify best-fit rupture parameters (length, location, depth, magnitude) for
megathrust earthquakes during the last 2000 years. Two new paleoseismic methods
will be developed in this project. First, Bayesian diatom transfer functions
that employ the relation between diatoms and salinity, tidal elevation, and life
form will be used to reconstruct records of vertical land-level change during
large earthquakes. The expanded modern diatom dataset, combined with new
Bayesian diatom-based transfer functions, will significantly increase the
accuracy and precision of microfossil-based reconstructions of coseismic and
interseismic coastal deformation in south-central Chile. Second, tsunami
simulation models will be used to create forward simulations of tsunamis and
match them with the distributions of paleotsunami deposits to differentiate the
rupture locations and lengths responsible for past tsunamis. By combining the
deformation reconstructions with mapped tsunami-deposit inundation and
latitudinal extent, the researchers will use numerical simulations to evaluate
different rupture scenarios for past megathrust earthquakes. Such rupture
modeling has not been attempted in south-central Chile, or published elsewhere
at this large spatial scale. Maps of the deposits of the 1960, 2010, and earlier
tsunamis in a variety of coastal geomorphic settings will provide important
calibration comparisons for identifying prehistoric tsunami deposits and using
them to infer inundation extent at other coastal sites subject to tsunami
hazards.