* 1624216
* Metalloradical Catalysis for Selective Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/06/2015,05/31/2019
* Peter Zhang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Peter Zhang of the University of
South Florida applies the concept of metalloradical catalysis for the
development of new catalytic systems based on cobalt(II) complexes of porphyrins
to control the reactivity and selectivity of radical reactions. Since
metalloradical catalysis can generate radical intermediates catalytically
without the need for stoichiometric initiators such as the commonly employed
organotin reagents, the method will have a positive environmental impact. In
comparison with the typical need for rare and expensive second- and third-row
metal ions to catalyze two-electron ionic reactions, one-electron radical
reactions can be carried out effectively with catalysts based on earth-abundant
and inexpensive first-row transition metal ions such as cobalt. As such, the
development of metalloradical catalysis addresses the increasing need for
sustainable catalysts. The proposed project by Professor Zhang integrates
research and educational activities. In addition to scientific training for
graduate and postdoctoral students, laboratory experiences for high school
students and teachers, as well as undergraduate students, are
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new catalytic radical processes, which are
both mechanistically distinctive and operationally attractive, serve as valuable
synthetic tools for constructing organic compounds, such as biologically
important natural products and pharmaceutically interesting small molecules. On
the basis of the fundamental understanding of the catalytic mechanisms of
Co(II)-based radical cyclopropanation and aziridination reactions, new catalytic
processes that involve a cascade sequence of radical reactions are in
development to allow for the efficient construction of carbocycles and
heterocycles beyond three-membered cyclopropanes and aziridines. Through the
design and synthesis of chiral porphyrins possessing potential hydrogen bonding
capability and with tunable electronic, steric, and chiral environments as the
supporting ligands, this project aims to achieve several specific types of
Co(II)-catalyzed radical cascade processes. The success of this project may
prompt the identification of new metalloradical catalyst systems based on
different combinations of open-shell metal ions and chiral ligands that can
catalyze a broad range of stereoselective radical reactions.