* 1624052
* I-Corps:  On-the-Go Urinalysis Optical Lab
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Humberto Bocanegra Evans, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Testing of urine for molecular content is a powerful tool that a doctor uses in
the assessment of a patient's health profile. This procedure is typically done
in a laboratory, where the patient must bring the urine sample for testing.
Unfortunately, the collection and transportation of the sample can be a time-
consuming task, which poses particular di;culty for patients with decreased
mobility. Furthermore, kidney health is crucial for quality of life.
Unfortunately, health issues like diabetes and high blood pressure are risk
factors in the development of chronic kidney disease. This is particularly
problematic given the high incidence of obesity that the United States currently
is facing. Together, diabetes and cardiovascular disease cost the United States
over $370 billions per year. By monitoring kidney function more frequently, its
deterioration can be detected early, allowing doctors and patients to make
adjustments in treatment and lifestyle to prevent further loss of kidney
functions. This is crucial given the fact that, in many cases, kidney function
cannot be recovered. Additionally, the alarming rate of chronic kidney disease
in adults over 65 years (25%) makes it critical to closely monitor kidney
function. The goal of this I-Corps team is to develop a completely marketable
prototype from the above proof of concept that includes the current and the
future planned improvements in the project phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed apparatus can facilitate the collection, storage and transfer of
patients' urinalysis data and reduce the amount of time and resources used by
performing urinalyses in a home setting with an automated device. It can also
benefit clinics, hospitals and assisted living settings, which can use the
capabilities of our proposed device to feed a database with the resulting
data.During the customer discovery phase in the I-Corps program, the team will
focus in understanding further the key needs of a broader medical population and
explore other areas where the technology can be of significant value (e.g.,
veterinary, sport medicine etc.). Validation and testing of proof of concept in
a hospital setting is expected to be completed. Specifically testing at a Family
Unit will be completed. Identify deficiencies in terms of user experience, work
towards improvements based on feedback and test at small clinics as well as
engaging patients.