* 1624330
* I-Corps: Pain-free Database Administration via Workload Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Barzan Mozafari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Businesses are increasingly relying on database systems to support mission-
critical applications. Consequently, running a database system has become a
major operational cost for businesses as poor database performance can directly
impact revenue and user experience. Database administrators (DBAs) are required
to constantly monitor, diagnose, and rectify any performance decays.
Unfortunately, the manual process of debugging and diagnosing database problems
is extremely tedious and non-trivial. Rather than being caused by a single slow
query, performance problems can be due to a large number of concurrent and
competing queries creating compounded and hard-to-isolate effects. Sudden
changes in request volume, query patterns, network traffic, or data distribution
can cause previously abundant resources to become scarce, and the performance to
plummet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a tool for
assisting DBAs in quickly and reliably diagnosing performance problems in a
database. By analyzing hundreds of statistics and configurations collected over
the lifetime of the system, this tool's algorithm quickly identifies a small set
of potential causes and presents them to the DBA. The goal of this project is to
investigate the commercialization opportunities of this technology through
customer discovery. Moreover, the team plans on locating and interacting with
Beta users who are willing to use the proposed program and provide critical
feedback on (i) what they like, (ii) what needs to be improved, (iii) what needs
to be added, and (iv) what these customers are willing to pay.