* 1624966
* Code-switching in spontaneous bilingual speech
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2022
* USD 465,293.00

The goal of this collaborative research project, led by Rena Torres Cacoullos at
Pennsylvania State University and Shana Poplack at the University of Ottawa, is
to uncover the strategies used by bilinguals as they switch seamlessly between
their two languages. Bilinguals alternate between stretches of speech in the
different languages even when speaking on the same topic to the same
interlocutor. Beyond merely inserting isolated words from another language, such
code-switching may involve juxtaposing entire phrases from different languages
in the same speech event. Educators, journalists, and other public figures often
disparage code-switching as haphazard mixing, yet it is now known that those who
code-switch are in fact the most highly skilled bilinguals. What is still a
conundrum are the rules governing code-switching. This project will integrate
research and education by training students to analyze natural bilingual speech.
The project will promote international inter-university collaborations, and by
revealing the systematic patterning of bilingual speech, the results will help
counteract the disparagement of what is often labeled Spanglish.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Mexico Spanish-English Bilingual speech corpus,
constructed with prior NSF support, provides an appropriate database for the
scientific investigation of code-switching because it contains copious instances
produced during spontaneous bilingual conversations. The transcribed recordings
will be comprehensively tagged for language and, based on this infrastructure,
systematic quantitative analyses will be carried out to address two kinds of
questions. One is the linguistic conditions on code-switching: At which
syntactic and prosodic points in the speech stream do bilinguals prefer to code-
switch? The other is the cognitive processes involved: Do contextual elements,
such as cognate words and interlocutor language choice, act as triggers? By
counting both instances of the presence and absence of code-switching, the
researchers will be able to distinguish idiosyncratic tokens from community
norms and rare occurrences from major patterns, estimate the propensity of code-
switching at particular sites, and evaluate the actual role and scope of
contextual elements that have been hypothesized to constrain patterns of code-
switching.