* 1624782
* I/UCRC: University of Florida Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jose Principe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This project proposes to establish the NSF I/UCR Center for Big Learning (CBL).
The mission of CBL is to pioneer in large-scale deep learning algorithms,
systems, and applications through unified and coordinated efforts in the CBL
consortium. The vision of CBL is to create intelligence enablers towards
intelligence-driven society. With the explosive big data generated from natural
systems, engineered systems, and human activities, we need intelligent
algorithms and systems to facilitate our decision making with distilled insights
automatically at scale. The proposed CBL center is a timely initiative as our
society moves towards intelligence-enabled world of opportunities. The CBL
consortium is expected to become the magnet of deep learning research and
applications and attract leading researchers, enthusiastic entrepreneurs, IT and
industry giants working together on accomplishing the promising mission and
vision. This planning grant will lead to a successful proposal for the
establishment of the NSF I/UCR Center for Big Learning with a solid consortium
across multiple campuses and a large number of industry partners.

CBL has the following broader impacts. (1) Making significant contributions and
impacts to the deep learning community on pioneering research and applications
to address a broad spectrum of real-world challenges. (2) Making significant
contributions and impacts to promote products and services of industry in
general and our members in particular. (3) Making significant contributions and
impacts to the urgently-needed education of our next-generation talents with
real-world settings and world-class mentors from both academia and industry. (4)
Our meetings, forums, conferences, and planned training sessions will greatly
promote and broaden the research and materialization of DL.



The proposed project aims to establish the NSF I/UCR Center for Big Learning
(CBL). With dramatic breakthroughs in multiple modalities of challenges (e.g.,
image, video, speech, text, and Q&A), the renaissance of machine intelligence is
looming.The mission of CBL is to pioneer in large-scale deep learning (DL)
algorithms, systems, and applications through unified and coordinated efforts in
the CBL consortium via fusion of broad expertise from our large number of
faculty members, students, and industry partners. The vision of CBL is to create
intelligence enablers towards intelligence-driven society. CBL possesses the
pioneering intellectual merit in the following key research themes. (1) Novel
algorithms. This theme focuses on novel DL algorithms and architectures, such as
deep architecture, complex deep neural networks, brain-inspired components,
optimization, deep reinforcement learning, and unsupervised learning. (2) Novel
systems. We propose novel architectures, resource management, and software
frameworks for enabling large-scale DL platforms and applications on desktops,
mobiles, clusters, and clouds. (3) Novel applications in health, mobile/IoT, and
surveillance. During the planning phase, we will establish a solid center
strategic plan, marketing plan, and the CBL consortium that consists of four
academic sites and a large number of industrial members.

CBL has the following broader impacts. (1) Making significant contributions and
impacts to the deep learning community on pioneering research and applications
to address a broad spectrum of real-world challenges. (2) Making significant
contributions and impacts to promote products and services of industry in
general and our members in particular. (3) Making significant contributions and
impacts to the urgently-needed education of our next-generation talents with
real-world settings and world-class mentors from both academia and industry. (4)
Our meetings, forums, conferences, and planned training sessions will greatly
promote and broaden the research and materialization of DL.