* 1624061
* Populating a Radiocarbon Database of North American, Phase II
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 261,946.00

Radiocarbon dating provides archaeologists with dates on organic materials
(especially charcoal from hearths) that are less than 45,000 years old. It is
the primary method that North American archaeologists use, and millions of
dollars in federal and other funding has been spent in obtaining thousands of
such dates from archaeological sites. Researchers around the world now use the
changing abundance of radiocarbon dates as a way to reconstruct population
histories over time, and thus to provide an important piece of human history:
where and when did populations rise and decline? How fast? How does population
change relate to climate change, technological innovation, population density,
subsistence, warfare, and emigration, social and political organization? This
project has already compiled dates from the 11 western U.S. states (35,000+); it
will now move on to compile dates from the 11 plains states. It is not only the
dates themselves that are compiled, but also associated contextual information
that researchers need to "clean" the database to create a sample useful for
their specific research questions. The data will become publically and freely
available through the Canadian Archaeological Radiocarbon Database, a large and
growing international radiocarbon database. It will provide researchers with a
useful tool to investigate research questions in several disciplines including
archaeology, paleontology, and genetics, and help move North American
archaeology toward its next frontier, "Big Data," since archaeology's strength
is its ability to test hypotheses against patterns in data across vast reaches
of space and time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the question of
prehistoric rates of population growth and, contrary to received wisdom, has
already discovered that the long-term rates of growth of agricultural
populations are the same as earlier hunting and gathering populations. If this
discovery stands, it implies that the only significant change in human
demographic history occurred in the nineteenth century, when technological
advances in food production and trade coupled with advances in medical knowledge
dramatically increased the rate of population growth. In other words, rapid
population growth is only a feature of modern human life. To achieve this goal
the project is investigating the "best practices" of statistical analysis of
large samples of radiocarbon dates. Rises and declines in the number of dates
per unit time is assumed to track similar rises and declines in human
population. There is reason to be cautious as there are several variables that
could modify if not negate this assumed relationship, for example, research
bias, the systematic loss of dates over time due to preservation , and the
effects of the standard procedure used to convert radiocarbon ages in familiar
calendar dates.