* 1624040
* Workshop:  3dNaturalists: Using citizen science, bioblitzes and the National Park Service Centennial to promote undergraduate learning in biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Uwe Hilgert, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* William Hoese
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The PI and organizing team from the University of Colorado, Central Michigan
University, Moravian College, and the University of Arizona have received an
award through the Research Coordination Network - Undergraduate Biology
Education (RCN-UBE) program to hold a workshop entitled Workshop: 3dNaturalists:
Using citizen science, bioblitzes and the National Park Service Centennial to
promote undergraduate learning in biology. The workshop assembles some of the
key personnel from three RCN-UBEs as well as partners from iPlant (CyVerse)and
the National Park Service, educators, and student leaders from science clubs in
Estes Park, Colorado. BioBlitz events are 24-hour biodiversity surveys involving
scientists and the general public collecting species information in an area;
perhaps the largest ever BioBlitz event will take place on May 20th as part of
the large National Park Service Centennial event. The purpose of this workshop
is to prepare students for their roles as experts and field technicians in the
2016 Centennial BioBlitzes and address important topics including data quality,
and science associated with crowd-sourced data, broadening participation in
citizen science, and incorporation of BioBlitz data into biology education. Key
themes of the workshop include data collection tools and devices, data accuracy
and application to key science questions, and the challenge of engaging more
underrepresented students and undergraduates in general in BioBlitz events. The
timing of the workshop is ideal to train students for the opportunity to engage
in the large-scale research learning experience about biodiversity in which data
collection (via apps on smartphones and tablets) and crowdsourcing datasets are
used toward the goal of producing a list of all species observed in the various
parks, including those new to the park or new to science. &lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will start with a field session where students and professionals will
use various citizen science apps on smartphones followed by two days of
facilitated round table discussions, presentations, and activities to exchange
information about citizen science data, data accuracy issues and student
engagement approaches. On the last day, participants will return to the field to
use the various tools discussed and build student confidence in leading the
general public through the BioBlitz events. The workshop will include
participants from a diverse array of institutions and backgrounds in order to
provide the broadest perspective on how to grow and improve the BioBlitz
experience as well as research and educational outcomes. The inclusion of
student leaders from science clubs such as Minorities in Agriculture, Natural
Resources, and Related Sciences (MANRRS) and different chapters of the
Ecological Society of America's SEEDS and SACNAS (Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science) will enhance student engagement,
recruitment, and networking.