* 1624513
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoscribe 3D Laser Lithography System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 436,543.00

This Major Research Instrumentation proposal will support the acquisition of a
three-dimensional (3D) printer with nanoscale resolution. The advent of 3D
printing has provided researchers with an unprecedented ability to realize and
test new concepts, by enabling the simple and rapid fabrication of 3D
prototypes. However, one of the major limitations of nearly all existing 3D
printing techniques, is they are limited to resolutions of about 15 microns.
This is a severe issue, as many device concepts, experimental research
approaches, and emergent material properties only become possible with the
capability to fabricate 3D structures with nanoscale features. By printing
structures with features over 40 times smaller than the diameter of a human
blood cell and 100 times smaller than other existing 3D printers, the
acquisition of a Nanoscribe 3D printer will enable a large and diverse array of
new research with impacts ranging from aerospace to biomedical applications,
such as: new ultra-light materials that can be tailored for energy absorption,
or sub-cellular nanostructures for new clinical therapies and tissue
engineering. This program will also support an array of new educational
activities focused on nanoscale 3D printing, ranging from K-12 to graduate
levels, which will help develop the future STEM workforce and increase the
participation of underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoscribe
3D printer, with an in-plane resolution of 150 nm and an out-of-plane resolution
of 1 micron, will enable a wide array of new integrative and transformative
research. Emergent material properties stemming from microstructural geometry
will be studied, such as dynamic tunability or combined low-density, high-
stiffness, and high damping. Novel 3D microfluidic anisotropic ratchet conveyor
systems for biological assays and combinatorial chemistry will be explored. The
Nanoscribe instrument will allow unprecedented investigations into the effect of
3D nanotopography on cell development, function, and mechanics. New ultra-
compact optical beam shaping systems will be investigated, including 3D
diffractive optical traps and metasurfaces. The Nanoscribe instrument will also
serve as a platform to study new photocurable resins for nanoscale 3D printing
that expand the library of printable materials and enable higher resolution
printing. New microscale flying robotic concepts will be studied that leverage
3D sub- microscale structural elements. Finally, the Nanoscribe instrument will
also open the study of 3D printing for use in otolaryngological microsurgical
applications to improve hearing. As is demonstrated by the diverse research
objectives of the 17 senior personnel leading this program, the acquisition of
this state-of-the-art 3D nanofabrication capability will be a major regional
resource, and lead to a broad range of new research in the greater Pacific
Northwest community.