* 1624665
* Northern Kentucky University FSML- Planning Grant: Developing a Five Year Plan
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Richard Boyce, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This project will prepare a 5-year strategic plan for the Northern Kentucky
University (NKU) Research and Education Field Station (REFS). This station is
located adjacent to the St. Anne Woods and Wetlands (SAWW), 155 acres of
conservation easement natural areas on and near the Ohio River. REFS is located
in the Outer Bluegrass Ecoregion, with open- and closed-canopy forested
wetlands, upland grassland, and wooded natural areas containing substantial old
growth forest, primarily dominated by beech. Although current and past
ecological research at SAWW has included some national data collection programs,
the breadth and depth of studies have been limited by the lack of laboratory
facilities at the site. The acquisition and recent refurbishment of a building
by NKU and associated land as its first field station opens the door to new
research initiatives and associated education and outreach opportunities. This
project is significant in that it will provide a plan of action for both
enhancing and building university research and education programs while
initiating and developing P-12 and community outreach programs. The field
station provides a space for activities that were previously not possible,
including indoor laboratory and field processing procedures, meetings, research
and education workspace, storage, and restrooms. Therefore this project is
important because it will promote the progress of science in a three-fold
manner: namely, it will provide a framework for the new REFS to 1) develop and
enrich new and existing field research programs at SAWW to contribute to long-
term projects and network with national databases such as our on-going
Ecological Research as Education Network (NSF-EREN) studies on litter
decomposition and permanent forest plots and active membership in the Kentucky
Organization of Field Stations (KOFS), 2) expand ecological and
transdisciplinary educational opportunities for undergraduates, and 3) increase
engagement with our community partners (business, government, education,
nonprofit organizations, and public-at-large) to expand learning and research
opportunities, enhance nature awareness, and increase environmental literacy to
create a better informed public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The St. Anne Woods and
Wetlands (SAWW) contain 155 acres of conservation easement natural areas on and
near the Ohio River. It is located in the Outer Bluegrass Ecoregion, with open-
and closed-canopy forested wetlands, upland grassland, and wooded natural areas
containing substantial old growth forest, primarily dominated by beech. Research
at SAWW began over 100 years ago by E. Lucy Braun and most recently has focused
on field biology (amphibian and reptile diversity, plant diversity, bird nesting
biology), biogeochemical processes, monitoring of the impacts of introduced and
invasive species, and the restoration of damaged systems. Through these
projects, scientists at Northern Kentucky University (NKU) have also trained
undergraduates in field research. Our intent through this project to develop a
5-year field station strategic plan to create a systematic organization of
research activities that can be networked with other sites on local, regional,
and/or national bases, particularly for long-term data sets. The newly acquired
NKU Research and Education Field Station (REFS), which is located adjacent to
SAWW and only a few minutes from the NKU campus, will centralize these research
efforts and allow for processing and analyses of samples, receive monitoring
instrumentation output, and complement field studies. The planning process will
facilitate the establishment of a budget-conscious field station usage plan and
supply direction for the incorporation of new technologies in monitoring studies
and communication informatics. Simultaneously, it will provide incentives for
broader research use of this facility by NKU faculty and others. These
activities will begin with our current participation in the Ecological Research
as Education Network (NSF-EREN) and the Kentucky Organization of Field Stations
(KOFS). The proximity of the field station to the NKU campus will expand
opportunities for ecological undergraduate instruction while providing unique
transdisciplinary teaching opportunities over a range of other disciplines. REFS
will expand our partnerships with businesses, educational institutions, non-
profit organizations, and the public-at-large to catalyze regional growth and
vitality. To do so, the facility will enhance community outreach activities for
P-12 schools to improve college readiness, host summer camps, and facilitate
teacher continuing education. The plan will also incorporate the use of the
field station and SAWW by the NKU Center for Environmental Restoration, an
instructional-based environmental consulting center, to train undergraduates in
improved techniques of land management and restoration. The station website
(http://stannewetlands.org/) provides an overview of activities that have been
done at SAWW.