* 1624183
* RAPID: Chemical Air Emissions from Cured-in-Place-Pipe (CIPP) Pipe Repair Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Andrew Whelton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,999.00

1624183&lt;br/&gt;Whelton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cities and utilities across North
America are repairing millions of miles of crumbling sewer pipes using the
cured-in-place-pipe "trenchless" renewal technique. At the same time, state
transportation agencies across the nation are also relying on CIPP for repairing
millions of miles of stormwater culverts. The cured-in-place-pipe repair method
involves the installation of a resin impregnated fabric into the deteriorating
pipeline or culvert followed by curing in situ with heat (hot water or steam) or
ultraviolet light. Cured-in-place-pipe is created by the crosslinking of a
polymer resin. Evidence indicates that chemical emissions from steam and hot
water cured cured-in-place-pipe sewer pipe repair activities can pose a risk to
human health and the environment. The project goal is to understand chemical air
emissions from steam cured cured-in-place-pipe installations, one of the most
popular cured-in-place-pipe technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A December 2015
chemical emission study of three steam cured cured-in-place-pipe installation
sites in a U.S. city indicated styrene was emitted into the air at greater than
1,000 ppm, exceeding all regulatory workplace exposure standards. Levels
reported far exceeded the International Toxicity Estimates for Risk value of 20
ppm for the most susceptible population such as children. Styrene is one
ingredient of steam cured cured-in-place-pipe, nearly 50% w/w in the uncured
resin, and a volatile organic compound (VOC). Styrene, a carcinogen (NTP 2015),
has an odor detection limit of 0.16 ppm. Steam cured cured-in-place-pipe is one
of the most common sewer pipe and culvert repair methods in use today due to its
low cost. The proposed work is urgently needed and will provide a better
understanding of cured-in-place-pipe site chemical air emissions. Without this
project: (1) risks posed to the environment and persons near cured-in-place-pipe
installation sites will continue to be poorly defined, and, (2) cities,
utilities, and state transportation agencies cannot implement engineering
controls that best protect the environment or human health. This project is in
response to the scientific needs of municipalities, utilities, and
transportation agencies across the nation who are rehabilitating deteriorated
water infrastructure, specifically pipelines and culverts. Cured-in-place-pipe
is increasingly being installed throughout the U.S. for stormwater culvert and
sewer pipe repair applications. New evidence suggests that cured-in-place-pipe
installation activity can emit the hazardous air pollutant styrene, among other
volatile organic compounds into the air exceeding workplace exposure standards
and it is most common that cured-in-place-pipe emissions are poorly controlled.
Currently, there is no reliable data set of time-resolved and volatile organic
chemical species emissions from cured-in-place-pipe sites. In light of the
growing number of emergency response incidents and population health impacts
prompted by cured-in-place-pipe chemical emissions, there is an urgent need for
the proposed study. Utilities, cities, and state transportation agencies do not
have the information needed to develop construction specifications and
engineering control strategies that limit chemical air emissions from cured-in-
place-pipe sites. Results will fill a knowledge-gap that inhibits infrastructure
owners and managers from better protecting the environment and nearby population
from chemical air emissions. This project provides an exceptional STEM learning
opportunity for Purdue University students.