* 1624313
* An Interatomic Potential for LixSi Alloys and Its Applications to Lithiation Induced Deformation and Failure in Silicon
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2017
* jianmin qu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 06/30/2017
* USD 166,527.00

The goals of this project are (1) to obtain an interatomic potential for LixSi
Alloys and (2) to use this interatomic potential to study the lithiation induced
deformation and failure of silicon anode in lithium-ion batteries. Making solar
energy economical and providing energy from fusion are two of the grand
challenges identified by the National Academy of Engineering. A key component of
both challenges is energy storage. At the moment, the most economical and
efficient way of storing solar energy is electrical battery. Lithium-ion battery
is considered the most promising technology for high density energy storage, and
silicon is the highest capacity anode material. Despite the rapid development
and significant progress made in recent years, capacity degradation and short
lifetime have not been solved for silicon based anodes. Among other things, the
lack of understanding of the mechanisms for lithium insertion/extraction, and
the lack of efficient tools for designing Si-based anodes are the major
roadblocks that prevent the technology breakthroughs for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the above needs, this project is
(1) to obtain an interatomic potential for LixSi Alloys and (2) to use this
interatomic potential to study the deformation and failure of silicon anode in
lithium ion batteries. Such an interatomic potential for LixSi alloys will be a
powerful tool. It enables us to validate the various continuum models on lithium
insertion. It can be used to estimate some of the material properties that are
difficult to obtain experimentally. It gives us a mean to study the
microstructural mechanisms of fracture and failure. Besides contributing to
science and engineering, the research activities will also have a broader impact
on educating students by (1) integrating the research results into a core
engineering course, "Multi-scale Modeling", (2) recruiting undergraduates for
research, focusing on women and minorities, (3) providing a platform for cross-
department interactions among graduate students, and (4) recruiting local high
school teachers and students for summer research experience in the PI's lab.