* 1624817
* Texas A&amp;M U. Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Metal Deformation Processes (iuFOCUS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Metal deformation processes are ubiquitous manufacturing techniques used in many
industrial sectors such as automotive, medical and electronic devices, oil and
gas equipment, and aerospace industries. The processes are involved in
approximately 7% of the US Gross Domestic Product. Advancement in metal
deformation technologies can address key national needs such as defense, energy
independence and efficiency, homeland security, and health care. The objective
of the project is to conduct a planning meeting to establish an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) on metal deformation
processes, which will provide intrinsic value to industry. The goal of the
Center is to deliver pre-competitive, fundamental knowledge to industry for
improved product performance, enhanced productivity, workforce development and
economic growth. The Center will provide a forum for collaborations among
academic, industrial, and national laboratory researchers to perform
fundamental, pre-competitive science and engineering research of metal
deformation technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create a robust and
sustainable I/UCRC Center across several industrial sectors, the academic
partners of this project, University of New Hampshire (UNH), Northwestern
University, and Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), will work collaboratively to
provide: a) innovative metal deformation technologies, e.g. flexible dieless
forming, ultrasonic-assisted forming, electrically-assisted forming, and
geometric texturing of workpiece and tooling surfaces for friction control, b)
closed-loop process control through novel in-process sensors and advanced
control algorithms, and c) process modeling and material characterization for
forming. The Center will have three technical thrust areas (with each university
Site leading one of the areas): modeling and material characterization (UNH),
advanced metal deformation processes and sensing (Northwestern), and
product/process optimization and standardization (TAMU). Each institution will
also focus on specific industries based on past collaborations and regional
interests: UNH, aerospace and electronic devices; Northwestern, automotive and
medical devices; and TAMU, oil and gas industry. The collaboration among the
institutions and industrial members can effectively and efficiently address the
industrial research and development needs. At the planning meeting, a total of
60 participants is expected. The Center projects will be determined by
systematic mapping of the industrial needs to the capabilities of the I/UCRC
Sites. More specifically, TAMU brings their excellent capabilities in produce
and process optimization and the support of their strong infrastructure for
metal deformation research including the shared-used laboratories Microscopy and
Imaging Center, Material Characterization Facility, and complementary
supercomputing facilities for modeling and simulation.