* 1624481
* MRI: Acquisition of a 213 nm Laser to Accompany an Existing Quadrupole ICPMS at Middlebury College
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Peter Ryan, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 119,191.00

This award will permit the acquisition of a 213 nm laser, which will be coupled
to an existing inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICPMS) to enable
laser ablation mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) at Middlebury College. LA-ICPMS is a
rapidly growing field which has been transformative because it allows rapid
analysis of very small regions (~10 microns) on materials such as minerals,
shells, and artifacts. At Middlebury College, the LA-ICPMS will be housed in the
Geology Department and will be used primarily to undertake uranium (U) - lead
(Pb) dating and trace element analyses of minerals, which are the primary
recorder of past tectonics. We also anticipate usage by biologists and by
archaeologists who are interested in understanding the source materials and
trade patterns of ancient tools. The proposal was widely supported by faculty at
nearby colleges and will be primarily dedicated to undergraduate research,
providing hands-on research experience for students regardless of the scope or
budget of their project. Users will include a diversity of students, including
many underrepresented groups and first time college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring a laser will allow numerous projects to
be undertaken in more efficient and effective ways. For example, laser ablation
radically expands the number of possible ICPMS applications, including the
ability to analyze materials in-situ with high spatial resolution, which is
essential for many applications. It also reduces sample preparation time and
complexity relative to solution chemistry, facilitating a wider user base for
the existing ICPMS. One internal project will use the provenance of detrital
minerals in offshore sediment cores to test predictions of dynamic uplift in the
eastern U.S. Another will use detrital zircons in Paleozoic meta-sedimentary
rocks to test longstanding models of Appalachian tectonics. A third internal
project will use the laser to better understand the origin of U and Th in
bedrock aquifers with unsafe alpha activity. External users have also put
forward a range of project ideas. Many users are interested in U-Pb
geochronology to date igneous rocks, establish the timing of regional
metamorphic events, and reconstruct cratonic evolution using detrital zircons.
Other users are interested in measuring trace elements to establish the
provenance of archaeological artifacts, understand petrogenesis of young
magmatic centers, and undertake trace element thermo-barometry.