* 1624777
* AGS-PRF: Inferring Predictability and Dynamics of Atlantic Multidecadal Climate Variability from Marine and Terrestrial Paleoclimate Records
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Daniel Amrhein, Amrhein                 Daniel         E
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 172,000.00

Under the aegis of the AGS-PRF (post-doctoral research fellowship) solicitation,
the researcher aims to leverage recent compilations of proxy records to
characterize North Atlantic multidecadal variability (AMV) in sea surface
temperatures (SSTs). The research explores the potential of publicly available
paleoclimate records in combination with a proven modeling technique to address
fundamental hypotheses about the time scales, stationarity, anthropogenic
influence, and coupled atmosphere-ocean dynamics of Atlantic multidecadal
variability (AMV). The project is guided by three specific science questions and
one far-reaching and overarching question.

Specifically, the research seeks to address:

Question 1) What is the predictability of AMV as evidenced by proxy records? Do
proxy records suggest mechanisms of coupled atmosphere-ocean AMV?

Strategy: To diagnose AMV predictability from proxy records, linear inverse
models (LIMs) will be derived from marine and terrestrial proxy records.
Eigenvalue analyses will be used to show dominant dynamical patterns and time
scales, and marine and terrestrial records will be used to identify coupled
climate variability. Forecast skill of models derived from proxies, modern
observations, and output from the Last Millennium Reanalysis Project will be
compared.

Question 2) Is AMV changing through time, and can we attribute changes to
anthropogenic forcing?

Strategy: Non-stationarities in AMV, including possible responses to
anthropogenic influences, will be explored using statistical tests, wavelet
analyses, and eigenvector analyses of LIMs constructed over temporal subsets of
the data.

Question 3) How do AMV dynamics in general circulation models and proxy-derived
models differ?

Strategy: Dynamics responsible for AMV in proxy-derived LIMs will be compared to
mechanisms for AMV in controls runs from the CMIP5 (Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project, Phase 5) archives.

The research is guided by the far-reaching and overarching question:

Question: Do paleoclimate proxy data have power to constrain AMV dynamics and
predictability?

Strategy: If "yes," then proxy records can be directly useful in making and
evaluating modern climate forecasts, and the techniques can be expanded to other
regions and time scales. If "no," then the research will help quantify the
limits of proxy records to assess predictability of modern climate, and identify
new record types and sites to improve dynamical understanding and predictive
power.

The broader impacts involve supporting an early career scientist, helping
reduce the uncertainty in North Atlantic multidecadal variability (AMV) in sea
surface temperatures (SSTs), and providing materials to local STEM high school
teachers and students through projects already in existence at the university.