* 1624302
* ABR/RUI Is the Terrestrial Permian-Triassic Boundary in the Karoo Basin? Implications for the Response of the Terrestrial Ecosystems to the End-Permian Extinction Event
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Gastaldo, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 190,345.00

Earth's biosphere experienced its greatest mass extinction ~251.9 million years
ago at the end of the Permian Age. In approximately 60,000 years, the oceans
experienced a loss of 90% of marine life. Many workers believe that a similar
change co-occurred on land, but rock-and-fossil records from the continents are
not well dated. For more than a century, the Karoo Basin, South Africa, has
served as the center for interpreting the response of terrestrial ecosystems to
this crisis. The current proposal uses a multidisciplinary, international team
of geoscientists to refine the physical and chemical conditions around which the
biological event is believed to have occurred in this basin. Field-and-
laboratory training of undergraduate STEM students continues to be an integral
component of the project, educating the next generation of geoscientists in an
understanding of Earth Systems in deep time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Mechanisms
responsible for the end-Permian biodiversity loss are attributed to changes in
atmospheric and oceanic chemistries. These were a consequence of the emplacement
of basalt in a large igneous province, the Siberian Traps. Increasing
atmospheric gas concentrations, accompanied by increasing global temperatures,
stressed the physiological limits of the plants and animals. It is essential to
know if these stresses affected both marine and terrestrial ecosystems,
concurrently, or if their responses are temporally out of phase. This project
will use stratigraphy, sedimentology, magnetic rock properties, and whole-rock
and stable-isotope geochemistry to look at the physical and chemical conditions,
in addition to paleontology and palynology to determine the biological
components, and constrain these in time (employing high resolution
geochronology). An empirical model will be developed to assess the stratigraphic
applicability of paleobiological data, leading to a better interpretation of the
latest Permian to earliest Triassic terrestrial transition.