* 1624316
* AGS-PRF: Antecedent Remote and Local Synoptic Environments Most Conducive to North American Polar/Subtropical Jet Superpositions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Andrew Winters, Winters                 Andrew         C
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 172,000.00

The jet stream is a well-known atmospheric phenomena, but the public is
generally unaware that there are two main jet streams in each hemisphere, the
polar jet stream and the subtropical jet stream. These jets are typically
separated by a significant distance, but in certain circumstances can end up in
the same geographic location, known as a jet stream superposition. These
superposition occurrences can be tied to very high-impact weather events, so
learning more about their causes and characteristics is important for improving
weather forecasts. The researcher funded under this award will use 35 years of
atmospheric data to identify, classify, and analyze an estimated 700
superposition events over North America. The main societal impact will be the
development and testing of an operational forecast product that would provide a
first alert to high-impact weather events in the 8-10 day forecast range. The
early career researcher also plans to continue his education and outreach
activities by mentoring an undergraduate student and communicating scientific
results to the public.

The researcher plans to study the topic of jet superposition events, wherein the
polar jet and the subtropical jet meet in a vertical superposition of initially
distinct jet streams. The NCEP CFSR dataset will be used to identify
superposition events over North America and then various analyses will be run to
answer the following research questions: 1) What is the nature of the large-
scale interactions between polar cyclonic and tropical anticyclonic PV anomalies
throughout the production of a jet superposition and does the polar or tropical
component consistently dominate those interactions? 2) What are the antecedent
remote and local synoptic environments that are most conducive to the production
of a superposition for each type of PV anomaly interaction and what influence
does a superposition have on the downstream midlatitude flow pattern? 3) What
environmental discriminators exist between jet superposition events and "null
cases", or instances in which the PJ and STJ closely approach one another but do
not superpose, for each type of PV anomaly interaction?