* 1624177
* NSF Workshop on Grand Challenges in Computing on the Edge (COME)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,505.00

Edge computing is new computing paradigm in which the resources for
communication, computation, control and storage are placed at the edge of the
Internet, in close proximity to mobile devices, sensors, and end users, and the
emerging Internet of Things. Terms such as "cloudlets? and "micro data centers?
have been used in the literature to refer to these small, edge-located data
centers, while ?fog? has been used to denote architectures that use a
collaborative multitude of client or edge devices to carry out storage,
communication and management. They all represent counterpoints to the theme of
massive data centers and core networks that has dominated discourse in cloud and
mobile computing. This award will support the organization of a workshop to
bring together industry practitioners, academic researchers, and government
stakeholders to discuss the vision, challenges, and opportunities for edge
computing research for the next 5-10 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
agenda of the workshop has the potential for broad and transformative impact on
the US and beyond by identifying the grand challenges and lay the foundation of
future innovations in computing. Furthermore, the workshop will engage early
career scholars and those from diverse backgrounds and underrepresented groups
to connect them with a broad community of academic and industrial researchers
interested in edge computing, networking and services.