* 1624065
* FSML Planning for the Future of the Holt Research Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jessica Leahy, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,993.00

University of Maine is awarded a planning grant to enable the development of a
10year plan to update and formulate new research, educational, and public
outreach programs at Holt Research Forest (HRF) in southern Maine. Recent
changes of project leadership and supporting foundation creates an ideal
opportunity to build on past successes and create a plan to ensure the legacy
and sustainability of HRF as a field station. This plan is needed in part
because a whole new set of environmental challenges, not foreseen in 1982, have
emerged. The plan will develop strategies to stimulate research and teaching on
the value of healthy managed forest ecosystems, climate change adaptation, and
forest dynamics at the urban/rural interface. A strategic plan will establish
the steps needed for establishing an enhanced infrastructure, a refined data
management plan with increased access to the valuable long-term data, broader
dissemination of research results, and developing greater communication between
HRF and similar field stations. A key outcome of the planning grant and
resulting strategic plan would be expanded opportunities for teaching, training,
and learning that engage graduate students, postdocs, undergraduate students,
K-12 teachers and youth, and adult learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Holt
Research Forest (HRF) a field station located in southern mid-coastal Maine and
has a 35-year history of multidisciplinary ecological research. The site
features a red oak white pine forest ecosystem, an important and relatively
understudied forest type, estuarine frontage with salt marshes and tidal flats,
and the largest fresh water pond on the island. The unique coastal setting of
HRF within the nationally recognized Kennebec Estuary with 30,000acres of
conservation lands within a 15 mile radius provides a wide spectrum of
possibilities for expansion of research. This planning project seeks to
articulate the growth potential for research, educational, and public outreach
programming. The process will involve a wide diversity of stakeholders and
potential beneficiaries. Other universities and colleges, scientists, natural
resource professionals, local schools, conservation organizations, state
agencies, woodlot owners, and the general public will all be engaged to improve
the outcomes. This will be accomplished through three workshops and a
conference; soliciting an external evaluation from experts in the field;
networking with peers at similar stations; and synthesizing the findings into
a10-year strategic plan that will guide future endeavors.