* 1624688
* Gulf Coast Research Laboratory (GCRL) Museum Improvements and Modernization
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Joseph (Read) Hendon, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2017
* USD 218,726.00

Natural history research collections provide vital references and resources for
taxonomic, phylogenetic, ecological, natural disaster, invasive species,
developmental, genetic and biodiversity research on an extraordinary diversity
of animals, plants and other natural objects. Those collections allow
researchers to examine a broader range of material, both geographically and
temporally, at a substantially lower cost than would be possible if samples had
to be obtained independently by the scientist. Such collections also contribute
to the training of the next generation of graduate and undergraduate students,
providing them with hands-on research experience and an understanding of current
museum practices, and expose members of the public, K-12 students and their
teachers to this type of research via tours, workshops and presentations. To
best serve the scientific community, however, such collections must have
carefully maintained, environmentally-controlled housing and must remain updated
with the potential for expansion to meet the ongoing research needs of the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Southern Mississippi's Gulf
Coast Research Laboratory (GCRL; http://gcrl.usm.edu) is home to the GCRL
Museum, which houses extensive ichthyological and invertebrate collections
dating back to 1958. More than 36,500 lots of fish specimens, representing 3,400
species from 270 families, are catalogued within the Museum, as are 6,536 lots
of invertebrate specimens. The facility serves as the primary repository for
specimens obtained during ongoing local, national, and international research
programs conducted at GCRL and at other institutions and provides support for
regional and federal programs such as NOAA's SouthEast Area Monitoring and
Assessment Program (SEAMAP). Current infrastructure and equipment for the Museum
are outdated and do not support efficient maintenance or utilization of this
vast collection. Improvements to the Museum will include renovation of current
facilities: (a) to accommodate modern, space-efficient compactorized shelving
units and (b) to integrate upgraded safety and containment systems. Renovated
Museum facilities and associated storage efficiency will allow for a completely
centralized collection of fish and invertebrate specimens that will aid in
better internal management of the collection and foster increased use of the
collection for academic and research purposes.