* 1624182
* RCN-UBE:  PULSE Ambassadors - Creating a National Leadership Network to Accelerate Departmental Transformation towards Vision and Change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* C Reiness, Longwood University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,978.00

The Partnership for Undergraduate Life Sciences Education (PULSE) is a national
effort by the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health/NIGMS,
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute to promote broad community adoption of the
recommendations of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (V&amp;C). PULSE Fellows have developed programs to support life
sciences departments across the nation as their faculties seek to integrate
V&amp;C's educational best practices for the benefit of the next generation of
scientists. The PULSE Ambassadors program was developed to address a key need:
organizational change, such as major curricular reform by faculty, often
benefits from catalysis by and support of external consultants. The program was
successfully piloted at ten diverse institutions, from community colleges to
research universities and will now be expanded by developing a robust and
diverse national network of trained Ambassadors who will bring on-campus
workshops to a broad array of institutions of higher learning. Network
participants will be intentionally recruited to ensure institutional, ethnic,
and geographic diversity in order to benefit the broadest possible array of
students, to promote greater persistence among prospective biology majors, and
to advance scientific literacy and the process of science among all college
students taking biology courses. The program's impacts will be evaluated with
respect to successfully promoting long-term change in the departments that are
engaged and components will be modified and adapted as necessary to maximize
effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PULSE Ambassadors Program is
specifically designed to engage life sciences departments in critical dialogue
about the faculty's vision for the implementation of V&amp;C recommendations and
goals for change over time, provide the department with the skills necessary to
guide organizational change, and connect faculty with key resources of the PULSE
community at large. A robust national network of Ambassadors who are
representative of the institutional and demographic diversity in our country
will be built to meet the increasing demand from the community. A diverse
community of network participants and PULSE Ambassadors will be recruited and
trained to support departmental engagement (Aim 1); stimulate organizational
change through collaborations of Ambassador network participants and life
sciences departments across the U.S. (Aim 2); and develop and implement a
systemic assessment plan to evaluate and adaptively manage network activities
(Aim 3). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).