* 1624364
* Doctoral Dissertation in Economics:  Voluntary Separation in Infinitely Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma Game:  An Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 8,432.00

Many economic and social relationships such as employment contracts, membership
of voluntary organizations, international alliances, friendships and marriages
feature voluntary separation: each participant can unilaterally and voluntarily
exit the relationship. On the other hand, voluntary separation often makes it
hard to build trust and long-term cooperation. Voluntary separation does not
only change how business or social relationships end, it also governs the nature
of relationships from the very beginning. Its effect on the level of cooperation
will have a profound implication for economic growth, social cohesion and
subjective well-being of individuals.

This study experimentally investigates how voluntary separation affects
cooperation. Cooperative behavior of subjects will be compared to theoretical
predictions. Different social mechanisms will be tested for their effectiveness
in inducing cooperation, which could help policy makers or community designers
in their choice of regulatory options.

In the experiment, subjects will interact repeatedly in a computer laboratory
setting under costly and costless separation. The baseline treatment will not be
allowing any separation at all. Theoretical studies on this class of strategic
interactions yield predictions based on gradual trust building. In the
equilibria they find, long-term cooperation is achieved by mutually defecting in
the beginning. This is a highly counter-intuitive way of building trust. There
is very little empirical/experimental evidence to support it. This study aims to
fill the gap in the literature by answering the following questions: Under what
circumstances do people cooperate? Does voluntary separation help or hurt
cooperation? How do people achieve cooperation? To test the theoretical
predictions, subjects' cooperative behavior will be compared across treatments.
By comparing separation treatments, we can also find out which social mechanisms
effectively facilitate cooperation. Finally, potential teaching/learning
patterns and persistently heterogeneous behavior among subjects can shed light
on formation of norms and socialization.