* 1624860
* Improved cyberinfrastructure to support data driven research in a model social-ecological system
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Neil Davies, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 184,233.00

The telecommunications revolution is enabling scholarly innovation and
discoveries not otherwise possible: in particular, high speed data networks
utilizing submarine fiber-optic cables now link even remote research sites to
mainland (cloud-based) resources. Field scientists can thus access high
performance computing systems, advanced instruments, data storage systems,
visualization environments, and data repositories. They can also maintain
academic interactions with colleagues and students on their home campus,
increasing productivity and allowing more time in the field. The improved
cyberinfrastructure provided by this project will help the University of
California's Gump South Pacific Research Station (http://moorea.berkeley.edu) on
the island of Moorea to support a transition to technology intensive, data
driven field research and to develop innovative cyber-learning programs. Among
other benefits, it will help advance the scientific understanding of coral reefs
by supporting programs such as the NSF Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site. Hotspots for global biological diversity, coral reefs are
sources of societal significance and economic value. Local and global processes,
including climate change and ocean acidification, however, increasingly threaten
the continued health of these exceptional natural systems. New research on the
population dynamics, ecosystem processes, biodiversity and resilience of coral
reefs is critical to their successful management, conservation, and restoration.
In addition to the benefits for research, the cyberinfrastructure upgrade will
also promote advanced training in field science at the graduate and
undergraduate level, benefiting students from universities and colleges from
California, Hawaii and across the United States. Located in French Polynesia,
the project will have the added benefit of providing international and multi-
cultural experience for American scientists and students. The Gump Station has a
strong outreach program through collaborations brokered by its partner local
community organization: Association Te Pu Atitia. The upgrade will strengthen
scientific research and education enabling the Gump Station and Te Pu Atitia to
communicate these findings to communities in Moorea, Hawaii, California and
elsewhere - particularly K-12 schools - working with partners to develop
programs that reach out to historically underrepresented groups in science
(including Polynesians and other Pacific Islanders).

Strategic facilities planning activities in 2014-2015 found that all current
research and educational programs at the Gump Station had an urgent need for
improved cyberinfrastructure to support their increasingly data-intensive
science. The upgrade will improve overall cyberinfrastructure and particularly
Internet access capacity, developing a comprehensive network that serves the
entire campus. Fiber optic cabling will be installed to the Station's core
research areas and its educational public outreach facility (the Atitia Cultural
Center). The Gump Station will transition from multiple residential-style ADSL
connections to a single Internet connection that will provide much better
capacity to support using the Internet for collaborations and to upload data and
video in real or near real time. The improvements will follow a typical design
for a small campus network with a small border router to connect to the local
Internet Service Provider and global Research and Education Networks, and a core
router to move traffic between the various VLANs and buildings. The new network
will be a traditional hub and spoke model using fiber to serve each of the core
research and outreach sites. In addition, improvements to the wireless network
will provide better and more reliable coverage across the Station.