* 1624515
* CAREER: Hybrid Bioprinting of Engineered Vascularized Endocrine Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2015,06/30/2020
* Ibrahim Ozbolat, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 244,888.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to create the next-generation hybrid biofabrication science and
technology to bioprint vascularized engineered pancreatic endocrine tissues for
diabetes management. This evolving paradigm in hybrid bioprinting will be
accomplished by the following research thrusts: 1) direct bioprinting of
perfusable vasculature, 2) direct bioprinting of scaffold-free insulin-producing
cell aggregate strands using an efficient and practical approach for scale-up
tissue fabrication, 3) hybrid bioprinting of insulin-producing cell aggregate
strands in tandem with vasculature using a unique Multi-Arm BioPrinter, and 4)
in vivo validation of the formation and effectiveness of pancreatic endocrine
tissues. The educational goal is to inspire students and to engage a life-long
interest in biomanufacturing. This will be accomplished by organizing
demonstrations, laboratory tours and summer schools for underrepresented K-6
students and minority groups, organizing workshops for newly enrolled honor
students, and integrating biomanufacturing into the undergraduate curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research in this study will have a direct
impact on the bioprinting of glucose-sensitive pancreatic tissues. It will
benefit society in the form of an alternative solution to managing diabetes,
which, due to its devastating nature, contributes to other mortal diseases such
as heart disease, stroke, high blood pressure, blindness, kidney disease and
amputation. This project has the potential to make significant progress in organ
printing technology that will eventually be applied to other organs and
drastically reduce the demand for organ transplantation and the need for animal
testing. Educational initiatives will broaden the participation of minority and
underrepresented groups, especially female Amish and Mennonite students. The
research results will be disseminated through publications in high-quality
venues as well as media coverage to reach out to strategically targeted local,
national and global audiences.