* 1624321
* RUI: Melt Viscosities in Silica-undersaturated Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Genevieve Robert, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,519.00

The movement of magma through the Earth, or magma transport, is an important
agent of mass and heat transfer within the Earth. The efficiency of magma
transport controls the separation of planets into different phases after their
formation, the scale and frequency of volcanic eruptions, and the behavior of
the planetary crust during mountain building. In turn, how far and how fast
magma travels from its source before it hardens and the violence of volcanic
eruptions are controlled by viscosity, the measure of magma's resistance to
flow. Viscosity is one of the most variable physical properties in geological
processes and its magnitude depends on temperature, chemistry, and on the
magma's content of volatiles like water, carbon dioxide, and fluorine. Viscosity
is subject to change rapidly in response to processes such as the formation of
crystals or bubbles in the magma. These processes can cause chemical and thermal
changes, leading to temperature and viscosity feedbacks in magmas. Modeling and
understanding of geologic processes at all scales therefore requires accurate
quantitative determination of magma transport and thermal properties. This can
be done experimentally, by a combination of low- (&lt;1000°C) and high-
temperature (&gt;1000°C) viscosity measurements and high-temperature (up to
1500°C) heat capacity measurements on the same suite of samples at atmospheric
pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a suite of silica-undersaturated
aluminosilicate melts that are analogs for highly-alkalic mafic magmas, the PI
and Bates College undergraduate students will quantify the effects of (1) Na-K
mixing, of (2) Al/(Al+Si) ratio, and of (3) fluorine on viscosity and heat
capacity. The effects of fluorine on viscosity and heat capacity of such melts
are especially important to consider as fluorine's abundance correlates
positively with the abundance of potassium and has a relatively high solubility
at atmospheric conditions. This has implications for the transport behavior of
terrestrial magmas that are nominally degassed with respect to other volatiles
that are not significantly soluble at atmospheric pressure (e.g., water and
carbon dioxide) and also for Martian magmas, which are thought to originate from
the melting of a more fluorine-rich source relative to Earth. The results will
be modeled using configurational entropy theory, which relates the timescale at
which structural changes occur within a fluid (e.g., magma or melt) to the
probability of these structural rearrangements. The results from this research
will contribute to a better understanding of the chemical controls on viscosity
and heat capacity, which in turn allows the construction of better predictive
models of magma movement and emplacement in the Earth, and of lava eruption and
flow at the Earth's surface.