* 1624068
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster for Atmospheric and Geophysical Research
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Roi Gurka, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2019
* USD 108,524.00

This is a Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award which funds the acquisition
of a 5-node cluster computer to support research and education activities in
atmospheric and oceanic sciences. On the atmospheric side the primary
application of the machine is the Extended Whole Atmosphere Community Climate
Model (WACCM-X), which is used here to study the mechanisms through which sudden
stratospheric warming events (SSWs) affect the ionosphere. SSWs are large-scale
disturbances of the stratospheric circumpolar circulation in winter (typically
over the North Pole) in which stratospheric temperature can rise by up to 50C
over the course of a few days. While these disturbances occur over the pole and
at altitudes of about 20km, they can affect the electron content of the
ionosphere over the equator at an altitude of 300km, where they can interfere
with satellites used for navigation, communication, and other purposes. The
mechanisms by which this influence propagates over such great distances is not
known but is believed to involve the vertical propagation of atmospheric tides.
Work here tests the idea that the SSW impact can occur because westerly
propagating planetary-scale waves excited by the SSW produce zonal wind
anomalies which affect the vertical propagation of tides, and the alternative
hypothesis that the mechanism involves changes in the heating due to ultraviolet
absorption by ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceanographic work considers wave-
turbulence interactions in the coastal ocean, an important issue for
understanding the transport of sediments associated with erosion and pollution
and for understanding water properties essential to ocean biology. The work uses
a large eddy simulation (LES) model, the Spectral Multi-domain model, to
simulate waves in the near-shore ocean (bottom depths up to 100m or so). A key
issue in understanding the interaction of waves and turbulence is the problem of
separating the motion field into wave orbital motions and turbulence, which the
PIs are attacking using a proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) in which
individual modes represent different length scales within the flow and have
energy levels which follow the classical Kolmogorov cascade. The cluster
computer is used to calculate a three-dimensional POD which provides separate
sets of modes to represent the wave orbital motions, small-scale turbulence, and
nonlinear interactions between the two occurring at intermediate spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRI award has broader impacts by providing
infrastructure for research and education, including courses in oceanic,
atmospheric, and computer science. In particular, the computer supports the
newly formed PhD program in Coastal and Marine System Science, the first
doctoral program at the university. Also, undergraduate students are strongly
engaged in the assembly and maintenance of the cluster computer, thus acquiring
hands-on skills in working with hardware integration and operating systems.