* 1624527
* RUI: Acquisition of Tools for an Ecosystem-Based Approach to Fisheries and Aquatic Resource Research, Education, and Management
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Willard Harman, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2019
* USD 193,459.00

The State University of New York College at Oneonta (SUNY Oneonta) is a
primarily undergraduate institution located in New York's Central
Leatherstocking region. The SUNY Oneonta Biological Field Station (BFS), located
in Cooperstown, NY, supports research opportunities for high-school students,
undergraduate and graduate students, faculty, and visiting researchers. The
planned improvements supported by the FSML grant will modernize the conventional
limnological monitoring schema, improving the breadth and quality of the
research, education, and training opportunities available to students and
researchers at SUNY Oneonta and from other institutions through the addition of
modern fisheries sampling and data collection capacities. The requested
equipment will greatly enhance several ongoing projects at the BFS, provide
capacity needed to revitalize an historical fisheries program that has been
largely absent from the BFS for nearly 30 years, and increase the self-reliance
of the BFS in providing regional support integral to opportunities offered to
undergraduate and graduate students, and visiting researchers. Projects and
programs that will benefit from these improvements include: the nation's first
Master of Science (MS) and Professional Science Master (PSM) programs in Lake
Management; characterization of food web dynamics in Otsego Lake, NY, following
collapse of an invasive planktivore; restoration of lake whitefish in Otsego
Lake; continued warm-water fisheries monitoring and updating an historical
inventory; ecosystem-level effects of the trophic management in experimental
ponds; continued long-term monitoring of water quality and limnological
parameters in Otsego Lake and the Upper Susquehanna River watershed; coordinated
long-term, high-resolution limnological and climate monitoring with other SUNY
institutions and contribution to the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network
(GLEON); and research on local and regional fish parasites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BFS has a demonstrated dedication to long-term
monitoring of aquatic ecosystems on BFS lands and throughout New York State.
Monitoring efforts have ranged in application from informing the management of
fisheries, lakes, and surrounding watersheds to basic research for the
advancement of biological and ecological knowledge. Certain systems have
accumulated more than 40 years of continuous monitoring data, some of which have
been utilized in high-impact global climate research projects. The BFS conducts
collaborative research projects with local, state and federal partners, and
integrates current ecological theories into natural resource management
practices. It serves the local community by monitoring water quality,
controlling sources and symptoms of anthropogenic eutrophication, managing
aquatic invasive species, and assessing emerging pollutants. These comprehensive
monitoring efforts provide diverse opportunities to study natural resource
management questions at various levels, from individual ecosystem components to
the ecosystem and regional levels.