* 1624696
* AGS-PRF: Experimentally Determined Volatility of Secondary Organic Aerosol Formed Through Aqueous Oxidation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Sarah Petters, Petters                 Sarah          S
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 172,000.00

Secondary organic aerosols (SOA) are small particles produced by the oxidation
of organic gases emitted by forests, fossil fuel combustion and fires. Complex
chemical processes that are not well represented in climate models and are a
source of large uncertainties in climate assessments produce sOAs. In particular
the oxidation of organic gases by water in cloud drops is recognized to be
important but there are limited studies to represent the processes that produce
the particles and their properties. The proposed work will measure and quantify
the persistence of these aqueous SOA particles by measuring their volatility in
the laboratory and their inclusion in climate models will enable more robust
assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to constrain aqueous SOA (aqSOA)
production mechanism this research would experimentally quantify the volatility
of aqSOA compounds that determine the low volatility fraction that survive
evaporation and scavenging to effect global climate. The goal is to probe the
fundamental relationship between the precursor molecular properties and aqSOA
volatility. The laboratory studies will elucidate aqSOA-volatility relationships
from (1) methylglyoxal, pyruvic acid, and methyl-vinyl ketone oxidation, (2)
oxidation products in precipitation samples and (3) dried organic aerosol
oxidation. The oxidation will be performed by hydroxyl radicals produced from
hydrogen peroxide photolysis in a batch reactor, the mixtures will be
aerosolized with a vibration orifice aerosol generator then evaporated in a flow
tube and finally detected by an optical particle counter. Polarity-resolved
volatility distributions will be measured using elution and ion chromatography.
The results will elucidate the fundamental volatility properties of aqSOA to
understand how they effect past, present and future climate.