* 1624958
* Collaborative Research: From knowledge consumers to knowledge producers: A scalable experiential learning approach for psychology and related disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 86,208.00

STEM education provides both technical training and the development of cognitive
skills, such as designing experiments, testing hypotheses, and analyzing data.
While traditional STEM training is essential for developing a highly skilled
technical workforce, the cognitive skills developed through this training are
beneficial in almost every type of career. To provide cognitive skills training
to undergraduates in psychology, who typically do not receive this type of
education, this project will develop a computer program, named TELLab, that
allows psychology students to design experiments and gather data using the
internet. Using this program, students will have the opportunity to experience
first hand the challenges of doing science, learning skills and concepts, and
most importantly, formulating and solving problems of personal interest to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the proposal has three broadly defined
goals: (1) Up-scaling and maturation of TELLab, so that it can handle hundreds
of thousands of users, in countless numbers of classrooms, with students at all
levels - all at the same time, (2) evaluation of TELLlab-based pedagogy in
diverse settings, including evaluating STEM competencies in non-STEM students,
particularly those in undergraduate psychology classes, and (3) advancing the
effort to create an open source community of faculty and students across the
nation to develop and sustain collective expertise. Through a collaborative
partnership across a variety of institutions, TELLab modules will be developed
and deployed in a variety of psychology courses. These modules will allow
students to design experiments and test hypotheses, providing immersion in the
cognitive skills that are at the core of STEM education. Course instructors and
participating students will be evaluated to identify and assess the factors that
influence student experiences and learning.