* 1624881
* AGS-PRF: Reconciling Atmospheric Temperature Observations and Understanding Climate Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Stephen Po-Chedley, Po-Chedley              Stephen
* Fellowship Award
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 86,000.00

Monitoring Earth's climate requires a lengthy record of global observations.
Satellite remote sensing technologies provide global coverage of observations at
a high spatio-temporal resolution. Due to the relatively short life span of
between 8-10 years for the individual satellites, one needs to combine the
observation records of multiple satellites that were launched at different eras
for monitoring and understanding climate changes. The challenging of using
satellite observations for climate studies is that one needs to remove/reduce
inconsistencies or biases within a satellite mission due to orbital drifting and
between continuous satellite missions with the same sensors due to changes of
orbital parameters, besides the need of inter-satellite calibration/validation
of different sensors. One of the two main objectives of this funded project is
to systematically identify and correct climate scale biases/drifts in microwave
brightness temperature measurements of satellites in both troposphere and
stratosphere using other observation records. The PI has developed and
demonstrated the key methodologies for this funded research in his dissertation
research.

The funded project will also take a fresh new look at this challenging question:
what causes large uncertainties in projecting climate change using climate
models? The PI plans to explore if and how the strength of climate feedbacks in
climate models are linked to the models? own climate states. If a linkage to the
models? climate feedbacks and the models? mean states can be identified, the
future global warming projection uncertainties can be reduced by using such
observations to constraint models mean states.

The proposed research will advance our understanding of sources based on biases
in both observations and climate models which will enable better decision-
making.