* 1624373
* Phase II Lehigh U Site: I/UCRC for Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* John DuPont, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Many important components and systems that are fabricated by industry and
subsequently used within the US infrastructure require joining at some point
within the manufacturing process. Examples include aircraft parts, bridges, and
power generation plants, just to name a few. Joining processes are quite complex
and can significantly alter the properties of the materials used to create the
component, thus affecting the ability of the component to operate safely over
the targeted design life. Safe and effective design, fabrication, and use of
components manufactured by joining requires integration of many engineering
disciplines. Unfortunately, there is currently only a handful of US universities
for solving these challenges, and there is a shortage of qualified engineers
being trained in the US to address these issues. The Manufacturing and Materials
Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) was established to fulfill these needs. Due
to the similarities between joining and many emerging Additive Manufacturing
(AM) processes, the Center has expanded to include AM. The academic researchers
at all the Ma2JIC sites work closely with Center members to identify research
projects that will provide member companies with methods for improving the
performance and/or reducing the costs associated with components they design,
manufacture, and/or use. The research projects conducted at all the sites also
serve as vehicles for educating the next generation of highly trained graduate-
level scientist and engineers in order to address the shortage of such
professionals faced by industry. The Lehigh University site within Ma2JIC
provides research expertise in several distinct areas such as modeling and
electron microscopy, and also provides a strong link to the energy industry
through their Energy Research Center. In addition, the educational goal is
extended at the Lehigh site to include undergraduate students through a senior
capstone course on Materials Selection and Failure Analysis in which Center
members provide failed components for analysis by the students and serve as
industrial mentors to the students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safe and effective use
of components manufactured by joining requires integration of many disciplines
and the development of advanced characterization and modeling tools. There is
currently only a handful of US universities for solving these challenges, and
there is a shortage of qualified engineers being trained to address these
issues. The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) was
established to fulfill these needs. Due to the similarities between joining and
many Additive Manufacturing (AM) processes, the Center has expanded to include
AM. The academic researchers at all the Ma2JIC sites work closely with Center
members to identify research projects that will provide member companies with
methods for improving the performance and/or reducing the costs associated with
components they design, manufacture, and/or use. Research will be conducted at
the Lehigh site in several different areas that have been identified jointly by
industry and the academic partners, including stress relief cracking, creep-
rupture of welds, weld overlay coatings, dissimilar metal welds, and high
strength steels. The research will combine basic principles of phase
transformations with state-of-the-art modeling tools and advanced
microstructural characterization techniques to provide members with information
for improving the performance and/or reducing costs associated with components
they use and/or manufacture. The research projects conducted at all the Ma2JIC
sites also serve as a vehicle for educating the next generation of highly
trained scientist and engineers in order to address the shortage of such
professionals faced by industry. This goal will be extended at the Lehigh site
to include undergraduate students through the senior capstone course on
Materials Selection and Failure Analysis in which Center members provide failed
components for analysis by the students and will serve as industrial mentors.
The students will submit their findings to the Center members and provide
posters for the semi-annual Center meetings. This program will add value to
Center memberships and improve the learning experience for undergraduate
students.