* 1624642
* Expanding Access to Marine Research and Training in Narragansett Bay
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Timothy Scott, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,449.00

Narragansett Bay is one of the world?s best-studied estuaries and research
conducted by the numerous institutions, state and federal agencies in the region
has led to considerable understanding of the normal functioning of a temperate
marine ecosystem. Roger Williams University (RWU) is a primarily undergraduate
institution with a water-front campus from which all of Narragansett Bay and its
tributaries are easily accessible by boat. In addition to an active field-based
research program of their own, RWU collaborates extensively with other
institutions, relying on their current fleet of two small vessels. All of
Narragansett Bay and its tributaries are easily accessible by boat from the
Roger Williams University campus. Their faculty sample and conduct research
throughout the region, often extending beyond Narragansett Bay into the ocean
for studies involving the RI coastal ponds and the offshore islands (e.g.,
Cuttyhunk, Block). Over a dozen fixed field-project locations are maintained
that include experimental shellfish beds and oyster flats constructed as part of
long-term restoration and shore/habitat stabilization efforts. Projects such as
these engage the broader public, state agencies, commercial fishermen and aqua-
culturists, and students participate with faculty and staff in all of these
efforts. Additional information on current research projects is available at
ceed.rwu.edu.

In addition to RWU, a large contingent of research programs work the
Narragansett Bay estuary system. These include the University of Rhode Island
(URI), Brown University, UMass Dartmouth, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Marine Biological Laboratory, Salve Regina College, Rhode Island College as well
as numerous federal and state governmental agencies. RWU often collaborates with
these institutions, frequently in the form of providing water access as projects
dictate. There is continuing demand for this on-the-water research capacity,
which RWU tries to accommodate where possible with its two current vessels (24'
Romarine and a 19' open skiff). This award enhances regional research capacity
through the acquisition of a third RWU vessel capable of 1) doubling passenger
capacity on a given cruise (12 plus crew instead of the current six), 2)
providing increased open deck space for gear deployment, 3) enhancing fuel
efficiency through the inclusion of an inboard diesel engine, 4) reducing
scheduling conflicts for boat time, 5) supporting the development of new
undergraduate courses in small boat handling, boat operations and maintenance,
and 6) supporting SCUBA research diving. RWU recently initiated a formal dive
program in collaboration with the University of Rhode Island, and will offer a
scientific research diving course for the first time in the fall of 2016. The
vessel of choice for this is a 30' Island Hopper configured with open deck space
and a dive platform. Commonly used as local dive boats, these vessels are built
by Sea Hawk Boats of Sebring, FL; are coast guard certified and are well
regarded for their stability and construction.