* 1624748
* Phase II I/UCRC Iowa State U Site: Center for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys (CANFSA)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Richard LeSar, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,996.00

The Center for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys (CANFSA) at Iowa State
University (ISU) consists of students, post-docs and faculty who work with their
CANFSA counterparts at the Colorado School of Mines (Mines) to engage scientists
and engineers from both industry and government laboratories to discover
fundamental understandings of the physical and mechanical metallurgy of non-
ferrous alloys (i.e., alloying and processing effects on microstructure,
properties and performance). The motivation for CANFSA is to address the
national decline in the training of students in this area that is critical to
U.S. dominance in high performance materials, structures and advanced
manufacturing. Today, there are only a few universities remaining who train
students in these core science and engineering areas that are so critical to our
industries, especially as National investments are made in new advanced
materials and manufacturing strategies. In fact, these declines have greatly
reduced&amp;#8232; the synergies that existed previously between faculty,
students, and the relevant industries, and this, in turn, has significantly
weakened the technical dominance of US industries that rely heavily&amp;#8232;
on these materials. CANFSA was organized to counter this trend by conducting
fundamental scientific studies on these advanced materials and their
manufacturing, thereby filling this workforce development gap and simultaneously
contributing to U.S. global industrial competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of CANFSA is to conduct basic and applied physical metallurgy
&amp;#8232;research of direct relevance to the industries that develop,
manufacture and use advanced &amp;#8232;non-ferrous structural alloys, and to
train students in these important subjects. This is accomplished by engaging
students in topics of importance to industry and government labs, and to have
both faculty members and external mentors guide the students' fundamental
research. The specific details of the projects that are conducted within the
Center vary as topics are selected that have the most direct relevance for the
partners from industry and the national laboratories. To date, the Center has
conducted leading research in the areas of: thermal and mechanical processing of
non-ferrous alloys (e.g., 3rd Generation Al-Li alloys, texture anisotropy of
Ti-6Al-4V); ultrafine grained alloys and their mechanical behavior (e.g., Ti and
Mg); aging of high-strength beta-Ti alloys; processing of microeutectic Al
alloys; microstructural evolution (e.g., Ni-Ti-Hf intermetallics, Ni-based
superalloys, high entropy alloys); multi-layer coatings; lube-free die casting;
and the role of trace elements and small microstructural variations on
mechanical properties. To conduct these varied research projects and accomplish
the goals of the Center, faculty members with complementary &amp;#8232;expertise
in the areas of theory, modeling, processing and characterization are working
together with members from industry and government laboratories. Iowa State
University has a variety of processing, characterization, and computational
tools available on which to conduct the Center?s research. This includes state-
of-the-art electron microscopy and atom probe capabilities in a newly
established Sensitive Instrumentation Facility and elsewhere across ISU's
campus. In addition, researchers have access to a variety of advanced processing
equipment and computational tools that span across a wide range of methods,
including: atomistic simulation techniques; discrete dislocation dynamics; phase
field simulation; cellular automata; finite element methods and FFT-based
simulation approaches. Computations can be made ranging from fundamental
physical processes to macroscale fluid and heat transfer. This expertise at ISU
is complementary to that at CSM, and collectively, CANFSA is able to offer a
suite of unique capabilities to its membership.