* 1624386
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negotiating Institutional Complexity in Mental Health Courts
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Cheyney Dobson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,881.00

Mental health courts are a type of specialty court, a relatively recent but
quickly growing intervention within the court system that is part of a larger
trend of criminal justice interventions aimed at decarceration. The key
distinguishing feature linking these interventions is the hybridization of
institutional logics, as the criminal justice system becomes engaged in service
provision to reduce re-offending. This project investigates the operation of two
urban mental health courts from the perspectives of both the court staff and its
"clients," asking a) How do staff and clients draw on the competing logics of
the service delivery and criminal justice systems? b) What shapes these
processes? and c) What are the consequences for the court intervention and the
logics themselves? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a combination of in-depth
interviews and ethnographic observation of court staff and clients, this project
will gain a comprehensive vantage point on the processes by which competing
logics are negotiated by actors differently positioned vis-a-vis the
organizational setting. In so doing, it will extend the literature on
institutional logics and bring medical sociologists and sociolegal scholars into
conversation as well as contribute to literature on the changing role of the
state in the lives of marginal groups through the frontline work carried out in
public institutions.