* 1624027
* 2016 Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Delia Milliron, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 10/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

With partial funding from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, this
project supports the Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on
Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals, specifically facilitating the
participation of students, postdocs, and early career scientists. The Conference
program is inclusive of diverse participants as presenters and discussion
leaders, including an emphasis on women, underrepresented minorities, and early
career researchers. The Gordon Research Seminar, to be held on this topic for
the first time, is organized by graduate student co-chairs with presenters and
discussion leaders also being graduate students, postdocs, and early career
scientists. This topical area holds great relevance for the advancement of
knowledge that can enhance or even revolutionize energy storage, conversion, and
conservation technologies, elevating the importance of the scientific discussion
and especially the education of a new generation of researchers in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal nanocrystals are chemically synthesized in
organic media and their surfaces are passivated with organic surfactants that
solubilize the nanocrystals in solvent dispersion, and perform a range of
functions, including electronic passivation of surface states, mediation of
chemical interactions with other materials, and electronic exchange with the
environment. Recently, it has become clear that controlling the chemistry of the
surfaces of the nanocrystals is critical to observing the special properties
promised by quantum confinement. The goals of this Gordon Research Conference
are to explore the photophysical and materials properties of colloidal
nanocrystals in terms of the chemical structure of both the core and the
surface. The Conference program highlights: (i) synthetic methods to tune the
composition, shape, and surface chemistry of nanocrystals, (ii) new analytical
methods to quantitatively characterize the core and surface chemistry of the
nanocrystals, (iii) photophysical studies of nanocrystals that relate activity
in chemical and electronic systems, (iv) doping and plasmonic behavior in
semiconductor nanocrystals, (v) the bio-compatibility and bio-applications of
nanocrystals, and (vi) methods to form and properties of assemblies of
nanocrystals. The program also features a session on emerging nanocrystal
materials, specifically pnictides and halides. The value of this conference,
with respect to pushing forward fundamental work in this field, lies in its
compilation of advancements in these diverse topics into a single program
addressed to a single interdisciplinary audience.