* 1624691
* Experimental Investigation of Mantle Heterogeneity: Behavior of Ga, Ge, and First-row Transition Elements (FRTE) During Partial Melting of Pyroxenite and Spinel Peridotite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Frederick Davis, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2021
* USD 156,123.00

Earth's mantle is its largest layer by mass and volume and is ultimately the
source of most of the magmas generated near Earth's surface. The chemistry and
mineral composition of the rocks in Earth's mantle also serve as a time capsule
that records events from the time of Earth's formation and its subsequent
evolution caused by the recycling of near-surface materials back into the mantle
through the processes of plate tectonics. This project is an experimental
investigation of the chemistry of magmas that can be generated in Earth's mantle
by different types of rocks that are likely to be found there. High pressure and
high temperature experiments will be performed to investigate how the first-row
transition elements (FRTE; Sc-Zn on the periodic table) and Ga and Ge behave
during the formation of magmas in Earth's mantle. These elements are
particularly useful for identify the types of rocks that may be melting to
generate magmas. The results of this project will increase scientific knowledge
of how magmas are formed on Earth and, through comparison with the chemistry of
natural samples, will increase our understanding of the distribution of
different rock types in Earth?s interior. Broader impacts of this research
include support for an early-career researcher at a primarily undergraduate
institution. The project will support training of a female graduate student who
will gain expertise in formulating scientific questions, designing and
performing experiments, analysis using several analytical methods, and
interpretation and dissemination of experimental results. This project will also
foster collaboration between the experimental lab at the University of Minnesota
Duluth and the geochemistry and cosmochemistry lab at Florida State University,
where analyses will be performed.

This research is an experimental study of the partitioning of FRTE between
mantle minerals and melts, which will improve geochemical tools for identifying
the source lithology of basaltic magmas. Experiments containing melts and either
peridotite or pyroxenite mineral residues will be performed in a piston cylinder
apparatus at conditions of mantle melt generation (pressures of 1.5 and 3 GPa
and temperatures from 1270 to 1450 °C). These experiments will be doped with
FRTE and Ga and Ge. The concentrations of these elements in the experimental run
products (quenched melts and minerals) will be analyzed by laser ablation
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). These analyses will
yield partition coefficients for each element of interest between each mineral
and coexisting melt. The project will aim to improve constraints on the
concentrations and ratios of FRTE in melts generated by partial melting of
peridotite and pyroxenite in Earth's mantle. Model melt compositions will be
generated using these new experimental constraints and compared with the
chemistry of natural basalts to better understand how lithological heterogeneity
in the mantle is expressed in the chemistry of basaltic magmas. Better
constraints on the source lithology of natural basalts will improve estimates of
the abundance and distribution of recycled lithologies in Earth's upper mantle.