* 1624657
* Collaborative Research: Constraints From Fault Roughness on the Scale-dependent Strength of Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,979.00

The strength of crustal rocks is a fundamental factor in tectonic processes:
fault motion, mountain building and crustal evolution all affect and are
affected by rock strength. Despite its central importance, crustal rock strength
is difficult to measure at field scales. Laboratory experiments constrain
strength at sub-meter scales, but those results imply that strength is scale-
dependent: large rocks are weaker than small ones. This problem is particularly
serious in fault zones. Understanding of fault strength is largely based on
laboratory experiments. Extending these well-controlled laboratory experimental
results to natural faults is one of the major problems of fault and rock
mechanics. This project explores a new approach based on the idea that fault
surface roughness provides strength estimates at a wide range of scales. The
study involves laboratory measurements at very small scales combined with
computer modeling and direct observations of fault surfaces. Result will provide
a quantitative understanding of fault friction that can be used to predict fault
friction for the range of scales and geometries found in the Earth, information
essential for the improved understanding of earthquake mechanics. Additional
desired societal outcomes of the project include development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce through graduate student post-doctoral fellow
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an intimate link between fault surface
roughness and strength. The yielding of asperities controls surface friction by
dynamically adjusting the real area of contact in response to a load. This
yielding process can control the topography on the fault surface. This project
uses the observed, preserved roughness to infer the yield criteria. Since
roughness occurs on multiple scales on faults, the strength (failure criterion)
at a variety of scales can be inferred. The goal of this research is to make the
link between fault roughness and bulk material strength properties. The first
step in investigating the proposed connection between fault roughness and
material strength is to measure strength directly on fault surface samples that
have the observed roughness relationship. In particular, the researchers aim to
understand the scale dependence of both brittle and plastic strength, and to
understand the expected transition from brittle to plastic deformation with
decreasing length scale. To accomplish these goals, they will use a combination
of indentation and nanopillar experiments on natural fault samples to obtain a
robust set of strength measurements. These results will be compared to roughness
at comparable scales using Atomic Force Microscopy to measure roughness on the
same samples. The next step is to establish the relevant modes of failure at
various scales on natural surfaces by: (a) predict the dominant failure mode at
relevant scales using the laboratory values; (b) use the observation of the
minimum scale of grooving to isolate the process that separates failure modes;
and (c) investigate smaller scales where the failure mode is determined by the
absolute strength of the material. The research team will explore the
implications of the measurements for friction by simulating the elastoplastic
deformation of a rough fault using the hardness values as measured on the
samples and then use the brittle failure criterion inferred from the nanopillar
experiments to calculate the shear stress required for motion of the deformed
surface and compare the results to typical values of fault friction.