* 1624809
* I/UCRC: University of Texas at Dallas Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Joining S2ERC
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

As software is used increasingly and ubiquitously in our everyday lives, as its
complexity and functionality grow faster and greater, as the consequences of
some operational failures become overwhelmingly serious, as both the time and
budget for producing high-quality reliable and secure software are continuously
reduced, industry and academia need to work together as a team to perform
cooperative research so that the gap between state-of-the-art research and
state-of-practice technologies used in the field can be reduced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this planning grant is to prepare the
Advanced Research Center for Software Testing and Quality Assurance (STQA) in
the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) to
become one of the major university sites of S2ERC - a well-established NSF
I/UCRC center on Security and Software Engineering. With the addition to S2ERC
of researchers and industry affiliates from the proposed site at UTD, a more
comprehensive platform can be established to provide excellent opportunities for
the academic community to become more aware of subject areas critical to the
industry, as practitioners bring their needs to the table. This platform will
also help achieve an additional objective of this grant to make STQA a leading
research facility on software testing and quality assurance in the North Texas
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will focus on developing advanced cutting-edge
technologies, with user-friendly tool support, for technology transfer. We will
assist practitioners, no matter what their previous level of experience with
software testing and quality assurance, to be quickly brought up to speed on
necessary background knowledge and gain the ability to apply a cost-effective
set of procedures tailored to their specific projects. With such effort, it is
more likely that software can achieve high quality more effectively at reduced
cost.