* 1624601
* A MODERNIZED AQUATICS LABORATORY FOR  RESEARCH AND TRAINING AT HIGHLANDS BIOLOGICAL STATION
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* James Costa, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2020
* USD 265,151.00

For nearly 90 years the Highlands Biological Station (HBS;
highlandsbiological.org) has been a center for scientific research, teaching,
training as well as public education and enrichment focused on the biological
richness of the southern Blue Ridge Escarpment region. The study of Blue Ridge
escarpment watersheds and aquatic ecology and biota has long been an important
research activity at HBS because of the Station's proximity to the headwaters of
several major river systems of upland North Carolina, South Carolina, and
Georgia. These river systems have both Atlantic and Gulf drainage and support
some of the richest aquatic diversity in North America. The HBS Aquatics
Laboratory was built in the late 1950s and has served the scientific community
well for over 5 decades, supporting numerous scientific studies and specialized
aquatics courses for teaching and training undergraduates, graduate students,
and Federal and State agency biologists nationwide. This project aims to
modernize and expand this now-dated laboratory at a time when Blue Ridge
Escarpment watersheds are experiencing accelerated changes, from development to
precipitation patterns to dam removal, activities that affect or are projected
to alter forest hydrology and stream and river health in complex ways. The
wettest region in the eastern continental US, the southern mountain region and
its aquatic resources are a natural laboratory and classroom, and an ideal
setting for learning about how watersheds and river systems function
ecologically and respond to environmental changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to reconfigure, update, and expand the HBS Aquatics Laboratory by
(1) modernizing the lab infrastructure by upgrading outdated electrical,
lighting, HVAC, insulation, and plumbing; (2) rearranging and replumbing
existing research tanks and artificial streams; (3) expanding the research lab
to provide bench space, restroom, and accommodate upgraded research equipment;
and (4) reorganizing and upgrading the adjacent exterior space by replumbing
outdoor artificial streams and creating storage for field equipment. The
upgraded HBS Aquatics Laboratory will support a greater breadth of controlled
laboratory and field studies of regional riverine and stream system ecology,
improving the scientific understanding of these systems and thus providing the
information needed to inform planning, management, and mitigation. Expansion of
the facility is also designed to dovetail with the growing public education and
enrichment activities at HBS, introducing K-12 students and life-long learners
to the equipment and methodologies of aquatic sciences.