* 1624174
* RCN-UBE: Yeast Orphan Gene Project: Finding a place for ORFans to GO
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jill Keeney, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 485,852.00

This RCN-UBE project will investigate the function of unknown genes in the model
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Baker's or Brewer's yeast). The genome of
this yeast was sequenced 20 years ago, yet nearly 10% of the genes have no
assigned function; these genes are called orphan genes. Determining the function
of the complete set of genes in this simple model organism will meaningfully
contribute to the understanding of how cells function. The goal of the Yeast
Orphan Gene Project is to organize a consortium of undergraduate student
researchers and faculty to coordinate resources and design experimental
strategies to assign functions to orphan genes in
yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on analysis of available bioinformatics data
sets, students will design and execute experiments for defining gene function.
The network will facilitate collaboration between students at different
institutions so that students can share strategies and technique solutions while
developing experience in on-line collaborations. Scientifically, the project
will contribute to a more detailed understanding of the biology of yeast and the
structure of the yeast genome. Ultimately, the yeast orphan gene project aims to
use the process of determining orphan gene function as a tool to teach
undergraduate students key concepts in bioinformatics, genomics, molecular
biology, and genetics and impart valuable experience in scientific collaboration
and leadership. The network will provide tools for faculty to expand research
experience for undergraduates and incorporate research experiences into
undergraduate courses. It will also be a mechanism to distribute a tested model
of an authentic course-based research experience to a diverse set of
institutions by providing workshop and assessment support. Through sharing of
resources, the network will develop a model for online course modules to be
shared among institutions. The networking activities will expand the expertise
of faculty, as well as provide undergraduates tools and resources for
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).