* 1624814
* AGS-PRF: Sensitivity Analysis of Carbonaceous Aerosol Mixing State and Morphology on Spectral Optical Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* William Heinson, Heinson                 William        R
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 172,000.00

Small atmospheric particles, known as aerosols, can impact weather and climate
through their interaction with clouds and radiation. In this project, research
will take place to determine how aerosol size, shape, and composition impacts
the interaction of aerosols with radiation. This project will focus on black
carbon, which is emitted from various combustion sources such as forest fires
and vehicle exhaust. The main result of the project would be a quantitative
estimation of the sensitivity of radiative properties to aerosol morphology and
composition, which will help to improve climate model simulations. The
postdoctoral researcher also plans to conduct various education and outreach
activities, such as teaching a college course, mentoring undergraduate students,
and providing research opportunities to high school students.

The researcher plans to conduct a project to systematically understand and
parameterize the sensitivity of the spectral optical properties of carbonaceous
aerosols to variations in aerosol morphology, refractive index, and external
mixing. The approach will be computational in nature involving the use of state-
of-the-art aerosol simulation techniques and non-spherical particle-
electromagnetic radiation interaction codes. Four main research questions are
posed: 1) How do the physical properties of black carbon aerosol evolve as a
function of organic carbon coating? 2) How do the intensive optical properties
and extensive optical properties differ for bare black carbon morphology and
those with external mixing with organic carbon? 3) What is the spectral response
of bare and externally-mixed black carbon? 4) What corrections are needed to
spherical core-shell calculations, conventionally used in climate models, with
regard to incorporating non-spherical black carbon particles with and without
organic carbon mixing?