* 1624322
* MRI: Development of an Isolated Attosecond Pulse Spectrometer at the Carbon K Edge
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Feng Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 987,462.00

With this award from the award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs, Professor Stephen Leone
from the University of California Berkeley and colleagues Daniel Neumark, Roger
Falcone and Feng Wang have developed an attosecond spectrometer system to
measure fast processes when electrons are excited in materials containing
carbon. This is a benchtop laboratory system with a laser source generating
pulses in an energy range called the carbon K-edge. When electrons are excited
by this laser pulse, the dynamic process that result (molecular fragmentation,
or rearrangement of other electrons) are observed. These processes can be very
fast, on an attosecond time scale (10 to the minus 18 seconds). The processes
are probed with such time-scale pulses of light as they occur. Initial
experiments have demonstrated the operational proof-of-principle. Applications
will proceed on various carbon-containing materials. In the long term, progress
will allow new measurements and basic knowledge to be generated on electronic
properties of materials, electronics and biological systems. In the process of
building this system students interact with expert builders helping in the
formation of the new generation of instrument builders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award addresses the development of a laser system and
apparatus that can produce high order harmonics and isolated attosecond pulses
up to and through the carbon K edge (300 eV). A robust system is built that can
perform dynamical attosecond experiments at the carbon K edge on a daily basis.
The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially to (a) develop robust attosecond pulses, (b) study charge migration
in molecules, (c) explore photodissociation dynamics and isomerization in
prototype systems, (d) study electronic coherences and (e) analyze solid state
and many-body charge state dynamics.