* 1624847
* Collaborative Research:   Examining the Temporal, Spatial and Geochemical Focusing of Magmatism During a Continental Arc Flare-up
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Scott Paterson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 119,354.00

Continental margin volcanic arcs are locations of vast crustal growth factories,
sites of extensive ore deposit formation and areas of widespread mountain
building. They are also locations of dangerous volcanic eruptions that can
disrupt the lives of millions of people at any time and over large regions.
Although a basic understanding of volcanic eruptions exists, the different
behaviors of eruption such as location, volumes and frequency are not well
understood. Part of the problem is that volcanoes are only the surface
expression of the complex physical and chemical processes that occur below the
Earth's surface in vertically extensive magma plumbing systems that feed the
volcanoes. One important but poorly understood type of volcanic behavior is the
spatial and temporal focusing of these systems best documented in volcanic
fields, as expressed through the change from initially low volume,
compositionally heterogeneous and spatially spread-out volcanism to high volume,
homogeneous and spatially focused volcanism often leading to large volcanic
eruptions. If magma focusing begins at deeper crustal levels, what processes
control this phenomenon, and how does it manifest itself in style, location,
volume, and the frequency of volcanic eruptions? To answer this, it is essential
that we understand the mechanisms by which magmatism is focused during vertical
transport through the crustal column and how volcanic and deeper magmatic
systems are linked to one another. Understanding the processes causing magma
focusing will also help us understand ore deposit formation and aspects of
mountain building and the growth of continents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research in the central Sierra Nevada,
California, has led to three important discoveries: (1) a clear pattern of
spatiotemporal and geochemical magmatic focusing in a field of Cretaceous
plutons with the large 95 to 85 Ma Tuolumne Intrusive Complex (TIC), in Yosemite
National Park occurring at the center of the focus; (2) a number of host rock
pendants in this area preserve volcanic rocks that mimic the same temporal and
geochemical focusing as the plutons; (3) a number of subvolcanic porphyry
"volcanic feeder systems" occur in this area, linking volcanic and plutonic
fields of the same age. These discoveries provide the opportunity to investigate
the potential causes and processes facilitating magma focusing in the mid-upper
crust that leads to the generation of focused volcanic systems, like those
established in the San Juan volcanic field in Colorado or the Aucanquilcha
volcanic cluster in Chile. The proposed study will examine two scales: 1)
Studying the broad spatiotemporal geochemical pattern of volcanic and plutonic
units at the peripheral boundaries of a large silicic pluton; 2) Targeting key
plutonic-porphyry feeder-volcanic "triads" to examine volcanic-plutonic links
during the focusing. The proposed research will use field mapping, geochemical
analyses and geochronology to explore spatial/temporal/compositional focusing of
magmatism at 6-11 km depths in an ancient arc, and compare to similar phenomena
established in modern volcanic systems. This project supports two early career
women, PhD student Ardill at USC and assistant professor Memeti at CSU
Fullerton, and professor Paterson from USC. Several undergraduates and one
graduate student from Hispanic-Serving CSU Fullerton will be involved. A free
mobile application will be developed in collaboration with CSU Fullerton
assistant professor Dr. Natalie Bursztyn that will enhance student learning in
the geosciences and engage the general public by taking them on a virtual field
trip back in time through the Sierra Nevada magmatic arc. The project emphasizes
training in analytical methods at home and at collaborating facilities. Paterson
and Memeti will continue a &gt;12 yr collaboration with Yosemite National Park.