* 1624391
* Broadening Participation in STEM Higher Education: Industry's Vital Role
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Edie Fraser, Diversified Search dba/STEMconnector
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2017
* USD 52,170.00

While women make up 51% of the nation's population and 59% of the workforce (US
Census Bureau), they comprise a mere 30% of the technology industry. To keep the
United States workforce competitive, particularly in the advanced technology
industries, increasing the diversity of the workforce is crucial. STEMconnector®
is a consortium of over 150 corporations, educational institutions, non-profit
organizations and government entities concerned with STEM education and the
future of human capital. With a particular emphasis on diversity and women,
STEMconnector® targets stakeholders across the STEM spectrum who are passionate
about educating and retaining the STEM workforce critical for driving the
economy. STEMconnector® will host a workshop in September 2016 to facilitate the
sharing of ideas surrounding broadening participation of women in ATE-related
fields, especially entry-level technical jobs. This convening will bring
together STEMconnector® members and members of the ATE community that actively
work on increasing the diversity of the entry-level technical workforce. From
the ATE Community, these include the Materials Science Education Support Center,
the Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing and the National Institute
for Women in Trade, Technology and Science (IWITTS).

According to a Gallup study, while 96 percent of Chief Academic Officers rate
their institution as either very or somewhat effective at preparing students for
the world of work, only 11 percent of business leaders strongly agree graduating
students have the skills and competencies that their business needs. This
workshop will provide an opportunity for stakeholders from various ATE industry
sectors such as manufacturing, agriculture and IT, to directly communicate with
the decision makers from ATE-focused colleges and universities. Not only will
participating institutions have the platform to share their best practices for
what is currently working, but they will also be able to collaborate to form new
diversity strategies and build partnerships through connections made at the
workshop. Through this workshop, STEMconnector® ultimately aspires to advance
women in ATE entry-level jobs through increased recruitment and retention.

The best practices shared and knowledge gained from this workshop will be widely
disseminated through web access and print publications. The participating
stakeholders will also share these ideas at their respective institutions by
implementing action items to improve the diversity programs and strategies
currently in place. The compiled resources will provide ATE and STEMconnector®
members with tools to refine their outreach and retention strategies, and
support women and other students with increased opportunities to succeed in
entry-level advanced technology jobs. It is anticipated that the resources will
also have the potential to impact women and other students who previously may
not have thought of advanced technology industries as a viable career path.