* 1624124
* CAREER: User-Space Protection Domains for Compositional Information Security
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Gang Tan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 276,607.00

Attacks on software applications such as email readers and web browsers are
common. These attacks can cause damages ranging from application malfunction,
loss of private data, to a complete takeover of users' computers. One effective
strategy for limiting the damage is to adopt the principle of least privilege in
application design: the application is split into several protection domains and
each domain is given only the necessary privileges to perform its task. In this
design, the compromise of one domain does not directly lead to the compromise of
other security-sensitive domains. The PI proposes to design and implement a
framework that makes it easy for software developers to apply the principle of
least privilege to their applications. The proposed framework will significantly
improve the security of critical software applications. It will benefit the
software industry by designing new technologies for building secure software
systems.

The proposed research combines several novel ideas: (1) user-space protection
domains through binary-level enforcement of isolation and information-flow
security; (2) a declarative language that allows for flexible configuration of
an application's security architecture; (3) a binary-level partitioning tool
that automatically splits an application into components of least privilege; (4)
a compositional reasoning mechanism that allows developers to perform formal
reasoning about an application's end-to-end information security. By staying in
the user space, the proposed framework is OS independent, and by working on
binary code, it is source-language agnostic, making it more broadly applicable.
Developers can use it to partition an application, flexibly configure its
security architecture, and reason about its information security. On the
education side, the PI will organize a series of activities to increase high
school students' awareness of security, privacy, and secure programming. The
central activity is a summer workshop that gathers local high-school technology
teachers and helps them design lesson plans that can be integrated into their
schools' technology curriculum.