* 1624976
* MRI: Development of a system for low temperature optical measurement of 3D magnon, plasmon and spin torque transfer dynamics.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 650,729.00

Over the past 15 years scientists and engineers have realized that integrating
logic and information storage functions could dramatically improve the energy
efficiency of computing devices and enable new and more powerful computing
paradigms. Promising materials for creating such a device include those
materials in which electrical current strongly interacts with the spin of
electrons. The spin of an electron can be thought of as a tiny bar magnet
attached to the electron in which the north pole of the magnet can be oriented
up, down, or in any other direction. To develop new computing platforms that
integrate charge and spin functionality, it is necessary to study how these
spins change direction in response to external stimuli such as electrical
current or pulses of light. These changes occur very quickly in about one
billionth of one second. This award supports the development of an instrument to
study spin reorientation by measuring the spin direction with extremely short
pulses of light that arrive at the sample at precisely controlled times relative
to external stimuli such as an electrical current or a beam of light.
Measurements will be carried out at very low temperatures to isolate and
understand the fundamental physical processes. This knowledge will provide the
scientific foundation for engineering appropriate materials for application in
future computing devices. The work is being coordinated with a new graduate-
level course on the materials under investigation and support the training of
one postdoctoral researcher and two undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-based phenomena in topological
insulators and magnetic heterostructures have attracted a great deal of
attention from the perspective of both fundamental science and device
development. However, the underlying physical origin of many of these phenomena
remains vague. Moreover, the dynamics of these phenomena, which are critical for
device applications, remain poorly understood. This award supports the
development of an instrument that will enable ultrafast optical measurements of
collective magnetic and charge excitations and spin transfer dynamics at low
temperatures and in three-dimensional magnetic fields. The new instrument will
allow scientists to answer fundamental scientific questions about quantum
materials, magnetic heterostructures, and other "quantum engineered"
heterogeneous materials and identify routes to tailor these heterogeneous
materials for spintronic, optoelectronic, and quantum device applications. The
new instrument will enable the first ultrafast measurements of the dynamics of
spin transfer torque. The three dimensional resolution and integrated optical,
magnetic, and electrical control will allow scientists to separate, understand,
and ultimately control competing processes. The instrument will also provide
unprecedented measurement of magnon and plasmon dynamics in topological
insulators and heterogeneous materials designed to control the emergence of
interfacial phenomena with unique quantum mechanical properties. Successful
development of the instrument will enable new interactions between fundamental
science, applied science, and device engineering fields. It will enable the
breakthroughs required for widespread adoption of "exotic" materials in device
technologies. Conceptual aspects of the research enabled by this instrument will
be integrated into new graduate and undergraduate courses and science education
outreach programs. Members of underrepresented groups will be actively recruited
for both the postdoctoral and undergraduate researcher positions supported by
the award.