* 1624988
* MRI Consortium: Development of the Fast Interaction Trigger Detector for the ALICE Experiment at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Klay, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 190,877.00

One of the four key recommendations of the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee's
2015 Long Range Plan (LRP) included increasing investment in small-scale and
mid-scale projects and initiatives that enable forefront research at
universities and laboratories. The LRP also encourages education and workforce
development as well as research and development into state-of-the-art tools and
techniques for nuclear science. This project, the development of a particle
physics detector at Chicago State University and California Polytechnic State
University, will enable the transfer of knowledge from an international
collaboration of world-class physicists and engineers at Europe's Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) to our universities. This will provide unique opportunities to
train undergraduate students in electronics, detection techniques, laser
technology, data analysis, and instrumentation interface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fast Interaction Trigger Detector (FIT) proposed here
is an instrument that meets specific requirements as the Minimum Bias trigger
for one of the particle detector systems (called ALICE) at the LHC: (a) The
capability to discriminate beam-beam interactions with a 99% efficiency for the
collisions generated by the LHC at a rate of 50 kHz for Pb-Pb collisions and a
rate of 200 kHz for p-p and p-Pb collisions. (b) The capability to provide a
start signal for the rest of the ALICE detectors (Level 0 trigger) with a time
resolution better than 30 ps. In addition to these design parameters, the FIT
detector will provide the following measurements: (a) Charged particle
multiplicity (b) Interaction reaction plane (c) First measurement of the
collision vertex position. FIT will also be the key detector to provide direct
feedback to the LHC. It will be the first of the ALICE detectors to be turned on
to perform beam tuning and monitor online luminosity. These characteristics, not
available in any instrument provided by a vendor, require the development of a
unique instrument at the vanguard of trigger detectors for high energy nuclear
and particle physics.