* 1624143
* RCN-UBE Incubator: The Mid-Atlantic Biology Research and Career Network: Innovations in Biology Undergraduate Education
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2018
* David Rivers, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The Mid-Atlantic Biology Research and Career (MABRC) network is a community of
scientists, educators and business professionals working together to improve
workforce preparation of life science students. The MABRC network seeks to
determine the essential technical and professional skills needed to succeed in
today's life sciences workplace and critically assess the current undergraduate
biology curricula with respect to workforce preparation. The results of the
network's evaluation will be disseminated by multiple vehicles to reach all
interested stakeholders. A career conference will also be organized to inform
and train students and to promote networking between graduates and employers.
The network will also initiate the design of a framework for providing authentic
research experiences for biology students, with an emphasis placed on early
engagement in research and in experiences that incorporate emerging technologies
that are critical for the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MABRC network
will create a forum for bridging the divide between undergraduate biology
education and student preparation by a) identifying technical and professional
skills essential for the workplace, b) evaluating undergraduate biology training
in the context of career preparation, and c) serving as a gateway between
academe, government, and the private sector to students and teachers at high
schools, and community colleges, 4-year colleges, and universities. Preparation
of graduates from these institutions for the workplace will assessed via
examination of departmental learning aims, curricular offerings, and via surveys
of stakeholders including industry leaders. Follow up analyses will be performed
to evaluate strengths and deficiencies of undergraduate biology curricula in
relation to desired workface skills. Subsequent network activities include
enhancing student career preparation through the development of a framework for
authentic research experiences that can serve as a model for other networks in a
variety of discipline contexts. The network is designed to promote training of
diverse student populations, with the intent of recruiting and retaining
underserved and underrepresented students in life science careers. Member
institutions and organizations will initially be affiliated with the emerging
biotechnology industry in the mid-Atlantic region. This strategy will promote
direct access to a large network of future employers, facilitates connections
with regional high school programs, and allows direct contribution to the
workforce in the home states of participating students, the latter being
especially important for underrepresented students to serve as peers and STEM
role models for K-12 students in their own
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange/finalreport/.