* 1624201
* AF: 4th Workshop on Biological Distributed Algorithms (BDA 2016)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Saket Navlakha, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of the Biological Distributed Algorithms (BDA) workshop is to bring
together computer scientists and biologists interested in studying the
relationships between distributed algorithms and distributed biological systems,
including ant colonies, slime molds, the immune system, and the brain. The
workshop will include invited talks together with oral and poster presentations
selected by the workshop's program committee. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is the
4th BDA meeting. This year, the workshop will be co-located with a premiere
distributed computing conference, PODC. In 2015, BDA was held as a stand-alone
2-day workshop at MIT in Boston, MA. In 2013 and 2014, BDA was co-located with
another premiere distributed computing conference, DISC, in Austin, TX and
Jerusalem, Israel, respectively. Each year, we have seen growing attendance and
submissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds sought will be used to provide
travel support for 10-15 students and post-docs, including women and minorities,
to attend and present their work (oral or poster) at the workshop. Since young
researchers, especially students and postdocs, tend to be the driving force
behind successful interdisciplinary collaborations, we will dedicate most of the
slots in the upcoming BDA meeting to works presented by students and postdocs.
Our experience in the past BDA meetings shows that students and postdocs often
have difficulty securing travel funds for such events, therefore we will
encourage their participation by offering them generous travel grants. We hope
to introduce young researchers to this exciting and emerging area of cross-
disciplinary research, and help them establish collaborations for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed systems are prevalent in computer science and
biology. Both domains rely on networks of interacting entities - molecules,
cells, and organisms in biology; sensor, mobile, and autonomous robot devices in
computer science - to coordinate output responses to inputs, route resources,
and navigate through environments. Both types of systems also seek solutions to
these problems that are inherently efficient, robust, and adaptive with respect
to changes expected in natural and competitive environments. These connections
suggest that by thinking computationally about the settings, requirements, and
goals of information processing within distributed biological systems, we can
achieve two complementary goals: First, we can use insights about how biological
systems solve computational problems to aid in designing more flexible, robust,
and adaptive distributed algorithms. Second, we can use, develop, or adapt
existing distributed computing theory to help understand the behavior of
biological systems and propose new, testable hypotheses to determine how well
such models fit the observed behavior of the biological system. By bringing
together both biologists and computer scientists, we aim to cross-fertilize the
important and timely ideas that both domains can offer to one another.