* 1624791
* Building a Lake Erie Area Research Network (LEARN)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kristen DeVanna, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 24,948.00

Fresh water is a finite resource. Communities, environmentalists, governments,
academics, and corporations are increasingly recognizing that its availability
as a clean and abundant resource could introduce conflicts over its use and
misuse. Because of this, the connection between water, people, energy,
agriculture, and climate is an important one. Unfortunately, because stressors
such as climate change, land use, and population shifts operate on a large
scale, the solution sets must also be grand. Therefore, the long-term goal is to
better manage and sustain Lake Erie in light of human-driven stressors by
creating a consortium of field stations and their associated researchers; the
consortium would be entitled, "Lake Erie Area Research Network" or "LEARN." This
award will support planning activities for this network including a two-day
workshop, a series of webinars, and survey work in order to establish the
foundation for the LEARN consortium - a consortium of field stations, scientific
equipment, and diverse researchers to address the grand challenges facing Lake
Erie. For LEARN to be successful it will require (1) the involvement of diverse
skill sets, (2) financial assets, (3) collaboration, and (4) communication.

Because of its mission (under NOAA and the National Sea Grant College Program)
to sustain and enhance the health and wise use of Lake Erie's resources while
serving as an unbiased, impartial program, the Ohio Sea Grant College Program is
ideally suited to be the leader of the consortium. Ohio Sea Grant is based out
of The Ohio State University, which allows the program to tap into the vast
resources associated with the university. Furthermore, Ohio Sea Grant,
throughout its existence, has utilized and strengthened partnerships with
government, academic resources, and the private sector to address environmental,
economic, and education issues using a combination of research, education, and
outreach projects. Since Ohio Sea Grant is implemented at Ohio State and works
closely with its scientists and administration, the university's in-house
experts, laboratories, and test assets will be leveraged. When layered with the
research and technical assets of other key research universities in the region
(e.g., the other members of the consortium), as well as the technical acumen and
innovative ideas of businesses, the LEARN consortium will provide the integrated
effort needed to solve/address the grand issues facing Lake Erie, the Great
Lakes, and all freshwater resources.