* 1624380
* Environmental Change Research Facility at BIOS
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Rachel Parsons, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 332,562.00

The ocean ecosystem is a shared resource that provides food and oxygen while
playing an important role in global cycles of carbon and nutrients. The oceans
are, however, threatened by a number of human induced changes including
increases in temperature, nutrients, CO2 and chemicals. In order to understand
how the changing ocean environment influences the biology of marine organisms,
scientists must run controlled experiments exploring the effects of many types
of stressors, carefully quantifying their individual and combined effects. The
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS; www.bios.edu ) - an independent U.S.
not-for-profit organization and a Bermuda Registered Charity - is uniquely
located on a seagrass and coral platform with easy access to the open ocean of
the North Atlantic, providing the opportunity to perform manipulative
experiments on a diverse array of organisms. A new Environmental Change Research
Facility (ECRF) will be established at BIOS, initiating the capability for
studies involving multiple environmental stressors associated with the effects
of global climate change. This will consist of two environmental rooms,
integrated into the pre-existing flow-through seawater, and CO2 exposure
facilities that will allow for experiments at multiple temperatures. Many of the
organisms of interest are small in size (i.e. juvenile coral through to
bacteria), and many of the processes require specialized stains to visualize.
Thus, the facility will also include a new microscope that will allow analyses
at a broad range of sizes (petri dish to single cell) and that is capable of
quantifying changes in organism development, calcification, and species
composition. With the addition of both the environmental chambers and the
microscope, the range of experiments that can be run at BIOS will be
substantially expanded. BIOS hosts a large number of visiting scientists, and
BIOS researchers participate in ongoing scientific collaborations with external
scientists, many with NSF-supported research programs, such that the ECRF
equipment will have a far reaching impact on the research capacity of the marine
sciences community as a whole. The facility will also support the primary goal
of the internships and courses at BIOS: to immerse students in experiential
learning through research in the ocean sciences. This can be a seminal change
for many students whose home institutions lack programs in marine science or the
opportunity to conduct independent research. Education experiences at BIOS can
influence decisions that determine STEM education and career trajectories, with
students leaving our programs better prepared to pursue professional careers
and/or graduate programs. The ECRF will provide opportunities to train
undergraduate and graduate students in complex multi-stressor studies, fostering
a next generation of scientists with the interdisciplinary skillset required to
address the pressing questions of environmental change in the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major objectives in modern
biological oceanography is to understand how the myriad of co-occurring
anthropogenic stressors influence marine organisms and determine how these will
modify global biogeochemical cycles. The objective of this grant is to establish
an Environmental Change Research Facility (ECRF) designed to test and quantify
the effects of multiple anthropogenic stressors on the marine environment
(including temperature, nutrients, CO2, low O2, and toxicants). Due to its
unique location in the oligotrophic North Atlantic gyre, BIOS provides access to
a broad array of marine systems, including open ocean, near-shore coral reef,
seagrass and mangrove ecosystems. The accessibility of these biomes via BIOS?s
fleet of research vessels is complimented by the presence of a flowing seawater
laboratory and CO2 exposure system where manipulative experiments can be
conducted. This grant supports the installation of two environmental rooms that,
by providing both thermal stability for process studies and opportunities for
controlled multi-stressor experiments, will substantially expand the types of
research that could be pursued at BIOS by resident scientists, visiting
researchers and students. Many of the organisms of interest ? planktonic
zooplankton, calcifying foraminifera or algae, bacteria and viruses, and early-
life stages of benthic organisms such as sea urchins and coral ? are quite
small. In order to quantify and visualize the response of this wide size-range
of organisms, the facility will also include a new microscope, capable of
visualizing changes in organism development and calcification, as well as cell
enumeration. This instrument will increase the in-house observational
capabilities for both preserved and live imaging and provide the capacity to
precisely control image positioning to allow for time lapse capture of growth,
biomineralization and dissolution. With the addition of this instrumentation,
scientists and visiting researchers will be in a position to address the
pressing questions of how environmental parameters affect the function of marine
organisms, including biomineralization, development, ageing, biogeochemical
cycling, community composition, microevolution and subsequently ecosystem
function and human health impacts. They ensure the continued success and growth
of an already transformative program in microbial oceanography by expanding the
capacity to execute and analyze process studies in a controlled environment.
Paralleling the benefits to basic research, the ECRF facility will be available
for use with student internships and BIOS courses. Since 2011, BIOS has hosted
over 800 students annually, most of them from US institutions. The ECRF will
provide opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate students to conduct
and analyze complex multi-stressor studies, fostering a next generation of
scientists with the interdisciplinary skillset required to address the pressing
questions of environmental change.