* 1624589
* Accomplishment-Based Renewal: Experimental Determination of the PVTX and Phase Equilibrium Properties of Aqueous Chloride Fluids at Magmatic-hydrothermal Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 477,941.00

Increasing world population, combined with an overall increase in global
standard of living, requires an ever-increasing amount of resources to meet
human demands. The Earth is the source of all the minerals, metals and other
natural resources required to manufacture the products needed to sustain a
modern technological society. Exploration models designed to discover new
occurrences of minerals and metals are based on an understanding of the various
physical, chemical and biological processes that lead to the accumulation of
metals and other resources into economic concentrations. Most mineral and metal
deposits are formed when heated fluids in the Earth's crust dissolve, transport
and deposit metals to form ore deposits, and most of the ore-forming fluids are
highly-saline brines containing various salts. The goal of this project is to
develop a better understanding of the fundamental properties of saline fluids at
temperature and pressure conditions appropriate for ore-forming systems. This
information, in turn, will lead to development of better mineral exploration
models and contribute to economic stability and prosperity and promote a more
secure future by reducing dependence on external sources to provide the raw
materials needed for technological and defense applications. The project will
also provide training in state-of-the-art experimental and analytical techniques
for several students and young researchers from diverse backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most natural saline fluids in the Earth's crust are
approximated by the H2O-NaCl-KCl-CaCl2-FeCl2 system. Previous work has shown
that the physical and chemical behavior of saline fluids at elevated
temperatures and pressures is highly dependent on the total salinity of the
fluid as well as the ratios of the various major salt components in the fluid.
In this project experiments will be conducted to determine the Pressure-Volume-
Temperature-Composition (PVTX) and phase equilibrium properties of aqueous
chloride fluids at magmatic-hydrothermal PTX conditions. Synthetic fluid
inclusions containing fluids with various binary, ternary, quaternary and
quinary compositions within this five-component system will be trapped at
magmatic-hydrothermal PTX conditions. Phase boundaries (liquid-vapor curves and
liquidi), critical points, and isochores (lines of constant density) will be
determined using the synthetic fluid inclusion technique that has proven to be
successful in numerous earlier studies. Empirical numerical recipes to estimate
compositions of fluids in the various sub-systems based on microthermometric and
microanalysis of natural fluid inclusions will be developed from the
experimental data. These data provide the basis for interpretations of
microthermometric data from natural fluid inclusions and provide feedstock for
future studies to develop empirical numerical models describing the PVTX
properties of hydrothermal fluids over the range of PTX conditions appropriate
for crustal hydrothermal systems. The results of this project will lead to a
better understanding of the phase equilibrium and PVTX behavior of ?real?
magmatic-hydrothermal fluids, and provide a solid basis for developing more
robust mineral exploration models based on data obtained from studies of fluid
inclusions in natural systems.