* 1624593
* FSML: Acquisition of instrumentation at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography to establish a Laboratory for Imaging Microbial Ecology (LIME)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* James Sanders, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 231,055.00

Marine microbes are an essential component of all marine ecosystems, and play a
central role in mediating how carbon and nutrients flow through the ocean. This
facilities improvement project will enhance the capacity of the University of
Georgia's Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO; http://www.skio.uga.edu/) to
conduct innovative research in the area of marine microbial ecology and
biogeochemistry by the upgrade and acquisition of instrumentation. Funds will be
utilized to expand the capabilities of the current flow cytometry equipment to
better enumerate small microbes, as well as to acquire new equipment that can
visualize and classify microbes based on image recognition software.
Additionally, an instrument that has the capacity to measure a suite of algal
photosynthetic parameters will be purchased. These instruments will enhance the
ability to investigate microbial interactions from the nanometer though
millimeter scales (from viruses to mesozooplankton) and will anchor a new
integrated analytical facility at SkIO called the Laboratory for Imaging
Microbial Ecology (LIME). The creation of LIME will allow SkIO to advance
fundamental research in biological oceanography, while making the Institution a
regional beacon for interdisciplinary ecological and biogeochemical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to enumerate, visualize, and assess
the physiological status of microbes across a range of sizes and trophic levels
is critical to furthering a mechanistic understanding of the interactions among
marine microbes, and how these interactions impact biogeochemical processes.
With this project, SkIO will acquire a FlowCam®, a Fluorescence Induction and
Relaxation (FIRe) instrument, and Zooscan system, and will expand the
capabilities of two existing flow cytometers (CytoSense and Guava EasyCyte 5HT).
This equipment will help SkIO build the capacity for high-throughput cultivation
experiments, enhance visualization of microbes, improve the automation of sample
analysis, and advance the ability to measure important physiological parameters
over a large range of particle/organism sizes. Images can capture interactions
in situ, and enumeration of individuals can reveal outcomes of a particular
interaction. These observations are essential for moving beyond bulk rate
measurements towards the linkage of mechanisms and rates along both spatial and
trophic scales. In addition, by enhancing infrastructure for scientific
research, this project will enhance educational opportunities through
established programs currently at SkIO including: university undergraduate
courses, summer undergraduate internships, and educational outreach programs
with HBCU's. Further, this new technology will help strengthen collaborations
and partnerships with regional research consortiums, and be used during an
annual Marine Science Day for the local community.