* 1624488
* I/UCRC:  University of Arizona Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Intelligent Telemedicine
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Wolfgang Fink, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

One in every five adults in the U.S. has experienced some form of mental illness
including stress, anxiety, and depression. While most of these cases are mild to
moderate disorders, nearly 10 million Americans per year suffer from severe
mental illness that were developed from these originally less serious mental
disorders. In certain scenarios, the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders
may be delayed or not possible due to situational circumstances (e.g., remote
sites, disaster areas, military environments, ships at sea, or humanitarian
assistance). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mental health expenditure in 2014 was
$203 billion in the U.S. which constitutes 6.9% of all health-related spending,
a level expected to be sustained for the next decade. The overall hospital share
of mental health spending has dropped from 41% in 1986 to today's 22%, and is
expected to continue throughout the next decade. While outpatient care is only
half to one third of the cost of the inpatient expense, about 45% of the mental
disorder patients have listed high cost as their main barrier to seeking mental
disorder treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital technology-based mental
healthcare is regarded as a natural and ultimate choice for outpatient settings
due to its low cost, high accuracy and continuous monitoring and tracking
capabilities. As such, enterprises are increasingly interested in intelligent
tele-medicine because it is the backbone for a completely new market, namely
?digital wellness? that features the combination of digital technology and
mental healthcare. The goal is to provide affordable and high quality mental
healthcare. This requires new, trans-disciplinary research to devise medically
effective and reasonable solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Intelligent Tele-Medicine (InTelMed) will devise and deploy biofeedback-control
designs to integrate wearable sensors, data analysis, and prescribed
intervention/treatment onto the same human smart service platform. From an end-
user perspective, flexibility, fashion, and visibility are key form factors.
From a technology development point of view, high accuracy (i.e., medical-grade
data) and low power design, real-time data analysis algorithms, application and
database interfaces are the critical components to create successful
biofeedback-based products. Biofeedback-control designs, as pursued by InTelMed,
have the potential to improve behavioral health for our nation and drastically
cut total outpatient mental healthcare costs, which constitutes 62% of the
overall mental healthcare spending. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;InTelMed will not only
advance science &amp; technology in psychology and physiology, but will also
accelerate both knowledge and intellectual property transfer to industry by
working closely with the InTelMed Center members. Moreover, for Corporate
America to retain a competitive edge as it emerges into the 21st century, it is
essential to prepare students to become a desirable workforce: The majority of
jobs in an increasingly complex and fast-paced society require knowledge and
skills that stem from a quality college education. As such, InTelMed will
recruit students from a broad background by engaging them in the biofeedback-
controlled sensor technology research, introducing them to internships at member
companies and organizations, and expose them to visit and present their work at
scientific conferences and workshops. InTelMed will partner with Center members
and local and national outreach programs to broaden participation of
underrepresented minorities and women in particular.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Intelligent Tele-Medicine
(InTelMed) is committed to research &amp; development in intelligent
biofeedback-controlled monitoring and intervening wearable sensor technologies.
In particular, InTelMed is concerned with physiological and psychological status
and change identification through real-time data acquisition, mining, and
analysis. Moreover, the Center focuses on the mitigation of physiological and
psychological changes through biofeedback-control for real-time management and
intervention. This requires a deep understanding in neurology, mechanisms of
stress development, emotion changes, and physiological variations. As such,
InTelMed relies on trans-disciplinary collaboration including psychology,
physiology, biomedical and electrical engineering, and computer science. Lastly,
the Center focuses also on the infusion of newly developed technologies into
relevant user groups, such as patients, athletes, soldiers, firefighters,
policemen, pilots, astronauts, and business professionals who work in stressful
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued advances in mobile platform
hardware (e.g., smartphones and smart watches) have increased the capability to
provide high quality physiology data, local real-time data analysis, and robust
connectivity. Such handheld capability is of significant interest to the field
of mental disorder treatment and stress management. Inherent portability,
connectivity, and affordability would allow use by minimally trained personnel
and deployment to areas heretofore considered inaccessible or impractical.
Software will be essential for enabling real-time evaluations, tele-diagnosis,
and biofeedback-controlled interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofeedback-
controlled real-time intervention - paired with wearable sensor technologies,
prescribed treatment, and data analysis - forms the backbone of "digital
wellness", i.e., digital technology-based mental healthcare. Specifically,
biofeedback-controlled intervention will help: &lt;br/&gt;- Improve accuracy and
efficiency: by harnessing new technologies, such as modular low-power wearable
sensors, mobile platforms, and cloud or server computing performance, including,
but not limited to, communication reliability, data security, and energy
efficiency to maintain cutting-edge digital wellness infrastructures.
&lt;br/&gt;- Manage scalability and complexity: by creating a network of mental
healthcare through automatic biofeedback controls and precision/custom-
interventions that can help hundreds of thousands of patients simultaneously.
&lt;br/&gt;- Provide adaptability and agility: by ensuring adaptive and real-
time responses to react promptly to patient needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
support of the above, InTelMed engages the following emerging technologies as
the essential prerequisites for digital wellness: &lt;br/&gt;1. Biofeedback-
controlled monitoring and intervening wearable sensor technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Physiological and psychological status and change identification
through real-time data acquisition, mining, and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;3. Analysis
of physiological and psychological changes both in the absence and presence of
substance use (e.g., medications, drugs, alcohol), and due to stress.
&lt;br/&gt;4. Mitigation of physiological and psychological changes through
biofeedback for real-time management and intervention. &lt;br/&gt;5. Cloud-based
temporal analysis and correlation models to evaluate the impact of treatments,
work environments, team interactions, and environmental changes on the
physiological and psychological health and performance. &lt;br/&gt;6. Clinical
coach intervention with patients via mobile health technologies to ensure
improved wellness through behavioral change. &lt;br/&gt;7. Coaching and training
program designs for athletes, soldiers, firefighters, policemen, pilots,
astronauts, and business professionals who work in stressful environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The charter of InTelMed may serve as an exemplar for other
fields of healthcare, such as, but not limited to, ambulatory care, emergency
care, intensive care, remote monitoring and home care, and primary care.