* 1624038
* Extreme Weather Events in Mid-latitudes: The Role of Arctic Sea Ice, SST due to AMV and Siberian Snow Cover Through Teleconnections Involving the Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Yannick Peings, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 700,985.00

The project addresses the predictability of the wintertime climate over
continental mid-latitude regions, with a focus on extreme events such as cold
spells and extreme snowfall. Episodes of anomalously cold temperature and heavy
snowfall have profound socio-economic impacts and can cause loss of life (for
example, the cold winter in 2009/10 over the eastern US/Europe; deadly cold
spell of February 2012 over central Europe; frigid temperature in March 2013
over the UK; cold snap of early January 2014 over the eastern US). Various
sources of predictability related to slowly evolving surface boundary conditions
of the atmosphere have been identified in previous research. In many instances,
the increased predictability is related to atmospheric connections through wave
propagation between widely different geographic regions, the so-called
teleconnections. Changes in surface heat flux due to the slow evolution of lower
boundary conditions, such as sea-ice concentration change, sea surface
temperature change or snow cover change may all drive teleconnections in the
atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting teleconnections can help
foretell the mean climate as well as the occurrence of extreme events at
seasonal to multidecadal time scales even in far away regions. The stratosphere
is also a source of predictability, especially at the intraseasonal time scale
since stratospheric anomalies (sometimes originating in the troposphere)
propagate down into the troposphere several weeks later. The increasing
availability of observations and progress in climate modeling have helped to
better understand the role of surface and stratospheric conditions in driving
the wintertime atmospheric circulation. However, fundamental aspects of
boundary-driven teleconnections are still uncertain, due to the low amplitude of
the forced signal compared to the unforced signal in the atmosphere in the
observations and conflicting results in modeling experiments that use different
models and/or slightly different boundary conditions. Some of the
teleconnections are non-stationary in time as they are observed in certain time
periods then disappear for reasons that are still unknown. Destructive
interference between different teleconnections can explain the non-stationarity,
but to date work has not been focused on understanding the combined (rather than
individual) influence of surface anomalies. Moreover, the potential role of the
stratosphere in modulating these teleconnections is poorly understood. These
questions are at the core of the present project. It will examine the effects of
different types of surface anomalies (Arctic sea ice, North Atlantic sea surface
temperature, Siberian snow cover) that have been suggested as a source of
predictability for the wintertime North American and Eurasian circulation. Using
observations, global and simplified climate models, the project will explore how
each forcing - as well as together - they may lead to a different frequency
and/or intensity of cold spells in winter over continental mid-latitude regions.
A particular focus of the project will be to examine the possible role of the
stratosphere in facilitating connections between widely different geographical
regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the likelihood of a change in the
number and severity of extreme weather events based on the slower processes has
important socioeconomic benefits. Two graduate students will be educated and
trained. Minority undergraduate students will continue to be involved in the
research group.