* 1624325
* Modeling Deep Earth Fluids and Diamond Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Dimitri Sverjensky, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

The deep Earth is inaccessible for direct observation, but most people are well
aware of its importance when earthquakes strike and volcanoes erupt. Less
appreciated is the fact that the deep Earth has a role in regulating the Earth's
atmosphere over the enormous span of geologic time. Fluids and volcanoes linking
the deep Earth and the near-surface environment have played a major role in
keeping our planet habitable over billions of years. For example, carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere is cycled over time down into the Earth and back up through
volcanic emissions via deep fluids and their chemical reactions with rocks.
However, remarkably little is known about these fluids. Laboratory experimental
studies seek to simulate them, geologists study rock samples for clues about
them, and theoretical modeling is needed to synthesize a consistent picture of
what is happening at depth. The current project seeks to advance such a
synthesis. It is expected that advancing our understanding of fluids in the deep
Earth will also help in building models for the evolution of and the search for
life on other planets, particularly for the huge number of new planets being
discovered outside our solar system.

Previous models of fluids in the deep Earth have assumed they are Carbon-Oxygen-
Hydrogen fluids containing molecular species (e.g. CO2, CH4, H2, and H2O)
without aqueous ions. No quantitative models exist for the ionic speciation and
reactivity of these fluids with their silicate environment at upper mantle
conditions, which severely hampers understanding of planetary volatile
evolution. The goal of this project is to develop a new approach to modeling the
chemistry of deep fluids calibrated on experimental silicate and carbonate
solubility measurements at high pressures, one that can be extrapolated to
predict fluid-rock interactions under upper mantle conditions. It is proposed to
develop predictive theoretical models for investigating the nature and
reactivity of deep fluids in the Earth with specific application to the deep
carbon cycle. A key issue to be investigated is the nature of the species in
deep fluids. In particular, metal-silicate and carbonate complexes will be
studied by modeling published experimental solubilities of important upper
mantle mineral assemblages and new experimental solubilities of aragonite at
elevated temperatures and pressures. The model will then be tested with
published fluid inclusion compositions in diamonds and coexisting mineral
compositions to develop aqueous speciation models for the end-member fluids
thought to form diamonds. Building on these results, chemical mass transfer
models will be developed to enable a quantitative understanding of the chemical
processes involved in the formation of diamonds from metasomatic fluids in the
peridotitic environment of the subcratonic lithospheric mantle.