* 1624734
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cathodoluminescence Microscope for Device Testing, Materials Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Leonid Chernyak, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,050,000.00

Title: Acquisition of a Cathodoluminescence System for Materials Research,
Device Testing and Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal application to
the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program requests support of the
University of Central Florida (UCF) in acquisition of the state-of-the-art
Allalin 4027 Chronos Cathodoluminescence Electron Microscope manufactured by
Attolight AG for continuous and pulsed (time-resolved) in-situ characterization
of a wide-range of materials and devices with nano-scale resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Cathodoluminescence (CL) is the light
emitted by specimens, as a result of electron bombardment, in the wavelength
range of 160 to 2000 nm. This broad spectral range allows CL to be collected
from a wide variety of materials including metals, semiconductors and biological
samples, as well as devices based on them. The proposed CL Electron Microscope
will be employed for optical testing of materials and devices and will support
the mission of UCF, a comprehensive state university committed to providing
quality education, engaging in beneficial research and integrating the
university's education, research and training programs with the local community.
As of 2016, UCF is the second largest university in the US and the second
largest in the state of Florida to grant M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Materials
Science and Engineering. Consequently, there has been a significant need for
curriculum development and enhancement to establish comprehensive physics,
optics, photonics and materials science programs. Because of the large number of
students involved, there is a number of specialty graduate level courses given
on advanced devices and materials technologies. The proposed CL Microscope will
form the basis of new laboratory course to train students in the theory,
methodology and data analysis possible with this new and versatile state-of-the-
art equipment. It should be noted that UCF hosts several NSF programs with as
much as 68% students from under-represented groups. Therefore, an involvement of
the proposed Attolight Microscope in these programs will also promote training
of minority students in top-edge research projects. If this project is
successful, the proposed CL Microscope will be the first one ever deployed in
the North and South America, thus demonstrating the broader impact of the
instrument on the research community at the regional, national and international
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CL instrument will be an essential
piece of equipment for characterization of novel materials and functional
structures such as semiconductor and plasmonic devices as well as ceramic
microstructures and defects. The advantage of the proposed system is also in its
capabilities of studying various organic materials. The proposed CL Microscope
will allow unprecedented nano-scale imaging and in-depth understanding of non-
equilibrium electronic carrier dynamics (down to pico-second time scale) and
transport in a wide range of materials and devices. This understanding
constitutes the main intellectual merit of the proposed NSF-MRI project. The
proposed system will additionally advance a number of research efforts in
photonics and materials science at UCF. Hence, such a tool will provide a
fundamental, multi-disciplinary and versatile capability that is presently
lacking at the University of Central Florida, thus emphasizing the broader
impact of this MRI proposal.