* 1624552
* FSML: Improving collaborative research infrastructure at Gombe National Park, Tanzania
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Ian Gilby, The Jane Goodall Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2018
* USD 329,173.00

The Gombe Stream Research Centre (GSRC) was established in Tanzania by Dr. Jane
Goodall in 1965 to support and maintain her pioneering study of chimpanzees,
initiated in 1960. Now in its 56th year, the Gombe chimpanzee study is one of
the longest and most detailed continuous studies of any free-living species.
GSRC is a core project of the Jane Goodall Institute, one of the most well-known
research and conservation organizations in the world. Research at GSRC has
revealed the complex social behavior and cognitive abilities of chimpanzees
including tool-making and use, group-hunting, cooperation in inter-group
competition and enduring family bonds and social relationships, all of which
have relevance to the understanding of human evolution. In addition, GSRC
research informs community-centered conservation programs near Gombe and across
Africa. Given the unparalleled depth of behavioral data, there has been growing
interest from scientists in diverse fields in conducting broad, inter-
disciplinary research at Gombe, to increase understanding of diet, physiology,
health and disease. However, the GSRC infrastructure has been built piecemeal
over the years and cannot support modern research or large trans-disciplinary
teams. This project will extend and update the facilities by providing reliable
power and renovating existing structures to provide state-of-the-art laboratory
facilities for visiting scientists. Improvement of the facilities will improve
current and future visiting researchers' efficiency in all their research
projects, and will enable the training of Tanzanian scientists and veterinarians
through hands-on experience with indigenous species. A better power supply and
improved internet connectivity will facilitate more immediate communication of
scientific data and events at Gombe to collaborators and students overseas, as
well as in local classrooms. A new library and museum space with power sources
capable of supporting video displays will greatly improve the educational
experiences of visiting students, school groups, and
tourists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provision of modern lab facilities at this
iconic site will enable transformative research through coupling the
exceptionally deep knowledge of the primates and the habitat with new techniques
to detect and measure disease agents and disease progression in situ, endocrine
levels, characteristics of bone, and nutritional and isotopic characteristics of
dietary items. Improved power and communication will support all ongoing
research projects and allow for greater synergy between them. The expansion and
renovation will feature 1) reliable electrical power through new solar and
backup generator systems, 2) wet laboratory space equipped with freezers for
sample storage and basic equipment for genetic, endocrine, and nutritional
analysis, 3) dry storage and work space for an herbarium and for the uniquely
extensive skeletal collections of individual chimpanzees and baboons of known
developmental and life histories, 4) a necropsy lab, 5) a space for meetings,
and 6) a small museum. Information on the core research projects conducted at
Gombe can be found at www.gombechimpanzees.org.