* 1624776
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster for Portland Institute for Computational Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Ovall, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 562,000.00

This research enterprise acquires, deploys, and maintains a modern heterogeneous
cluster for scientific computing. The cluster combines the latest multi-core
processors with the new MIC (Many Integrated Core) architecture to provide a
testbed for development of new parallel mathematical algorithms. Multi-
institutional access to the equipment, managed through a new center called the
Portland Institute for Computational Sciences, will catalyze interactions within
a regional user base of computational scientists. This equipment will
considerably strengthen open, state-wide high performance computing access in
Oregon.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The equipment aims to profoundly impact research
into fundamentally new techniques in computational mathematics. Highly scalable
dimension reduction techniques that exploit existing parallelization tools
developed at US national laboratories will be designed for evolution problems
posed in spacetime domains. For hyperbolic problems on complex spacetime
structures, a new class of mathematically sound methods, well-suited for thread
parallelism on MICs, will be studied. New algorithms to compute eigenmodes of
partial differential operators, based on parallelizable approximations of
operator-valued contour integrals, are considered. Another project will use
massive medical data sets to validate novel statistical inferential methods
leading to valuable templates of disease progression. The equipment will be
extensively used to develop and run numerical simulations of convection in
Earth's mantle. Further catalogued examples of projects show that the
equipment's impact will be regional and beyond Oregon. Educational and training
activities will promote the learning of fine-grained parallelism critical to
exploit new and emerging energy-efficient processors.