* 1624501
* AGS-PRF: Instability of Sheetlike Structures in Alfvenic Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Alfred Mallet, Mallet                  Alfred
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 11/30/2018
* USD 172,000.00

The solar wind provides the background of the space environment in which our
planet exists. It is analogous, in some ways, to the jet streams in Earth's
atmosphere, with flows that vary in speed and direction. This solar wind is the
background on which space weather events occur. To correctly and accurately
model space weather events and their impact on Earth, it is crucial to
appropriately model the solar wind. The solar wind is turbulent in nature and
this project aims to understand the intermittency of turbulence and certain
instabilities that are expected to arise in the turbulent space plasmas such as
those at the magnetopause and as a result of solar flares. Turbulent plasma is
ubiquitous in astrophysics, so understanding plasma turbulence is important more
generally, and not just in the setting of the solar wind - for example, in
accretion disks, galaxy clusters, or in fusion devices on earth. This work is a
unique combination of theoretical work to predict when the instabilities set in
and numerical experiments to verify the prediction. This work is very timely and
will form a basis for predictions for NASAs upcoming mission Solar Probe Plus.
The PI of this Postdoctoral Research Fellowship plans to incorporate student
participation through a research class at the University of New Hampshire as
well as through the organization of a session at the Solar and Heliospheric
INterplanetary Environment (SHINE) meeting. Typically, 25% of the attendees of
this meeting are students.

The project seeks to investigate the impacts of Kelvin-Helmoltz and plasmoid
instabilities on Alfevnic turbulence. These instabilities become important once
coherent structures in the turbulent plasma, the Elsasser sheets, reach a
critical aspect ratio. The growth rates of these instabilities will be predicted
and then confirmed with Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics simulations. The updated
turbulence model will predict the local anisotropy of the turbulence, how the
outer scale properties of the turbulence in the solar wind affect the
statistical properties at small scales, and the type of intermittent structures
that are produced. The dissipation in plasmas is observed to be closely linked
to intermittent structures. This is an important current topic of interest to
the community. The intermittent structures formed in the Alfvenic turbulence
investigated here are strongly affected by the presence of the instabilities,
and so this project is important for the understanding of the dissipation of
turbulent energy.