* 1624599
* Phase II I/UCRC Oregon State U. Site: Center for Wood-Based Composites (WBC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Charles Frazier, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2022
* USD 638,113.00

This project advances the utility, performance, and sustainability of the wood
composite products used to build American homes and consumer products. The
subject matter, composite materials derived from wood, is often overlooked
because for the average person wood composites are as commonplace as trees
themselves. However for the scientist, wood is an incredibly complex biomaterial
for which contemporary scientific methods are now revealing insights that lead
to better performance for the homeowner, improved efficiency for the industry,
and greater sustainability for society. At Oregon State University, Department
of Wood Science &amp; Engineering, we believe a sustainable society must include
timber products and the future requires a marriage between this ancient material
and the most sophisticated scientific and technological methods. The IUCRC for
Wood-Based Composites is a team effort among three critical partners: industry,
federal government, and academia. The federal government joins the partners into
a mutually beneficial collaboration that leverages resources and skills. The
industry defines the ever-changing technological challenges, and guides the
required research. Academia conducts the research with students that employ
cutting edge methods within a practical context. At Oregon State University, we
provide expertise for design of wood-based composites, manufacturing efficiency,
and evaluation of product performance. Along with our partner, Virginia Tech, we
provide industry-directed, pre-competitive research, and a pathway for students
to become future leaders in sustainable U.S. manufacturing, innovation, and
management positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science and technology of wood
composites continually evolves as the industry adapts to changing economic
cycles, legislative pressures, and raw material supplies. Consequently the goal
is to advance knowledge in adhesives, adhesion, wood/adhesive interactions, and
wood chemistry as these topics influence wood rheology, heat and mass transfer,
and fracture mechanics while processing wood, manufacturing composites, and
evaluating product performance. A parallel goal is to identify fundamental
phenomena, and reduce them to definable quantities that may be described
numerically for purposes of modeling, simulation, and performance prediction. At
Oregon State University, we focus on the materials science of wood in the
context of the design, manufacture and performance of wood-based composites. We
offer expertise in various microscopy techniques (electron microscopy,
fluorescence microscopy, micro X-ray computed tomography), composite
manufacture, accelerated weathering, and numerical modeling to study adhesive
bonding, as well as micro- and macro-scale product performance.