* 1624613
* MRI:Acquisition of a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope with Airyscan for research and training at North Carolina State University.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jason Haugh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 539,132.00

An award is made to North Carolina State University (NCSU) to acquire a state-of
the art confocal microscope in order train a well-prepared and knowledgeable
workforce, as well as to conduct world-class research. This instrument will be
used to train undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs in quantitative
fluorescence microscopy applications and single molecule counting. The
microscope will be located within the Cellular and Molecular Imaging Facility
(CMIF), a University-administered core research facility that serves researchers
from six NCSU colleges and from neighboring institutions and local industries.
This system will expose students to state-of-the-art imaging applications via a
new course (Quantitative Imaging and Dynamics in Biology), other established
courses (BIT595 Confocal Microscopy and BIT 478/578 Mapping the Brain), and
during direct undergraduate research experiences. In addition, a new and
innovative Light Microscopy Workshop will serve under-represented students from
local Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and a local women's
college in North Carolina. By exposing traditionally underrepresented students
to cutting edge research and technology, NCSU intends to broaden interest in and
to improve STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) education. This
innovative program will i) expose students across the region to advanced imaging
technologies that are not available at their home institutions; ii) introduce
students at institutions lacking comprehensive research programs to ongoing
research at NCSU; and iii) integrate and strengthen existing collaborations
between NCSU and partnering institutions. NCSU will partner with the NC Museum
of Natural Sciences to share imaging results via presentations and hands-on
educational activities led by Workshop participants as well as students and
postdocs from NCSU laboratories.

The state of the confocal microscope will impact research and training programs
across six NCSU colleges and numerous disciplines, including Cell and Molecular
Biology, Biochemistry, Animal and Plant Developmental Biology, Plant Pathology,
and Bio-Engineering, among others. This instrument will enable NCSU faculty and
students to i) perform measurements with increased sensitivity and
discrimination; ii) obtain fast temporal and spatial data; and iii) image live
biological samples for longer times with reduced phototoxicity. These
capabilities will impact, among others, research programs in plant vacuole
biogenesis and dynamics, stem cell maintenance in plants, long-range signaling
in the Drosophila embryo, and cell signaling during animal cell migration.