* 1624232
* Polygonal and Polyhedral Elements as a New Computational Paradigm to Study Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Glaucio Paulino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 389,180.00

Modern advances in materials science have revealed that soft organic solids ---
such as electro- and magneto-active elastomers, gels, and shape-memory polymers
--- hold tremendous potential to enable new high-end technologies, especially as
the next generation of sensors and actuators featured by their low cost together
with their biocompatibility, processability into arbitrary shapes, and unique
capability to undergo large reversible deformations. The realization of this
potential has prompted an upsurge in the computational microscopic and
mesoscopic studies of soft materials with the objectives of quantitatively
understanding their behavior from the bottom up and ultimately guiding their
optimization and actual use in technological applications. Almost all of these
studies have made use of standard finite elements, which have repeatedly proved
unable to simulate processes involving realistically large deformations. The
graduate students involved in the project will benefit from the collaborative
computational/theoretical character of the research. Concepts developed from
this interdisciplinary research will be adapted into the curriculum and will
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this project is to put forward a new computational technology with the
capability to study soft solids undergoing realistically large deformations. A
second objective is to deploy this technology to study the nonlinear elastic
response of soft solids with complex particulate microstructures (e.g.
elastomers reinforced with anisotropic filler particles), ubiquitous in many
soft active material systems. From a conceptual point of view, this will be
accomplished by making use of mimetic inspired methods (which preserve the
underlying properties of physical and mathematical models, thereby improving the
predictive capability of computer simulations) to put forward a new
discretization approach for arbitrarily shaped elements under finite
deformations in the context of finite element and virtual element methods. This
work involves collaboration with the University of Milan and Los Alamos National
Laboratory.