* 1624189
* Human Response To El Nino-Driven Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Jack Broughton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 205,557.00

Extreme variation in climate is a topic of concern across the globe. Jack
Broughton and Joan Coltrain, of the University of Utah, will undertake research
to study how variation in the intensity and frequency of El Niño events in
northern Baja California, Mexico over the past 11,000 years influenced marine
and terrestrial fish, birds, and mammals. Their research will also investigate
how past peoples responded to changes in the availability of different animal
resources. This research will provide novel data sets from which to anticipate
change in future animal populations under a range of forecasted El Niño-related
variation scenarios and thus support current and future management of marine and
terrestrial animals of the eastern Pacific. The project will also reveal how
human populations responded to past El Niño and provide insight into the impact
of future El Niño events on coastal societies in developing countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the impacts of ancient El Niño events on past
human societies and animals have been documented in specific isolated cases,
continuous, high-resolution, millennial-scale records of the impact of El Niño
variation on animal resources and the resulting changes in the human use of
North American landscapes have yet to be documented. This project will generate
just such a record from a massive collection of animal bones and artifacts that
was deposited over the past 11,000 years by people and raptors (hawks, eagles,
owls) that occupied a rock shelter site (Abrigo de los Escorpiones) located
about 100 m from the Pacific coast of northern Baja California, Mexico. The
currently archived animal bone collection includes both marine and terrestrial
species and represents one of the largest, well-stratified, continuous, records
of climate-based changes in animal populations on the Pacific coast of North
America. A rich record of artifacts and features (e.g., fire hearths, marine
shell layers) attest to a substantial but intermittent human use of the shelter.
The project will determine whether people abandoned the coastal site during
periods with high El Niño frequencies. Such times are characterized by both warm
sea-surface temperatures that disrupt marine ecosystems and increased
precipitation that enhances the productivity of inland habitats. The study will
involve: (1) identification of the animal bones to the species level, (2)
radiocarbon dating of a large sample of the bones to establish a time-line and
chronology for the deposits, (3) establishing a record of human occupational
intensity of the site through artifact counts and evidence of human-caused
damage on animal bones (e.g., stone tool cut marks, burning), (4) stable isotope
analysis of both bones and shells to provide information on El Niño variation
over the past 11,000 years, and (5) statistical analysis to determine
correlations between variation in past El Niño and change in local animal and
human populations.