* 1624413
* EAGER Collaborative Proposal: A microfluidic platform for the discovery of new, life-like chemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* David Eddington, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. David Baum and collaborators from the University of
Wisconsin - Madison and Dr. David Eddington from the University of Illinois -
Chicago to develop a microfluidic platform for the discovery of new, life-like
chemical systems. There is a lack of knowledge about how new life-like chemical
systems, having the capacity for reproducing and evolving, can emerge. The
researchers are developing a device to screen complex chemical mixtures in order
to find life-like systems that can grow over a mineral surface and can evolve
more efficient growth over time. The goal of the project is the discovery of new
life-like chemical systems, which would advance the understanding of how life
originated on earth. The new experimental approach of this research is used to
engage students and the public through presentations. It is also shared with
diverse chemists, including high-school chemistry teachers, in a citizen-science
effort to understand the nature of life's chemical
origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project involves building a simple
microfluidic device and an associated experimental paradigm for flowing a
complex chemical mixture, in a stripe, over a mineral surface. This surface
contains possible building blocks of autocatalytic cycles as well as inorganic
or organic sources of energy. The stripe is displaced across the mineral surface
over a multiple day experimental window. This experimental arrangement enables
selection for adsorbed autocatalytic sets that can propagate themselves along
the surface. Furthermore, if there is spatial variation in such autocatalytic
systems, the device selects for variants that can more rapidly colonize newly
encountered mineral. Among other analytical methods, X-ray photoemission
spectroscopy is used to detect changes in the concentration of adsorbed carbon
or nitrogen. Such changes would indicate an adaptive response to selection for
enhanced colonization and growth. When new autocatalytic chemical systems are
detected, their chemical composition is characterized.