* 1624785
* FSML: Improved research infrastructure to monitor ecosystem dynamics under ongoing climate change at the La Selva Research Station, Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Ulrike Seibt, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/29/2020
* USD 194,951.00

For the past decade, the La Selva Canopy Tower Network, a five-tower canopy-
access system equipped with electricity, connectivity through fiber-optics and
WiFi connection, and a range of meteorological and biogeophysical sensors, has
supported a wide range of research at La Selva Research Station
(http://www.ots.ac.cr/), a lowland wet tropical forest in Costa Rica owned and
operated by the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS). La Selva research on
forest dynamics and gas exchange, much of which has been carried out using these
canopy towers, has played a leadership role in helping understand the
significance of carbon dynamics in tropical forests under changing climatic
conditions. The La Selva Canopy Tower Network is an ideal site for integrated
flux monitoring of a tropical rainforest, given that is has been intensively
studied with long-term datasets documenting ecological and ecosystem dynamics,
and a wide range of ongoing and planned research projects using the towers. The
second-generation tower network to be deployed under this award will provide
continuous data on ecosystem fluxes and concurrent detailed canopy and soil
environmental conditions valuable for a broad range of data analysis, synthesis,
and modelling efforts. These towers already provide a valuable platform for
experiential learning for both graduate and undergraduate students. Each year,
La Selva hosts more than 10,000 days of student visitation to the station. OTS
courses bring approximately 150 undergraduates and 150 graduate students to La
Selva to learn how to conduct their own research. An important component of the
OTS education programs is its emphasis on recruiting and advancing students
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines. Over the last five years, 24% of all
U.S. undergraduates in the OTS education programs are from under-represented
groups in the STEM disciplines. Additionally, more than 120 faculty-led academic
groups from the US, Europe, and Costa Rica visit the station each year. Some
courses, especially those run by OTS, encourage students to conduct short-term
projects using the towers and their sensors. OTS also runs summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates comprised of more than 80% minority students.
These students spend 10 weeks at the station and have the opportunity to conduct
their summer research using the tower network.

The canopy tower network had a recent setback caused by a treefall that affected
the functionality of three towers. OTS is in the process of dismantling and re-
establishing the fallen towers. While disruptive, this accident has also
presented an opportunity to address the limitations of the previous system and
rebuild the network of canopy towers and sensors to create a state-of-the-art
ecosystem flux and bio-meteorology (biomet) monitoring system that can
significantly expand the research opportunities of the tower network. In
addition, a redesign of the tower walkway and installation of updated safety
equipment will allow the new canopy tower network to be safer and less
vulnerable to future disruptions. Specifically, as the three damaged towers are
resurrected, we propose to develop a second-generation canopy tower system by
adding the following flux-biomet instrumentation and safety features: (1) Eddy
covariance system including a sonic anemometer, CO2-H2O analyzer, and canopy
CO2-H2O profile system in order to continuously measure ecosystem fluxes of
carbon, water and energy; (2) Canopy monitoring sensors for continuous
measurements of canopy air humidity and temperature including four component net
radiometers and PAR sensors; (3) Soil monitoring sensors for continuous
measurements of soil CO2 and O2 concentration, moisture, and temperature; (4)
Additional tower section to increase the height of two the tower to 50 meters
(the height of the tallest canopy trees in the area); (5) Addition of mid-canopy
walkway to increase access to new canopy levels; (6) Additional safety features
including break-away bolts and anchors; and (7) Improved connectivity in WiFi
and fiber-optic systems to increase the remote-operability of data collection
and management. The new flux-biomet monitoring system combined with the improved
and more robust tower infrastructure thus provide an integrated upgrade in the
facilities for research at La Selva that will have broad use for existing and
new research programs in tropical ecology and ecosystem science. The towers will
also significantly expand the training experience and increase the safety of US
and Latin American students using the towers.