* 1624073
* Transforming Chemical Ecology by Enabling Measurement of Volatile Compounds in the Field
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2021
* USD 306,599.00

This project will open up the world of smell to exploration by field biologists
by installing a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC-Mass Spec) at the Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL). As one of the five senses, smell plays a
large role in how insects and other animals interact with plants, including
whether a plant is pollinated or eaten. Because one-third of the calories that
humans eat come from plants that are pollinated by animals, a basic
understanding of pollination is important to food security. More broadly, smell,
for reasons related to immune systems, affects how animals recognize relatives,
choose mates, remember events and attach emotional value to them. Recent
breakthroughs allow the use of a GC-Mass Spec to detect very small amounts of
chemicals emitted into the air. Currently deployed equipment has primarily been
confined to artificial, laboratory settings. This project will provide students
and scientists from across the United States an opportunity to study the role of
chemicals in mediating the relationships between plants and animals in a
natural, field setting. Specific research projects will include exploring how
the simultaneous pressures of avoiding being eaten while attracting pollinators
affect the evolution of plants, the manner in which chemicals affect where
insects eat plants, as well as shed light into the evolutionary pathways by
which insects began to use plants as food. RMBL will provide training to
scientists and students on how to use the equipment, reaching diverse cultural
groups through our education programs, which have a high minority participation
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will install a state-of-the-art Shimadzu
Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) 2010 Ultra, with both thermal
desorption and conventional solvent-desorption injection ports, at the Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory. Taking advantage of recent technological
improvements, this equipment will allow the identification of volatile chemicals
emitted by plants in an ecological context. This project will provide the first
such instrument to users at a major research field station in the US and will
enhance scientific infrastructure by improving access to instrumentation on a
cost effective basis. In addition to supporting research by scores of scientists
from around the world, Co-PI's Diane Campbell (UC-Irvine) and Robert Raguso
(Cornell) will incorporate floral volatiles (e.g., indole and รก-pinene) into
studies of how interactions with pollinators and seed predators influence
natural selection on floral trait combinations. Emily Mooney (Univ. of CO,
Colorado Springs) and Kailen Mooney (UC-Irvine) will build upon past and ongoing
studies of the interactions between the herbaceous host plant Ligusticum
porteri, the aphid Aphis helianthi, its locally dominant insect herbivore, and
the predators and ants that attack and protect the aphid, respectively. As part
of his work on the evolutionary genomic architecture underlying herbivory, Noah
Whiteman (UC-Berkeley) will identify volatiles from Cardamine cordifolia in
order to design experiments to expose Scaptomyza nigrita flies to active
compounds in behavior trials. Additionally, RMBL will offer training in chemical
analysis, including a one-week course for novices and a course for those who
have experience with GC-MS but not the particular model machine. We will
integrate the equipment in training of a diverse scientific workforce. More than
38% of participants in our Research Experience for Undergraduate program are
minorities. We anticipate that some of these students will learn to analyze
chromatograms, extending their skill sets beyond biology and thereby enhancing
future career opportunities. More information about the Rocky Mountain
Biological Laboratory can be found at rmbl.org.