* 1624679
* Phase II I/UCRC Clarkson University Site: Center for Metamaterials (CfM)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Zijie Yan, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 550,000.00

The Center for Metamaterials (CfM) provides a one-stop-shop for research and
development of metamaterials with collaborations between UNC Charlotte, Clarkson
University and its many industrial and government members. Metamaterials are
man-made or engineered materials having remarkable properties that do not occur
in nature. The focus of the CfM is primarily on optical, infrared and radar
applications of metamaterials and the new ways in which they permit to control
the flow of light and sophisticated filtering and detection of light. Examples
include improved performance of light harvesting systems for energy production
and designs for smaller higher performance antennas for broadband
communications. The CfM works closely with members to address fundamental and
precompetitive questions regarding the design and fabrication of metamaterials
with customized properties. Fundamental questions include how radiation can be
made to interact more strongly with the meta-atoms that compose the
metamaterial. It is these interactions that lead to new approaches for
engineering designs for improved technologies ranging from imaging sensors to
improved heat sinks. The projects conducted within the CfM are developed
collaboratively with the Industry Advisory Board (IAB) deciding on the viability
of metamaterials solutions for achieving smaller, better, lower-cost and higher
performance products for both commercial and defense deployment. The global
metamaterials market sector is growing fast and through the CfM, members remain
current and competitive on the many emerging technology opportunities. In
addition, all projects are conducted by a cohort of students on each site,
several from under- represented groups in science. Students' projects typically
fold into their dissertations and work closely with members as interns making
them well-positioned for employment after graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CfM's faculty and students at UNCC and Clarkson to work hand-in-hand with IAB
members to develop new knowledge, new materials' capabilities and software
tools. The technology roadmap, developed by our members, provides a framework
for the clustering of project objectives into more specific goals. To ensure the
long-term success and viability of the Center, we focus on research that impacts
a broad range of industries. CfM goals are to better understand and exploit new
properties associated with structured materials, publish and generate IP related
to new components and devices. Within the CfM there are many foundational
scientific questions to be addressed, concerning understanding and modeling the
physical processes that occur when waves interact with subwavelength sized
structures. Resonant behavior combined with effective medium descriptions can
predict unusual material properties, such as negative refractive index.
Exploiting resonant behavior in subwavelength elements, surface patterns and
composites, all demand more complete descriptions and a deeper understanding of
field-matter interactions. At the nanoscale many new phenomena are being
unveiled that are ripe for technological advances. The rich resources of the CfM
are well suited to address the tiers of challenges associated with advancing
metamaterial applications and filling technology gaps. Clarkson University
brings to the CfM, a long history and current expertise in developing advanced
materials and advanced materials processing techniques in collaboration with
industry. The CfM will utilize Clarkson's expertise in these areas to address
key issues with metamaterials, including developing high performing constituent
materials to be used in metamaterials, and the development of cost-effective
fabrication techniques. Moving forward, we plan to include medical and acoustic
metamaterials while retaining a brand for the CfM primarily tied to sensing,
imaging, antennas and energy harvesting.