* 1624866
* Collaborative Research: The PIPELINE Network
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Douglas Arion, Carthage College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 56,697.00

The PIPELINE Network project will significantly enhance physics education by
developing and evaluating methods to incorporate workforce-relevant skills and
activities in the student experience. The majority of physics graduates at all
degree levels will become scientists and innovators working in the private
sector, yet very little of the knowledge they gain while earning their degree
specifically prepares them for these roles (for example, few physics programs
emphasize real-world applications of scientific concepts, communication skills,
or basic business concepts, all of which are important to successful private
sector careers). Adding workforce-relevant learning to the discipline will
attract a larger and more diverse student body to major in physics, and by
extension improve the quality of the future STEM workforce. The PIPELINE project
will bring together efforts of six institutions to create and document new
approaches to teaching innovation and entrepreneurship in physics which can be
shared with the broader community. The project will also advance our
understanding of how these practices affect student and faculty attitudes
towards innovation and entrepreneurship in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the PIPELINE network are to build students' workforce confidence,
improve physics faculty attitudes toward private sector careers, foster better
integration of academic and industrial sectors, promote innovation in the
physics discipline, and build a framework for wider adoption of physics
innovation and entrepreneurship practices. The project will accomplish these by
implementing physics innovation and entrepreneurship (PIE) approaches at member
institutions during each year of the project, revising approaches between
iterations, and finally documenting and disseminating curriculum. Most
importantly, PIPELINE will develop surveys and interview protocols which will
investigate the link between PIE experiences and student and faculty attitudes
about innovation and entrepreneurship, and which can be used by other
departments for gauging, monitoring, and improving institutional change around
PIE. These research findings and tools will provide insights and utility that go
beyond the immediate partner institutions, and live on beyond the duration of
the project. PIPELINE will generate a core network of experienced PIE
practitioners, a readily accessible body of tested PIE curricula deliberately
varied in scope to fit unique needs and challenges of future adopters, and
robust insight into the obstacles to PIE implementation and how future adopters
might address them.