* 1624712
* Phase I I/UCRC University of Louisville Site: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Sam Park, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 749,586.00

Phase I I/UCRC University of Louisville Site: Center for Efficient Vehicles and
Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Louisville (UL) will help establish and operate a multi-institution
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Efficient Vehicles
and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS) as one of two charter sites
(Arizona State University will host the second charter site). Such a center is
needed to support the U.S. automotive/ground transportation industry?s efforts
to meet demanding new federal regulations governing vehicle fuel economy and
emissions, as well as society?s expectations for improved sustainability in
economic and personal activities. The EV-STS center will engage the industry?s
critical stakeholders - vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers,
fleet operators, ground transportation industry infrastructure providers, and
state and local governments - in identifying important efficiency/sustainability
related problems, and formulating a research program that develops innovative
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the EV-STS center and its UL site
is to leverage collaborations among corporate, government, and academic partners
to conduct and disseminate industry-relevant research on technologies and tools
that facilitate the design, manufacture, deployment, and operation of energy
efficient, environmentally sustainable ground vehicles. The scope of this
mission includes passenger cars, light- and heavy duty trucks, and motorized
off-road equipment. It encompasses both vehicle-level technologies, and the
infrastructure and transportation systems that incorporate ground vehicles. The
mission is divided into four primary thrust areas: powertrains for full-electric
vehicles and the entire continuum of electric-hybrid powertrains, including
batteries, electric machines, power electronics, thermal management, packaging,
etc., advanced internal combustion engines and alternative fuels, non-powertrain
vehicle systems, and ground transportation systems and infrastructure. Within
EV-STS the UL site will have a research focus on realizing sustainable ground
vehicles. Site-specific topic areas are likely to include advanced batteries for
use in electrified vehicles, lightweight structures, high performance computing
tools for vehicle architecture optimization, emission and greenhouse gas
reduction in internal combustion engines, and frictional loss management.