* 1624795
* EAR-PF: SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL VARIABILITY OF COSEISMIC SUBSIDENCE ALONG THE CASCADIA SUBDUCTION ZONE
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Cristina Dura, Dura                    Cristina
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Cristina Dura has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Humboldt State University. This
investigation will expand the resolution of subsidence due to seismic events
along the Cascadian margin in both space and time. This information is critical
for the assessment of seismic and tsunami hazards along the Pacific coast in the
USA. Dr. Dura will use computer modeling based on diatom abundance to estimate
subsidence along the West Coast. The study will consist of three components: (1)
expand regional modern diatom dataset from the coasts of southern Washington,
Oregon, and northern California to better characterize the vertical zonation of
diatoms in a range of tidal environments. This information will be used to infer
ecological niches of fossil diatom assemblages in cores; (2) develop a new
diatom-based computational model that will reduce errors on subsidence estimates
by ~28% compared to previous models; and (3) use this information to understand
the spatial and temporal distribution of earthquakes along the Cascadia
subduction zone. The education plan will entail developing teaching materials
for K12 schools, participating in teacher workshops, creating an online tsunami
curriculum to accompany a children's book, and outreach events for the community
through local community groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and precise
estimates of coseismic subsidence over multiple earthquake cycles are critical
to understanding the patterns, timing, and magnitude of strain accumulation and
release during past earthquakes. Dr. Dura will employ new Bayesian diatom-based
transfer functions to estimate coseismic subsidence, and improve upon the
accuracy of existing foraminifera-based transfer functions. New estimates of
coseismic subsidence in multiple cores at four sites spanning over 600 km of the
Cascadia subduction zone will be used to characterize and correlate earthquakes
along strike and distinguish rupture lengths and earthquake magnitudes over the
past 2000-4000 years. The high-precision subsidence estimates will be
incorporated into 3-D elastic dislocation models to produce more realistic
(heterogeneous vs. segmented) rupture models that will help improve future
earthquake and tsunami hazard assessments. Using a modern diatom dataset and
application of a new Bayesian diatom-based transfer function will advance
quantitative microfossil-based techniques by significantly increasing the
accuracy and precision of coseismic subsidence estimates at Cascadia.