* 1624434
* Development of a Longitudinal Strategic Plan for Research and Education at The Cayo Santiago Field Station, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Angelina Ruiz-Lambides, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support the creation of a ten-year strategic master plan for the
Cayo Santiago Field Station (CSFS), an off-campus facility for research and
education of the University of Puerto Rico that has served the scientific
community for over 75 years. CSFS provides a free-ranging population of rhesus
macaques (Macaca mulatta) for research projects focused on behavior, cognition,
demography, life history, physiology and genetics. A new building has been
recently acquired and offers the ideal space to develop adequate biological
field station facilities, including the development of a housing unit,
laboratory area, meeting space, and computer lab that can support the research
currently done at CSFS and expand the community outreach program. Funding will
allow a group of researchers and professionals from relevant backgrounds to
perform a site-visit and offer advice needed to determine the extent of
renovations necessary. In summary this is the ideal time to gear our efforts in
conjunction with other professionals toward the improvement of the field
station. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help direct efforts towards
developing state-of-the-art infrastructure and laboratory settings for the
improvement of the CSFS, which will enhance CSFS?s ability to forge ahead in its
mission of providing an invaluable service to educational and research
communities, including the advancement of underrepresented groups within
science. As the only minority U.S. institution of higher education that hosts a
primate center, the CSFS represents a unique place to increase diversity in
science by supporting local Puerto Rican students and researchers. The proposed
planning activity consists of the formation of an Advisory Committee that will
help design a master plan following a two-day meeting at CSFS with three
specific aims: i) to determine the potential for growth of research at CSFS and
to establish the technological, communication, and facility renovations that
would be necessary to accomplish such a goal, ii) to create a plan to develop an
academic program for undergraduate teaching and training, and iii) to initiate
the development of an outreach program for school students and the general
public and to determine how best to integrate community outreach with on-going
research and teaching. For more information about the field station, please
visit the Caribbean Primate Research Center webpage for Cayo Santiago at
http://cprc.rcm.upr.edu/?q=cayodesc.