* 1624485
* I/UCRC for Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center Site at the Catholic University of America
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ozlem Kilic, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This award will support creating a new I/UCRC Site of Broadband Wireless Access
and Applications Center (BWAC) at the Catholic University of America (CUA). The
CUA Site will complement existing BWAC Center strengths to develop novel
technologies in the wireless domain. The new site, in combination with the
existing center, addresses a critical area of American economy, and has
potential to increase the societal ability to access broadband wireless services
and to support development of broadband wireless as a platform for innovation.
The I/UCRC Site will help recruit diverse and promising students into the
electrical engineering and computer science programs at CUA. Research related to
wireless realm will be seamlessly integrated with education. By involving
undergraduate and graduate students directly in the projects of actual interest
to industry, the center will better prepare the students in their career
development, and enhance the intellectual capacity of the engineering and
science workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CUA Site will address the technical
challenges of broadband wireless access and applications with an integrative
approach, and conduct research in the areas of software defined wireless
networks, mobile edge cloud, cognitive radio networks, dynamic spectrum sharing,
millimeter wave antennas and networking systems, Internet of Things, and
wireless and mobile applications. The cooperative research efforts at the CUA
Site will potentially make impactful contributions to advance wireless
technologies and applications, software and hardware components, and wireless
standards.