* 1624377
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer to Support Student/Faculty Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Cindy Hauser, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,917.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
David Blauch from Davidson College and colleagues Durwin Striplin, Cindy Hauser
and Nicole Snyder have acquired a liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer (LCMS)
equipped with electrospray-ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization (APCI) sources coupled to the liquid chromatograph. Mass spectrometry
(MS) is an analytical technique used to identify the chemical composition of a
sample and to determine its purity by measuring the mass of the molecular
constituents in the sample. Chromatography is an isolation technique that
precedes the mass spectrometry analysis. It separates a mixture of components in
a liquid into its several constituent chemicals which are then analyzed and
identified by the mass spectrometer. The electrospray produces an aerosol of
ions by applying a high voltage to the sample. These are some of the most widely
used analytical instrumentation techniques used to identify and quantify the
chemical composition of a sample. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students in research and research training
with this modern analytical technique and also and also supports research
efforts from two other local universities, Queens University of Charlotte, a
masters-level regional university, and Johnson C. Smith University, an
HBCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) developing chromophores
and redox assemblies for solar energy conversion; (b) synthesizing and profiling
complex carbohydrate constructs with proteins and other biomolecules; and (c)
examining the reactivity of non-innocent ligand-metal complexes.