* 1624659
* MRI: Acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering Instrument with In Situ Capabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 543,000.00

This project will allow the PI and co-PIs to acquire a powerful small angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS) instrument equipped with a collection of in situ sample
stages that will accelerate and enhance a broad range of research activities in
priority areas at the University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) with an impact
on advanced manufacturing, clean energy, and bioscience for human health. The
new instrument will be incorporated into the existing user facility
infrastructure at UT Austin, ensuring its availability to a diverse user base.
In particular, the instrument to be acquired substitutes and in some ways
exceeds the capabilities of remote facilities, allowing more materials
characterization research to be carried out on campus without requiring students
to travel. As such, the diverse undergraduate student population of UT Austin,
who are very active in research, will be exposed to state-of-the-art X-ray
scattering methods as a result of the acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will acquire a SAXSLAB Ganesha 300XL+ system featuring a high brilliance
microfocus X-ray source, scatterless slits, and a high dynamic range Pilatus
300k detector. These specifications will bring to UT Austin the ability to
interrogate low-contrast samples such as block copolymers and bio-molecular
assemblies; studies that have previously been confined to synchrotron-based
investigations. Besides readily exchangeable sample stages for quantitative
scattering on solutions, bulk samples, and thin films (including grazing
incidence), the instrument features a number of in situ stages to enable
investigation of dynamic evolution of mesoscale structures. These capabilities
in a user-accessible, campus-based instrument are ideally suited for
investigating structural evolution in biological environments, informing design
of adaptive materials systems, developing effective materials processing
strategies, and diagnosing materials degradation pathways. Currently,
researchers at UT Austin fulfill a majority of their need for SAXS by traveling
to synchrotron facilities, though none are located nearby. The existing SAXS
instrument at UT Austin predates modern advances in bench top X-ray
instrumentation from the source to the detector. A modern instrument, well-
equipped for both routine and sophisticated in situ experiments, will have an
immediate and major impact on research activities at UT Austin.