* 1624775
* I-Corps:  Non-invasive real-time Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Xiaoya Ma, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

One of the major human developments in the 21st century is the creation of new
ways to allow people to interact and immerse with the world around them, such as
touch technology and virtual reality. With every new development, there has been
rapid technological advancement across fields. Brian-Computer Interface has the
potential to bring human interaction to a new level. However, current non-
invasive brain technology is extremely limited in capability. For example, on
the consumer end, current technology has only allowed for meditation-based
applications. On the other hand, more highly capable brain technology is
expensive, requires surgery and can take many months to learn to use. The
proposed project will develop the first low-cost non-invasive brain-computer
interface that allows for never before seen real-time control of devices. This
would create new methods of interaction for everyone and also transform the
lives of millions of people with severe disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps team will develop a consumer product including hardware and software.
The hardware will be a headset that includes a two-electrode behind-the-head
wireless electroencephalography (EEG), along with visual stimuli and a unique
software that allows computer to detect and determine a person?s intent using
only brain activity. The product will allow for real-time control with similar
performance compared to invasive methods, all with a non-invasive, quick setup
headset and our innovative brain signal processing algorithms. The product will
function better (much higher accuracy) in people with severe impairments, does
not require eye gaze, and can be set up and learned to be used in only five to
ten minutes. The Brian-Computer Interface product can be used to interface
between operators and equipment in a wide variety of industries such as
transportation, aerospace, manufacturing, education, communication and medicine.
The team intends to apply the technology in commercial and industrial electronic
control, assistive technology developers (e.g. wheel chair control), Brain-
Computer Interface enthusiast and researchers, gamers or game developers and toy
makers (e.g. virtual reality).