* 1624693
* University of Minnesota Duluth R/V Blue Heron OI 2016
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Richard Ricketts, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2019
* USD 123,126.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation for the R/V
Blue Heron, an 86 foot Coastal Vessel owned by the University of Minnesota and
operated by the Large Lakes Observatory as part of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Lakes Observatory operates the largest
university-owned research vessel on the Great Lakes, the R/V Blue Heron. Built
in 1985 for fishing on the Grand Banks, the Blue Heron was purchased by the
University of Minnesota in 1997, sailed from Portland, Maine, up the St.
Lawrence Seaway to Duluth, and converted into a limnological research vessel
during the winter of 1997-98. She is outfitted with state-of-the-art research
equipment, has berthing for 11 crew and scientists, and can operate 24 hours per
day for up to 21 days in between port calls. The Blue Heron is part of the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), and is available
for charter by research scientists on any of the Great Lakes. In 2015, the
vessel completed 40 funded days where 6 (15%) were for NSF. In 2016, Blue Heron
is currently scheduled for 61 days, 23 of these (38%) will be for
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meteorological sensors/weather station
upgrade $7,752 &lt;br/&gt;Position and Orientation System upgrade $87,363
&lt;br/&gt;pCO2 sensor for underway system $28,011 &lt;br/&gt; $123,126
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.