* 1624320
* A Scaffolded Data-Centric Approach to Improved Learning of Introductory Computing Concepts
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jeremy Ernst, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 594,314.00

The significance and importance of this project is the availability of improved
science for teaching fundamental computational concepts both to students
pursuing degrees in computer science and to students where computation plays a
secondary but increasingly vital role in the practice of their discipline. The
fundamental problem addressed by this project is the limited methods currently
available to motivate and sustain student engagement in challenging parts of the
learning process. Through the use of relevant and authentic data combined with
an improved learning environment the project will achieve improvements in
learning and, more broadly, will provide the "data literacy" increasingly
critical in the economy and society. While advantageous for all students, these
characteristics of realism are especially engaging for students in under-
represented populations. The "big data" resources are useful not only in
introductory courses but also for emerging data science courses. The project
will develop a deep understanding of the impact on student motivation and
learning of the project's interventions across diverse student populations. This
understanding will influence curriculum design and help shape better pedagogical
practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal and scope of this project will be
enhanced knowledge of, and extended technologies for, improving motivation and
cognitive gains of students learning introductory computing concepts. The
project will extend the catalog of available data sets, add authoring and
curation tools enabling the efficient creation and restructuring of data sets,
improve the ability of a student to search for a relevant data set, and provide
scaffolding to allow early visualization of "big data". The project will extend
a block-based visual programming environment, BlockPy, allowing mutual
translation between Blockly and Python. The extension will add an instructor
authoring tool and run-time support for immediate feedback on algorithm-based
exercises that improves student learning and encourages student exploration of
alternative algorithms. New visualizations will support student learning in any
programming class using big data. These resources will be combined with other
course elements in a robust web framework supporting many forms of distributed
instructional delivery. The project will apply the Dick and Carey Instructional
Design method to facilitate adoption by others and integrate detailed assessment
of the curriculum.