* 1624129
* Proposal for continued support for the LTER Schoolyard Book Series
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Adrian Howkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 04/30/2018
* USD 167,333.00

The Long Term Ecological Research network is developing a children's book series
as one component of its broad effort to combine scientific research and science
education. The books engage children and their families in learning about the
earth's ecosystems through narratives that reflect the research conducted at
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites. This project will strengthen and
advance the LTER 'schoolyard' book series by completing production of three
additional books and by expanding the publication formats of all 12 books to
include both eBooks and interactive ePub3 versions. Selected books will be
translated into Spanish. Authors and the publisher will work closely with the
LTER Communications Office to increase the profile of the book series and to
develop a rich resource of materials that can be used by educators throughout
the US.

The science theme underlying the narrative of each children's book is a topic
investigated by LTER researchers; it uses this approach to engage young children
from a broad range of backgrounds. This approach is based on an understanding of
how children perceive their local environment and encourages young children to
develop empathy for the ecosystem in which they live. This empathy can then lead
to greater interest in learning more about their own local environments,
progressing to interest in other more distant environments as a student matures.
This modest award will advance the LTER schoolyard book series in three distinct
ways. First, three books currently in development will be completed, bringing to
12 the number of children's books available. The books will represent half of
the active LTER projects, bringing knowledge of diverse ecosystems to middle
school students. Second, the investigator will develop a formal assessment of
the success of the books as educational tools, including their relationship to
new science standards. Third, the lead investigator will work with authors,
Taylor Trade Publishers, and the LTER Communications Office to develop a
business plan for future publications. In the composite these three goals will
strengthen an educational book series that has already proved both popular and
effective.