* 1624048
* RAPID:  Baseline Survey of Asylum Seekers in Germany
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jens Hainmueller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,978.00

European governments are currently facing the largest refugee crisis since the
Second World War. In 2014, Europe registered approximately 567,000 new asylum
claims, a figure which has since been surpassed by the total intake between
January and July of 2015. Given that the crisis in the Middle East shows no
signs of abating, these population flows can be expected to continue, placing
significant pressure on European governments. This massive influx of asylum
seekers has resulted in severe political fallout in many European countries.
Although refugee integration has been a long-standing and pressing goal,
scholars and policymakers have strong opinions but little evidence on how best
to bring it out about. This research will collect new evidence and apply
innovative techniques to assess which policies promote the successful social,
political, and economic integration of refugees into host countries and which
measures are likely to fail or backfire. Germany is the focus of the study since
it is the European country that has received by far the largest number of recent
refugees. Using a mobile messaging application (WhatsApp) and working with local
governments and NGOs, a large panel of recently arrived asylum seekers in
Germany will be created to provide timely understanding of how policy parameters
impact refugee integration. The distinguishing feature of our project is that we
will provide the research and policy community with two important tools. First,
for researchers we will test and assess a new panel recruitment and retention
approach via WhatsApp that can be used with a highly mobile population. Second,
for policymakers we will provide systematic information about the current
situation and perspectives of asylum seekers in Europe. Longer-term the study
will inform policy discussion by providing systematic evidence on the impact of
asylum procedures and programs for the subsequent integration of refugees.
Additionally, taking advantage of what we learn from Germany, we will be able to
apply this knowledge to the US case. Unfortunately, there is insufficient
experimentation in the US to allow for policy guidance. We must therefore rely
on findings from cases where experimentation is prevalent. Hopefully, the
lessons gleaned from the analysis of the varied programs in Europe will be
useful for American policy makers as they confront similar security and economic
challenges with increasing numbers of refugees arriving on our
shores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematically evaluating the impact of a plethora
of asylum seeker and refugee integration policies provides important
contributions to existing immigration research across a range of social science
fields: 1) it expands the scope of advanced econometric and experimental methods
to a new policy area in order to produce internally valid evidence on the impact
of integration policies; and 2) it advances understanding of the impact of
policy beyond that of economic success by incorporating political and social
outcomes for these highly vulnerable populations. These two contributions can
help build a basic understanding of the conditions favorable for the integration
of asylum seekers and refugees, which is currently absent from both the academic
and policy literature.