* 1624690
* Phase II I/UCRC U. of Alabama at Birmingham Site: Center for Health Organization Transformation
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Nancy Borkowski, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2021
* USD 479,917.00

Phase II I/UCRC U. of Alabama at Birmingham Site: Center for Health Organization
Transformation

Partnerships between university and industry can result in innovative solutions
to the complex issues affecting the U.S. health care system. The University of
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) site of the Center for Health Organization
Transformation (CHOT) represents a collaboration between UAB and industry
partners to engage in applied industry research to provide evidence on
innovations that can improve health care quality and access, while reducing
costs. Industry partners include a broad spectrum of health-related
organizations (health systems, hospital, home health, rehabilitation) serving
Alabama, Louisiana, and other states. The UAB/CHOT affiliation will facilitate
and accelerate such research by our joining an experienced learning
collaborative, and by leveraging the resources of UAB and its industry partners.
Our projects have implications for the prevention of health conditions that
disproportionately affect racial/ethnic minorities, particularly in the Deep
South, such as diabetes, obesity, avoidable readmissions, and falls.

The UAB CHOT site?s mission/vision is "to generate knowledge with respect to
health care delivery innovations that may result in efficient, high-quality care
that is patient-centered and equitable through collaborative research with
industry." The UAB CHOT site's research focus includes organizational processes
and the evaluation of health care delivery innovations, health information
technology, quality improvement, and patient experience including care
coordination. UAB will expand CHOT's existing research capacity, increase its
geographic presence in the Deep South, and broaden industry partner types
involved in changing the U.S. health delivery system. UAB's participation in the
CHOT will enhance our diverse students' experience in the classroom and in the
field, and provide faculty with opportunities for practice-based, multi-
disciplinary research. Finally, the broader scientific community will benefit
through the dissemination of our projects' findings through refereed
publications, presentations at scientific meetings and CHOT sponsored
communication venues - webinars, and newsletters.