* 1624585
* Advancing Research, Education and Public Engagement at The University of Memphis Meeman Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Michael Kennedy, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,785.00

Rapid urbanization of lands and the challenge to maintain a high quality of life
for people in urban environments requires leadership and innovative research.
Situated within the commercial and cultural hub of the mid-South region, The
University of Memphis and Meeman Biological Station (MBS) are in a unique
position to provide essential guidance related to natural resources management
and sustainability. Toward that goal, this project facilitates development of a
5-year plan that will enable fuller and broader utilization of MBS with the
intent to conduct and contribute to world-class ecological research and
education. Including minority representation in research and educational
pursuits will be a primary objective of the plan. The planning process consists
of visits to existing field stations, workshops focused on research, education
and community engagement, and an online survey targeted at local and regional
stakeholders. Distillation of gathered information will help identify important
research directions, expand educational opportunities for undergraduates and
teachers in training, increase outreach to K-12 students and the community
through targeted environmental education programming and elaborate a solid path
toward advanced operational and fiscal management of MBS. This is an ideal time
to address long-term planning, as the appointment of new administrative
leadership at the University of Memphis and hiring of new faculty interested in
using MBS has resulted in a drive to increase programming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Memphis Edward J. Meeman Biological
Station (MBS) is two miles east of the Mississippi River on the third Chickasaw
Bluff (formed from Pleistocene loess) and lies in the narrow transition zone
between the Mississippi River Valley and the West Tennessee Coastal Plain
physiographic regions. This location provides a biodiversity rich area for
terrestrial as well as big-river and associated habitats research. The goal of
this project is development of a 5-year strategic plan for MBS that would
advance future research direction, educational programming and community
engagement to ensure its regional and national relevance, vitality and
sustainability. Three approaches will be used to gain insight and gather
information: 1) visits to select Organization of Biological Field Station
locations that have similar missions, are regionally relevant and are in urban
environments; 2) hosting three workshops focused on research direction,
educational programming and community outreach; and 3) creation of an online
questionnaire, based on information garnered from field station visits and
workshops, that will be widely disseminated to regional stakeholders for
additional input and feedback. A document compiled from collected data will
guide MBS long-term direction and programming. As the only urban field station
on the lower Mississippi River and located in the heart of the tristate, 10
county Mid-South region, this is an opportune time to advance capabilities at
MBS. Situated within a majority minority 1.3-million person metropolitan area,
MBS is well positioned to engage students that are typically underrepresented in
science. Existing collaborations with local underperforming middle schools, a
community college feeder school for the University of Memphis, the HBCU Lemoyne-
Owen College and non-profit organizations present opportunities to introduce
multiple cohorts of students to the natural environment in a way that many have
never encountered. Such collaborations could form the basis for broader
community awareness and appreciation of science, the environment and the role
humans play in shaping it. For more information about MBS, visit
http://www.memphis.edu/meeman/.