* 1624547
* Anhydrite in Arc Magmas and its Relationship to Sulfur Degassing and Ore Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* John Dilles, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 310,000.00

Calcium sulfate in crystalline form (anhydrite) and as melt blebs has been found
in a few natural samples of volcanic rocks from circum-Pacific volcanoes in the
Andes, Philippines, Cascades, and Aleutians. It has also been produced in a few
laboratory experiments. Such sulfate-bearing magma potentially carried much of
the sulfur from deep sources in the Earth's mantle to the shallow crust. Where
arc volcanoes have erupted historically, sulfate-rich magmas have degassed
abundant sulfur dioxide that enters the atmosphere and may produce up to 2 years
of global climatic cooling with attendant human impact. Where sulfate-rich
magmas crystallize to granite in the shallow crust they may release water, up to
one gigaton of sulfur, and metals that are responsible for formation of large
mineral deposits of copper, molybdenum, gold, silver and other economic metals
critical to the USA economy. In order to understand better the contributions of
calcium sulfate-bearing magmas to sulfur in the atmosphere and mineral deposits,
the proposed research will undertake laboratory experiments on calcium sulfate
in magmas, and document the occurrence of minute calcium sulfate inclusions
preserved in natural magmatic samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first approach
includes petrologic experiments on the stability of sulfate in oxidized and
water-rich arc magmas that are planned at pressures ranging from the base of the
crust (~1GPa) to the upper crust (~50MPa). High pressure experiments on basaltic
andesite will provide information on the transfer of sulfur in arc magmas
through the crust, and the stability, nature and composition of calcium sulfate-
rich melt phase. Initial experiments have produced such an immiscible Ca-SO4-Na-
Mg-Cl melt. Analysis of both the silicate and sulfate melt phases will directly
determine partition coefficient data for sulfur, chlorine and other species
including ore metals such as gold. Low pressure experiments on dacite will be
saturated in aqueous fluid, and the concentrations of sulfur in all three phases
(silicate melt, anhydrite, aqueous fluid) can be measured and partition
coefficients can be determined. Direct measurement of the sulfur content of the
one or two aqueous fluid phases will make us of laser ablation-ICP-MS on fluid
inclusions trapped in situ in fractured quartz. The second approach is to use
modern imaging techniques (SEM, QEMSCAN, EMPA element mapping) to search arc
volcanic and plutonic samples for minute inclusions of sulfate minerals in
robust phenocryst minerals such as apatite, titanite, quartz, hornblende,
pyroxene, and feldspar. A special focus will be plutonic samples from porphyry
copper deposits to learn whether or not these magmas were initially calcium
sulfate-bearing. The data from this work will allow improved and quantitative
modeling magmatic cooling, crystallization and depressurization that causes the
breakdown of magmatic sulfate and consequent transfer sulfur species (SO2, H2S)
to a separate water-rich fluid phase that may either enter the atmosphere during
volcanic eruptions or react in the crustal with metals in the aqueous fluid to
form economic mineral deposits.