* 1624200
* The PALM Network: Enhancing undergraduate biology education and building the professional biology educators workforce through long-term mentorships
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2022
* John Winnett, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 483,966.00

The Promoting Active Learning &amp; Mentoring (PALM) Research Coordination
Network focuses on providing sustained mentoring in active learning, a practice
shown to be highly effective in increasing success and retention of diverse STEM
students. The project is open to current faculty and postdoctoral fellows and is
coordinated through several life sciences professional societies and faculty at
a range of educational institutions. Network coordinators will recruit
participants and provide venues for sharing of their achievements in enhanced
active learning. Special efforts will be made to include instructors at
minority-serving institutions and community colleges, where many under-served
students begin their college careers. The outcome will be an expanding national
network of undergraduate instructors who practice effective active learning
methods, thus enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Short-term exposure to principles of active learning is
often not sufficient to promote significant change in teaching practices from
lecture-dominated to a more effective learning format. The goal of the PALM
Network is to provide long-term, hands-on mentoring experiences that will allow
PALM Fellows to experience the scope of pedagogical and cultural changes needed
to achieve effective change, and thus lead to change that will positively
influence the teaching culture at each PALM Fellow's institution. PALM brings
together stakeholders to support teaching mentorships to promote sustained
biology education reform at diverse institutions. PALM will allow faculty and
postdoctoral fellows to gain hands-on experience and at least one semester of
mentorship in bringing evidence-based, effective active learning strategies into
their classrooms. PALM Fellows will pair with mentors who have reformed their
teaching, visit their mentors to observe and participate in redesigned classes,
develop an active learning module for one of their classes with guidance from
their mentors, demonstrate how they have adjusted their practice to use active
learning, and disseminate their work at their home institutions and at
professional society meetings and in the peer-reviewed science education
literature. Evaluation of the program will involve analysis of PALM Fellows'
teaching practices before and after mentorship and annual follow-up surveys for
3-5 years afterwards to determine long-range impact. A Steering Committee
consisting of educational representatives from seven life sciences professional
societies and faculty from a variety of institutional types will oversee the
program, screen applicants for mentorships, provide mentor orientation and
regular follow-up, and coordinate information sharing meetings of Fellows and
mentors each year. By capitalizing on Steering Committee links to minority- and
tribal-serving institutions, societies of underrepresented scientists, and
community colleges, which educate over half the minority students in the U.S.,
PALM will bring Vision and Change reforms to faculty and undergraduate students
who have not factored prominently into past pedagogical reform plans.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).