* 1624240
* Evolution and climate change: elucidating the controls on species' responses to 4 Myrs of environmental change in the Atlantic Coastal Plain, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Erin Saupe, Saupe                   Erin           E
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 87,000.00

Dr. Erin E. Saupe has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at University of Oxford, Yale University, and
the University of Michigan. This study will examine long-term evolutionary
responses of marine mollusk species and communities to environmental changes
during the last 4 million years in the Atlantic Coastal Plain, USA. Analyses
will integrate paleontological and modern biological data with paleoclimate
information to test two hypotheses: (1) Whether temperature changes after 3.0
Million years ago generated observed patterns of biotic turnover in the
molluscan fossil record of the Atlantic Coastal Plain; and (2) Whether species
exhibit increased genetic diversity in regions that are closer to the centroid
of their suitable environmental conditions, and in regions that were
environmentally suitable for those species over millions of years. Dr. Saupe
will engage high school and undergraduate students in research. Dr. Saupe will
also design an online educational exhibit on her research for the Yale Peabody
Museum, which will be visible internationally.

Mollusks of the Atlantic Coastal Plain provide an ideal system to examine how
species respond to environmental changes. The region has abundant records of
both fossil and modern mollusks and has experienced significant environmental
disturbance in the last 3 million years. Dr. Saupe will study different mollusks
species using ecological niche modeling and geographic information systems
software to quantify environmental tolerances (i.e., niche breadth). Genetic
diversity will be measured using next generation DNA sequencing. An
understanding of the controls on species' responses to environmental change will
inform the protection of critical ocean resources.