* 1624104
* RCN-UBE:The Neuroscience Case Network (NeuroCaseNet)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Patricia Marsteller, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 431,428.00

This award will support the establishment of a new network (NeuroCaseNet) for
current and future faculty that are developing, using, and evaluating case
studies and Problem Based Learning (PBL) teaching methods in the neuroscience
curricula. While there is strong support for neuroscience education within this
large and diverse community, the adoption of case studies and PBL methods within
neuroscience courses is far less developed. Finding appropriate teaching
resources, in part due to the interdisciplinary nature of neuroscience and the
rapid growth of neuroscience programs, is a strong challenge. This network will
provide collaboration opportunities for educators with a strong interest in
using these pedagogies in the classroom and create a platform for the discussion
and dissemination of new teaching resources for the broader neuroscience
education community. The increased faculty and future faculty collaboration on
creating case studies stimulated by the network promises to enhance neuroscience
education in all institutional contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
objectives of this network are twofold: to provide collaboration opportunities
for educators with a strong interest in using these pedagogies in the classroom
and to create a platform for the discussion and dissemination of new teaching
resources for the broader neuroscience community. The network is organized into
cohorts of case writers, each with 6-8 Fellows of whom are experienced in
cases/PBL methodologies. These Fellows will work collaboratively to create
publishable case studies via focused workshops. The Journal of Undergraduate
Neuroscience Education will be a primary vehicle for dissemination of these
pedagogical tools to the wider neuroscience education community. The network
then provides support for Fellows to create their own peer-mentoring groups
which is intended to both support the generation of a new rounds of case writers
but more importantly to encourage and promote implementation of case studies and
PBL in the classroom. The network will partner with established promotors of
neuroscience education, specifically the Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience
and the Society for Neuroscience to education and inform the community of these
new curricular tools. Thus, with the creation of new curricular materials via
the case writing Fellows and peer mentoring groups to encourage and support the
implementation of these case studies, the network will have a strong impact in
promoting pedagogical change in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).