* 1624097
* I-Corps: OneScope Development
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Mary Nan Mallory, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The focus of this I-Corps project is to prototype and define the
commercialization path for the OneScope, a two-component disposable laryngoscope
system that integrates controllable suction to maintain a clear view of the
airway. Twentyfive million intubations occur each year in the US alone.
Intubation is the procedure performed to provide lifesaving oxygen to a
patient's lungs, accomplished by holding the jaw open with a laryngoscope in the
left-hand and toggling between the suction tube to clear obstructing fluids and
the breathing tube in the right hand. This procedure is made more difficult
because of the physician must choose between two types of laryngoscopes and
often must switch equipment mid-procedure. The OneScope was conceptualized by
two Emergency Physicians frustrated by the inadequate intubation equipment
available on the market today. It is anticipated that OneScope will be useful
for both direct and video techniques and will wirelessly transmit video to a
nearby tablet allowing an indirect view of the vocal cords.

The goals of this project are to develop a fully functioning 3D printed
prototype of the OneScope and to develop a full understanding of how to
commercialize this product. The prototype will be designed to meet the needs of
potential users (physicians and paramedics) as determined by customer discovery
interviews. An industrial engineer will be engaged to translate customer needs
to complete designs, with input from a manufacturing partner to ensure good
manufacturing and quality standards are met. To develop a full understanding of
the commercialization path for this product, lean start-up and customer
discovery interview methodologies will be used to explore the business
requirements (including sales channels, manufacturing cots and timeline,
financing and team development).