* 1624668
* I/UCRC: Phase II: Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Cloud and Autonomic Computing (CAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Jerzy Rozenblit, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 840,331.00

The explosive growth of IT and cloud infrastructures, coupled with the diversity
of their components and a shortage of skilled IT workers, have resulted into
systems whose control and timely management exceeds human ability. The mission
of the NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Cloud and
Autonomic Computing (CAC) is to advance the knowledge of how to design and
engineer computing systems and applications that are capable of managing
themselves, adapting their resources and operations to current workloads and
anticipating the needs of their users. The CAC with three university sites (the
University of Arizona, the Mississippi State University, and Texas Tech
University) will lead research of innovative designs and programming paradigms
for cloud and computing systems that can self-configure, self-heal, self-
optimize and self-protect with minimal involvement of IT administrators or
users. We are planning to involve the Auto Industry through the University of
Detroit Mercy (UDM), who is an affiliated member with UA. The CAC not only
advances the science of autonomic computing but also accelerates its transfer to
industry by closely working with industrial partners in the definition of
projects pursued by the CAC, and contributing to the education of a workforce
capable of designing and deploying cloud and autonomic computing systems. The
CAC will involve students and faculty from underrepresented groups through
several dissemination and recruiting initiatives at each
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's IT and cloud infrastructures face
significant management challenges that result from, among other factors, their
distributed nature, their need to adapt to unanticipated demands, their
heterogeneity, their size, large numbers of users and great complexity and
diversity of IT and cloud services. The mission of CAC is to engage academics,
industrial and government partners in joint efforts that accelerate both our
understanding of the fundamentals of cloud and autonomic computing, and the
transfer of these fundamentals into industry solutions and education of a
workforce capable of designing autonomic systems in general and cloud systems in
particular. The CAC will conduct research on how to enable systems to be self-
managed with respect to performance, fault, security, resilience, power
consumption, etc. Unlike past attempts that address these properties in
isolation, the CAC will endeavor to pursue integrated approaches that address
more than one property. The technical scope of the Center?s activities includes
design and evaluation methods, algorithms, architectures, software, mathematical
foundations and benchmarks for cloud and autonomic systems. Solutions are
studied for different levels of both centralized and distributed systems,
including the hardware, networks, storage, middleware, services and information
layers. The CAC solutions will focus more on self-management and security issues
in Internet of Things (IoT), critical infrastructures and cloud systems and
applications. The following are concrete examples of industry-relevant technical
challenges that the CAC will address in the context of autonomic IT
infrastructures: Automatic management of performance and energy consumption in
large scale data centers and cloud systems; Securing and protecting the
operations of sensors and actuators in IoT environments and their applications
or services; Predictive modeling of quality-of-service of IT and cloud resources
and applications; Dynamic resource provisioning and scheduling of computer
resources; Autonomic management and protection of critical infrastructures; and
Automation of system management operations of Internet of Things (IoT) resources
and services.