* 1624722
* Support for International Quantum Cascade Laser School and Workshop (IQCLSW) 2016.  Held in Cambridge, United Kingdom on September 4-9, 2016.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Mikhail Belkin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Support for the 2016 International Quantum Cascade Laser School and Workshop
&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: This grant provides funding support to
young scientists (postdocs and graduate students) from US institutions with the
top-ranked accepted presentation to attend the 2016 International Quantum
Cascade Laser School and Workshop (IQCLSW). The IQCLSW conference is held every
2 years since 2004. It serves as a premier venue for all the groups working in
the field of quantum cascade lasers for discussing the latest developments in
the field and generating new research directions. Quantum cascade lasers are
semiconductor lasers operating in mid-infrared and terahertz range of
electromagnetic spectrum which have numerous important applications in the
fields of chemical and biological sensing, free-space optical communications,
defensive infrared countermeasures, securing screening, and remote detection of
dangerous substances. The 2016 IQCLSW conference will be held in Cambridge,
United Kingdom on September 4-9, 2016. An important component is the 2-day
school portion, in which hour-long tutorial presentations are aimed at graduate
students and young scientists to rapidly acquaint them with the fundamentals of
this rapidly developing technology and thus provide education and training of
the new generation of scientists. The 2016 IQCLSW conference will have a
significant applications focus and will include and engage mid-infrared and
terahertz photonics industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
2016 IQCLSW meeting starts with the two-day School section, with 9 hour-long
tutorial presentations by top scientists and engineers in the field aimed at
students, postdocs, and young scientists. Tutorial presentations are designed to
teach the fundamentals of the rapidly evolving field of mid-infrared and
terahertz quantum cascade lasers and mid-infrared and terahertz photonics
applications. The 3-day Workshop follows the School and will have 4 keynote,
10-15 invited and 45-55 contributed talks, as well as poster sessions, focused
on the most recent developments in quantum cascade lasers and their
applications. Applications that will be discussed include: high-resolution
spectroscopy, microscopy, chemical and biomedical sensing, coherent detection,
imaging, security screening, and infrared countermeasures.