* 1624675
* Enhancing the capabilities and integration of a long-term marine biological monitoring program
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Lora Harris, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 132,831.00

This award supports the expansion a long-term biological, physical, and chemical
monitoring program in the Chesapeake Bay region by the addition of new sensor
capabilities. This expanded measurement program will allow for comprehensive
documentation of ecosystem responses to environmental change in the Chesapeake
Bay ecosystem resulting from global climatic change, nutrient loading, and
watershed restoration. The project supports the NSF missions of expanded
scientific understanding of long-term change in ecosystems and the application
of scientific data to support the health and welfare of populations in the
coastal zone. New measurements will fill in key gaps in our understanding of
linkages among biological, chemical, and physical processes in the coastal zone
and how these linkages control the response of marine systems to local,
regional, and global change. The monitoring system will provide data streams
that will support graduate education as well as training of visiting grade
school students and the general public about coastal marine ecology and how it
responds to pollution and climatic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging
component of the CBL research effort is the establishment of an integrated
molecules to metazoans long-term monitoring program from its recently
reconstructed research pier. This award supports the substantial enhancement of
a well-established monitoring program at the University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL;
http://www.umces.edu/cbl) by the addition of new environmental sensors and the
deployment of a state-of-the-art data integration and management system. The
proposed expansion of the sampling program will allow the CBL site to become a
sentinel to document diurnal, seasonal, and inter-annual-scale change in the
Chesapeake Bay ecosystem, a representative coastal system, under the influence
of global climatic change, nutrient loading, and watershed restoration.
Specifically, this award will result in the addition of new sensors to measure
chemical (pH, fDOM), physical (current velocity and waves), and atmospheric
(PAR) parameters that will complement existing monitoring of temperature and
salinity, tides, nutrient and organic matter concentrations, plankton and fish
abundance, light availability, and community respiration. These new sensors will
complete the comprehensive monitoring program we envision on the CBL pier. To
ensure that these varied and extensive data streams are integrated and managed
in a robust and open environment such that researchers, both at CBL and in
society generally, can gain maximum benefit from the resources, this award will
also support the deployment of a new data integration and management system
(DIMS) that will house and disseminate the archival and new data streams.