* 1624761
* Huron to Erie Alliance for Research and Training (HEART) Field Station Improvements for Urban Watershed Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Jeffrey Ram, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2018
* USD 251,996.00

The Huron to Erie Alliance for Research and Training (HEART) Field Stations are
unique in their access to both natural and built water resources in the urban
environment, including natural ecosystems and water infrastructure that supports
over 4 million people in Southeast Michigan. Located at Belle Isle, Lake St.
Clair Metropark, and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department Water Works Park
(WWP) drinking water treatment plant, the HEART field stations provide access to
state-of-the-art research laboratory facilities and unique native and restored
Great Lakes coastal ecosystems and green/blue infrastructure, as well as major
shipping networks, world-class tourism and fisheries resources and an
international border crossing. The frontiers of knowledge on the sustainability
of water infrastructure and the maintenance of water quality for human and
ecological welfare will be advanced through new studies using the proposed
equipment and facility improvements. These studies will directly impact
metropolitan Detroit and the Great Lakes region and will also serve the national
purpose by providing innovative education and training on a broad variety of
urban water resources topics at all levels of study (K-12, community college,
undergraduate, graduate and post-doc). The research and education approaches
used by HEART are designed to secure a technologically-advanced future workforce
knowledgeable and experienced in urban watershed issues and study methods, and
instilled with values about the stewardship of urban freshwater resources. The
proposed equipment will enhance HEART's ability to positively impact the
economic competitiveness of the shipping and fisheries industries, as well as
the sustainability and affordability of drinking water systems. Established
partnerships with urban public schools and community institutions will enable
improvements in the research, education and training at the HEART field stations
to provide greater access to advanced Science-Technology-Engineering-Math (STEM)
resources and skills for underrepresented minorities. The field stations are
places where researchers from diverse institutions and academic disciplines
interact, and each facility provides a venue for tours and conferences that
connect collaborators nationally and internationally around urban water
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of the proposed equipment at HEART
will advance knowledge of fisheries and restoration science through
environmental DNA detection using PCR-based techniques, developing new methods
for assessing the effectiveness of habitat restoration and the risk of invasive
species transport via ship ballast water. Equipment to support advancement of
automated methods for rapid molecular aquatic ecology analysis will bring this
promising new field closer to marketability and broad application for the public
good. Experimental manipulation of the 5,000 square foot replica drinking water
treatment system at WWP and evaluation of physiological organism responses will
provide new insights on treatment process effectiveness for contaminants of
emerging concern. The equipment will support hands-on student water science,
aquatic molecular and microbial analysis, identification of invasive species,
fisheries experiments, drinking water treatment technology investigations and
water quality studies in the critical Great Lakes waterway from Lake Huron to
Lake Erie. Communications technology will expand the capacity of the HEART Field
Stations to collect and integrate data and enable scientists to engage and
empower the public in creating a sustainable urban environment based on sound
science. For more information visit the HEART website at
http://www.heartfreshwatercenter.org/.