* 1624832
* Planning for a Great Basin Ecological Observatory: from NevCAN to the Spring Valley Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 24,993.00

This project will support strategic planning for the Spring Valley Field
Station, located in the Great Basin of North America. Long-term changes in
forest ecosystems are difficult to predict and detect, and field stations allow
for multi-year investigations that are otherwise very difficult to perform.
While this project will utilize existing long-term infrastructure associated
with the Nevada Climate-eco-hydrological Assessment Network (NevCAN), it will
support new biological research and education on Great Basin species, from
sagebrush to the iconic bristlecone pine. The station will therefore contribute
to ecological studies in a semi-arid region that is considered at risk of
widespread mortality linked to warmer droughts. The main objective of this
project is to develop a long-term vision for the station, together with a
realistic management strategy during its first five years.

Three NevCAN sites, from the sagebrush steppe on the valley floor to the
bristlecone pine stands at the subalpine tree-line, will be part of the Spring
Valley Field Station to capture ecological patterns and processes over a 2000-m
elevation gradient. The station will fill a growing demand for long-term
information on Great Basin population dynamics, ecosystem processes, threats to
biodiversity from invasive species, and overall resilience to future climatic
changes, especially in connection with forward-looking resource management,
conservation, and restoration. A one-week workshop to be held at the end of
August near the proposed station will bring together university faculty and
stakeholders from inside and outside of Nevada to draft the master planning
document, including a facility needs, details of data management, and fee
structure. The Great Basin is characterized by both an upper and a lower tree-
line, hence the Spring Valley Field Station will be ideally suited to
investigate the linkages between climate and ecosystem dynamics in space and
time, including the expansion, retreat, or persistence of trailing and leading
ecotonal edges.