* 1624538
* Collaborative Research: Testing Models for Extension in the Rio Grande Rift-Basin and Range Transition Zone of Southern New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Jason Ricketts, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 166,905.00

The Basin and Range province and the Rio Grande rift in the western United
States are two tectonic domains where the lithosphere has slowly pulled apart
over the past 25 million years. The stretching is distributed across wide areas
in the Basin and Range and is more focused along a narrow zone from southern New
Mexico to northern Colorado in the Rio Grande rift, which in many ways resembles
other significant rift zones around the world. A variety of tectonic models have
been proposed to explain the extension in these two domains. Some models
attribute their development to the same mechanisms whereas others implicate
different mechanisms for each domain. In this project, a research team from the
University of Texas El Paso and New Mexico State University aims to distinguish
which tectonic forces drive extension in the two provinces where they merge in
southern New Mexico. To do so, they will determine the uplift ages for many of
the ranges in the region in order to determine if the Basin and Range province
and the Rio Grande rift experience the same extension history. Desired societal
outcomes will be achieved through the full participation of students and
researchers of Hispanic heritage in the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rio Grande rift is one of the
world?s best exposed and most thoroughly studied continental rifts, yet there
still remains considerable uncertainty and debate on the driving forces that
produced it and why it formed when and where it did. Many researchers view the
Rio Grande rift as the easternmost segment of the adjacent Basin and Range
province, but others view it as a separate structural entity. Despite the
observation that the southern Rio Grande rift physiographically resembles the
adjacent Basin and Range, it can be distinguished by higher heat flow, thinner
crust, deeper basins, and an abundance of Quaternary normal faults. These
observations lead to uncertainty as to whether these two structural domains
evolved contemporaneously or not, as well as different interpretations of the
underlying causes(s) driving crustal extension in the southwest U.S. The
objective of this project is to constrain times of extension in the region where
these two structural domains merge to test models for formation of the Rio
Grande rift. Specifically, the project aims to be addressed are: (1) the timing
of the main phase of extension in the Basin and Range Province of southeastern
Arizona/southwestern New Mexico and the southern Rio Grande rift of southern New
Mexico; (2) the difference in style/timing of extension between the Rio Grande
rift and Basin and Range; and (3) the main driver of extension in the southern
Rio Grande rift. To these ends, the research team will use apatite (U-Th)/He,
apatite fission-track, and zircon (U-Th)/He thermochronologic methods on samples
collected from thirteen individual fault block uplifts in the Rio Grande rift-
Basin and Range transition of eastern Arizona, southern New Mexico, and western
Texas. These results will fill a data gap between the Basin and Range and the
northern Rio Grande rift. For each sample, U and Th zoning profiles will be
obtained for apatite and zircon, and inverse models will be produced that
incorporate all new thermochronologic data, zoning information, as well as
existing geologic constraints. These data will be able to place very tight
constraints on each samples' time-temperature history. The resulting models will
delineate times of rapid exhumation from times of tectonic quiescence at each
location, which will be the principle method for testing between models for
extension.