* 1624582
* Structural Architecture and Evolution of the Southern Flank of the Brooks Range Fold and Thrust Belt, Arctic Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Elizabeth Miller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 192,108.00

A broad zone of fault-related deformation, called the Schist Belt, stretches
East-West for more than 600 kilometers along the southern side of the Brooks
Range in northern Alaska. This fault zone played a fundamental role in the
formation of flanking sedimentary basins, the Yukon-Koyukuk Basin to the south
and the Colville Basin to the north of the Brooks Range. It is also the main
structure separating southern Alaska, with a geologic history tied to the
Pacific plate margin, from northern Alaska, whose history is tied to plate
tectonics in the Arctic Ocean. Despite its impressive physical extent, questions
about its exact age and hypotheses about why and how it developed are debated.
This project will study the geology and deformation history of this fault zone,
sharing logistics with an international Swedish project aimed at understanding
the geology of the Arctic region. The proposed research represents a
contribution to basic science that will improve our understanding of the geology
of the Arctic, one of the last remaining frontiers on earth. Current global
interest in the Arctic makes this region a superb arena for international
collaborations and offers a unique opportunity for graduate students to engage
in field-based research, learn state-of-the-art analytical techniques and build
their careers. Training graduate students in Arctic geoscience and international
collaboration contributes to a diverse, globally competitive STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce for the U.S., particularly in
the Arctic. International communication and collaboration is a top priority for
the U.S. as Arctic nations chart their offshore-extended economic zones based on
international treaties. The proposed research will also produce maps and data
compilations that will represent contributions that will be useful to a broad
cross-section of society as related to natural resources, including both mineral
and hydrocarbons, potential geologic hazards and land-use, as well as
contributing to knowledge of the geology of the Gates of the Arctic National
Park. Greater understanding of the Arctic region is also important to national
security considerations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along its northern side, the
Brooks Range orogen of Arctic Alaska is a Jurassic to Early Cretaceous belt of
crustal shortening characterized by a classic thrust belt architecture
consisting of imbricated passive margin sequences and allochthonous oceanic arc
sequences. The structurally deeper, polymetamorphic core of the Brooks Range is
now understood to include portions of the Arctic Caledonides and the Baltic
Timanides, translated to their current position by the opening of the Arctic
Ocean. The Schist Belt is defined as a zone of penetrative deformation whose
fabrics and age (based on 40Argon/39Argon geochronology) are interpreted in
remarkably different ways by previous workers. Our proposed work will test
hypotheses and address questions about the age and origin of this belt. Geologic
mapping coupled with meso- and microstructural work, including the study of
quartz lattice preferred orientations, will permit along strike comparisons of
deformation within the belt and determine if it represents thrust or normal
sense shear. Thermochronology transects using 40Argon/39Argon methods and
Uranium-Lead dating of metamorphic zircon growth will place brackets on the age
of deformation and metamorphism. Apatite fission track dating will allow us to
define the geometry of large-scale Cenozoic structures that led to the
remarkable and unique exposures of Schist Belt rocks. The proposed work provides
a unique opportunity to join efforts with a 5-year campaign funded by the
Swedish Research Council and it will contribute to the broad international
effort focused on the understanding the origin of the Arctic Ocean. It also
offers us the opportunity to collaborate with a substantial scientific mission
involving the deployment of EarthScope?s Transportable Array across the state of
Alaska, which will ultimately provide a lithospheric context for this study.