* 1624030
* I-Corps: Commercialization of a Nanoparticle Concentration Apparatus
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Xuanhong Cheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team presents a microdevice for continuous nanoparticle
concentration. Motivation to create such a device stems from a well-recognized
challenge of preparing bionanoparticle samples at resource limited settings.
Bionanoparticles, such as viruses, liposomes and exosomes are frequently
processed for clinical diagnostics, surveillance of biological weapons and
pandemic pathogens, drug and food safety, as well as manufacturing of medicines,
but they usually are present only in very dilute suspensions. While the
conventional methods, such as high-speed centrifugation and membrane
ultrafiltration, are effective for concentrating biological nanoparticles, these
batch processes often have variable recovery, dependent on the sample
composition, operators' skills and the separation mechanism. These conventional
methods also require bulky instruments, special skills and long processing time.
The recently popularized concentration approach using magnetic beads offers an
advantage of low infrastructure requirement, but most biological species require
affinity labeling to impose sufficient magnetism, and the labeling efficiency is
poor when the target concentration is low and when inhibiting or competitive
species are present. The microdevice presented by this team addresses above
challenges through continuous concentration of bionanoparticles in a portable
device with simple operation and without the need of labeling. It departs from
expensive devices and immobile processes that are currently practiced in
laboratories, and is an enabling technology for point-of-care bionanoparticle
analysis. Such a device is expected to impact many fields, such as the
diagnostic industry for the preparation of virus and exosome samples, and the
pharmaceutical industry for nanomedicine production.

The microfluidic device presented here employs a temperature gradient and a
carefully engineered convection to drive directional motion of nanoparticles. By
flowing a dilute nanoparticle sample through a micro-fabricated fluid channel,
the particles migrate sideways along the axial flow, based on their intrinsic
physical properties, and the concentrate species are retrieved from a
strategically placed outlet. With a device footprint no bigger than a business
card and all accessories miniaturizable to palm-size, this device allows
bionanoparticle concentration outside of sophisticated laboratories with small
power consumption. The I-Corp team intends to perform market analysis and
explore commercialization potential for the nanoparticle concentrator. Through
direct conversation with people at different industrial sectors, key
specifications needed for practice will be identified, which will guide future
development of device towards prioritized markets and customers. The I-Corps
program will also equip the entrepreneurial lead and the principal investigator
with business skills and prepare them for technology translation.