* 1624210
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Production, Circulation, and Utilization of Scientific Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Gary Wilder, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2018
* USD 22,365.00

It is widely observed on the Earth today that glaciers are shrinking, sea levels
are rising, and extreme weather events are increasing in frequency and severity.
We also know that the future trajectory of the global warming patterns
underlying these and other developments will be affected by the choices humans
make and, especially, the energy policies their countries pursue. Therefore,
researchers are seeking to understand where these policies come from and how
governments and citizens determine their energy futures. Social science
researchers in particular ask how competing environmental and geopolitical
policies arise. Anthropology is particularly well placed to provide insights
into such questions because the field focuses on the everyday activities,
understandings, and processes that bring ordinary people to make these momentous
decisions. In other words, anthropology brings large-scale geopolitical issues
into an everyday focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;City University of New York
anthropology graduate student Zeynep Oguz, with the guidance of Dr. Gary Wilder,
will investigate the case of oil and natural gas exploration processes in
Turkey.The researcher has chosen Turkey because there the government-run Mineral
Exploration and Research Institute (MTA) has partnered with public and private
oil companies to search for hydrocarbons in the eastern Mediterranean Sea and
the Black Sea. This conjunction of stakeholders enables the researcher to
observe the involvement of multiple actors in a resource exploration setting,
including experts, statespeople, private businesses, and environmental
activists. Further, in contrast to extraction, the early stage of hydrocarbon
exploration have been understudied by social scientists even though it is
critical to the making of key decisions. The researcher will focus on the
production, circulation, and appropriation of techno-scientific knowledge about
potential hydrocarbon resources. He will employ a range of social science
research methods including participant observation in gas and oil exploration.
He also will interview geologists and engineers involved in the process to
capture their everyday practices and worldviews about resources, the
environment, and the future. He will trace the circulation of data sets, field
reports, maps, and other findings derived through hydrocarbon exploration, and
conduct further interviews to assess how government officials and members of
civil society utilize scientific information to make or contest energy policy.
Findings from this research will provide insight into the factors that affect,
perpetuate, or obstruct decision-making processes in energy policy and climate
change mitigation. It will also contribute to new and more general social
scientific understanding of how knowledge is made, circulated, and utilized.