* 1624153
* RAPID: Large-Scale Shake Table Test to Quantify Seismic Response of Helical Piles in Dry Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Amy Cerato, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2019
* USD 133,180.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will investigate the seismic
behavior of helical piles by means of shake table tests on model piles in the UC
San Diego laminar soil box. Helical piles are deep foundation elements that look
like, and are installed like, a large steel soil screw - they have a slender
steel shaft with any number of round plates at the tip to provide support to the
structure they hold. Helical piles are spun into the ground with a large torque
motor and provide support through soil bearing on the plates and along the
shaft. They come in many lengths and are often the foundation of choice for
retrofitting existing buildings or new, urban construction, due to their small
footprint and ability to create minimal disturbance to surrounding structures.
Although helical piles are installed as foundation elements in seismically
active areas such as New Zealand and Japan, they have not been used widely in
seismically active areas of the United States. This lack of use is, admittedly,
due to having no quantifiable data to illustrate the seismic behavior of helical
piles. In addition, there are no side-by-side seismic comparisons to other deep
foundation systems available, other than qualitative "survival" stories like
those from the 2011 Christchurch earthquake. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the
series of earthquakes in 2011, the city of Christchurch was surveyed and it was
found that all buildings/infrastructure constructed on helical piles sustained
minimal structural damage, however, a large majority of the condemned buildings
were constructed on other foundation types. The international community has
qualitative proof that helical piles perform well in earthquake prone areas, but
engineers have not quantified "why" those piles are superior foundation
elements, and unfortunately, helical pile use in seismically active areas within
the United States remains minimal. Therefore, this project seeks to find out
"why" helical piles seem to behave so well in seismic regions by subjecting them
to earthquake loads in the University of California - San Diego's Large Shake
Table. These data are especially important and timely to generate because
certain areas of the United States are now requiring seismic retrofits of
existing buildings, yet engineers have a dearth of data regarding foundation
systems to help make these structures safer. For example, in October 2015, the
City of Los Angeles voted on a seismic ordinance that will require more than
13,000 structures, both pre-stressed concrete and soft-story wood structures, to
be seismically retrofitted. Even though it is known from qualitative studies
(e.g., New Zealand and Japan) that piles with comparatively small cross-section
and high anchoring capacity, such as helical piles, are beneficial for seismic
resistance seemingly due to their slenderness, higher damping ratios, ductility,
and resistance to tip uplift, building codes and current state of practice have
not been adequately developed for this pile type because no quantitative data
exist. Research of seismic behavior of helical pile supported structures is
therefore imperative to generate necessary data that will help ensure that
helical piles are being correctly applied in seismic areas and establish
quantifiable benefits and/or limitations of helical pile use in seismic areas.
This project will benefit people living in seismic zones by educating engineers
with full-scale helical pile experimental data so that they better understand
how to design a building system that is safer, more resilient and sustainable
for individuals and the community.