* 1624569
* Adhesion, Friction and Lubrication in Polymeric and Biological Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Douglas Adamson, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 254,299.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental studies of adhesion,
friction and lubrication are important for understanding cell adhesion,
colloidal stabilization, nanomolding, nanofabrication, and drug delivery. Many
biological systems demonstrate superior adhesion and lubrication properties; for
example, cartilage in human joints can withstand pressures on the order of ten
atmospheres and have remarkably low friction coefficients. A unique feature of
these biomaterials is that they consist of bio-macromolecules with charged
groups. This award supports research and training of graduate students in modern
analytical and computational methods with application to adhesion, friction and
lubrication in biological and polymeric systems. The main goal of this research
is to develop a fundamental understanding of the role of electrostatic
interactions in adhesion and friction in biological and biomimetic polymeric
systems. This will be achieved through a synergistic approach combining
theoretical and computational techniques. The predictions of the theoretical
models will be tested in computer simulations and verified experimentally
through collaboration with experimental research groups in the US. This project
will have an impact on science and technology of materials design with desired
adhesive and lubricating properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
also provide special opportunities for involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students in cutting-edge research. Mentoring of students is integrated into
every aspect of the research. Graduate students will work with undergraduate
students in physics, chemistry or chemical engineering, as well as with talented
high school students. This experience will prepare them for future STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many biological systems demonstrate superior
adhesion and lubrication properties. A unique feature of these biomaterials is
that they consist of bio-macromolecules with ionizable groups. In aqueous
solutions, properties of these materials are influenced by electrostatic
interactions between ionized groups, by interactions with surrounding media, and
by the ionic strength of the solutions. The main goal of this research is to
understand the specific role of electrostatic interactions on adhesion and
lubrication in biological and polymeric systems. This will be achieved through a
combination of molecular dynamics simulations, self-consistent field
calculations, and scaling analysis. These techniques will be used to develop a
model of lubrication for the glycoprotein-collagen network layer covering
cartilage surfaces. Theory and simulations will be used to study the system's
static and dynamic properties as a function of salt concentration, solution pH,
fraction of charged groups, molecular architecture, and sliding velocity. The
overarching objective of this research will be to understand the effect of
dielectric discontinuity on adhesion and friction at the nanoscale. The
predictions of the theoretical models will be tested in computer simulations and
verified experimentally through collaboration with experimental research groups
in the US. This project will have an impact on the science and technology of
materials designed with desired adhesive and lubricating properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will also offer special
opportunities for involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-
edge research. Mentoring students is integrated into every aspect of the
proposed research. The results of the proposed research will be incorporated
into graduate level and special topics courses.