* 1624219
* Workshop for Developing an Energy Positive Water Resource Recovery Facility Test Bed Network
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Zhiyong Ren, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,957.00

Ren&lt;br/&gt;1624219&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wastewater treatment plants are
transforming the current energy intensive, regulatory focused operations into
integrated energy and resource recovery facilities, or "Energy-Positive Water
Resource Recovery Facilities" (EPWRRF). The energy content embedded in
wastewater is multiple times the energy used for treatment, and value-added
resources can be recovered as well. However, the lack of access to test
facilities for technology development and implementation is a major impediment
for this transformation. This workshop will focus on evaluation metrics for
technologies and the structure and general functions for a potential test bed
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent workshops on energy-positive water resource
recovery, organized collaboratively by federal agencies, academic institutions,
industry groups, and water utilities, paved a pathway toward the water resource
recovery facilities of the future. The energy content (heat and chemical)
embedded in wastewater is multiple times the energy used for treatment, and
value-added resources such as nutrients, precious metals, chemicals, and clean
water can be recovered as well at such facilities. The most pressing the finding
of these recent workshops and activities was the hindrance of new technology
adoption due to the lack of test-bed facilities for wastewater technologies. The
objective of this workshop focuses on envisioning the structure of a test bed
network and specific action plans to assist with technology transfer from
laboratory benchtops all the way through demonstration and deployment. The
participants from different fields will discuss the following major questions:
1) What will the testbeds look like? 2) How can a testbed network be built? 3)
How will different projects will enter the testing pipeline? 4) How can
environmental compliance be assured? 5) How can successful demonstrations be
translated to the market place? 6) What are the economic, social, and
environmental impacts of the projects and testbed network? EPWRRFs are an
excellent way to address "tipping points" in the food-water-energy nexus by
lowering energy usage at water treatment plants, by recovering valuable
resources required by agriculture and other industries, and by providing clean
water for both potable and non-potable uses. Enabling these new technologies to
transfer to the marketplace is key to solving water quality issues as well as
food and energy sustainability problems.