* 1624727
* Phase II I/UCRC Pennsylvania State University Site: Center for Health Organization Transformation
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Christopher DeFlitch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2023
* USD 321,500.00

Phase II I/UCRC Pennsylvania State University Site: Center for Health
Organization Transformation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. healthcare system is a
global leader in terms of scientific and clinical technology development.
However, with expenditures at 17.1% of the GDP, significant gaps in terms of
access and quality exist, along with rates of morbidity and mortality that are
substantially worse than other industrialized nations. The mission of CHOT is to
advance the knowledge and practice of transformational strategies in evidenced-
based healthcare management and clinical practice. The development of
transformative approaches will necessitate involving partners from all sectors
of healthcare including IT providers, systems solutions providers, care
providers, insurers, and employers with large healthcare coverage programs. The
realization that a "one-size-fits-all" approach to healthcare is unsustainable
has motivated the modeling, development and deployment of personalized advanced
wellness systems (PAWS). PAWS transcends traditional boundaries existing within
healthcare systems, ranging from personalized patient care models (from a
patient?s perspective), to personalized drug delivery systems (from a healthcare
decision maker's perspective). CHOT is the only industry-university cooperative
research center focused on innovations in healthcare delivery. The Center's
interdisciplinary approach will deliver integrated and broadly applicable
solutions and will enhance the education of the next generation of healthcare
policy experts, physicians, nurses, and engineers. Undergraduate and graduate
students become a part of a high-performing multidisciplinary organization that
provides an ecosystem for networking, leadership, and career placement. It is
expected that the work of the Center will result in improved health care quality
and more effective use of financial and system resources in the health system,
while providing immediate decision support to industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHOT has identified four research areas in order to meet
the needs of our members as well as the healthcare industry: macro-systems
innovation; health quality, safety, access, and efficiency; patient-centered
care and population health interventions; electronic health records and
information exchange. The underlying theme of personalized advanced wellness
systems (PAWS) is achieved through fundamental research in value-based care,
time-driven activity based costing, person-centered care, medical device design
and integration, emergency department benchmarking, community paramedicine,
telehealth and wellness, and precision medicine and precision health. A
concerted plan of seven research projects will be supported by research methods
in systems engineering. In particular, systems thinking and system dynamics
methods will be combined with simulation, data analytics, and machine learning
in order to develop models that can inform the prospective assessment of
interventions and innovations. In order to bridge gap between what is
learned/discovered and what is done in practice/ management, knowledge-to-action
(KTA) initiatives will be pursued, with a view toward technology readiness in
order to increase the impact of these projects.