* 1624705
* A Screened Lab Addition to Enhance New Ecological Research at Clemson's Baruch Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Skip Van Bloem, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 171,473.00

Coastal landscapes experience a variety of environmental stresses caused by
changes in land&amp;#8232;use, climate, storm frequency and intensity, and
saltwater intrusion. Research at the Clemson University &amp;#8232;Baruch
Institute of Coastal Ecology and Forest Science (BICEFS) focuses on
understanding how three major components of the landscape - water, vegetation,
and wildlife - are affected by and respond to man-made and natural disturbances.
Research at BICEFS spans from the heart of cities to the wildest places in the
landscape in an effort to understand how these components&amp;#8232;are
interconnected. In the last three years, BICEFS has doubled the size of its
faculty from five to ten, adding new research lines in wildlife biology,
landscape ecology, and ecosystem service economics. This project responds to
that growth by adding a 1110-square-foot screened lab to an existing lab
building to provide new, flexible workspace to support new research initiatives,
field lab activities, and training. The institute's location in coastal South
Carolina enables outside activities year-round and therefore the design provides
energy efficiency and simplicity for cleaning, maintenance, and project specific
set up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like many field stations, BICEFS operates its labs
and major equipment on a shared basis. Lab space is designated to various
activities or analyses that support major research lines, rather than to
individual investigators. As the faculty has expanded in the last two years,
common space has been repurposed for more specialized uses and upgraded or new
instrumentation has been added as part of start-up or state-funded initiatives.
As a result, the lab is limited by available workspace for staging experiments,
sample processing, instrument maintenance, etc. Various space studies have
provided recommendations for lab space on a per scientist basis that is
sufficient to support a vibrant research program and the development of
graduate&amp;#8232;and undergraduate research. To bring capacity up to these
recommendations, a 1110-ft2 screened workspace will be constructed on the side
and end of the existing laboratory building. The construction is a simple
design, with a concrete slab, screened walls, and a metal roof. Basic electrical
and plumbing hookups are included, as well as shelving, cabinets, and portable
furniture. A walk-in cooler will be installed at one end of the space to store
plant, soil, and animal samples. The flexible, all-season design facilitates
research by faculty and students and, in part, that of collaborators from 39
other institutions that use the property. The design also facilitates lab-type
classroom activities and workshops. The Institute's web site is
www.clemson.edu/baruch.