* 1624812
* Phase I I/UCRC University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Site: Center for Advanced Research in Drying (CARD)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Logan Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 748,382.00

Phase I I/UCRC University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Site: Center for
Advanced Research in Drying (CARD)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worcester Polytechnic
Institute (WPI) and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) have
jointly proposed to establish an NSF Industry University Cooperative Research
Center entitled the "Center for Advanced Research in Drying (CARD)". CARD will
be a unique center dedicated to assisting U.S. manufacturing industries to
become environmentally sustainable through targeted improvements and innovations
on the energy efficiency of various drying and relevant heat/mass transport
processes. This will assist companies in their mission to reduce costs and
improve product quality. CARD has two major thrusts. First, CARD is dedicated to
conducting innovative industrially-driven research and development, with a main
focus on energy efficient drying processes. Second, CARD will bridge the
manufacturing and technology skills gap to create the workforce of tomorrow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CARD will initially focus on the following industries:
food and agricultural processing, bulk chemicals, forestry products,
pharmaceutical, semiconductor, and textile. CARD's vision is to assemble a
diverse and complementary set of researchers and industrial partners that are
uniquely suited to tackle "grand challenge" types of problems. The confluence of
the above-mentioned industry sectors will provide unique research opportunities
leading to the generation of new knowledge and cross-pollination of ideas.
Dissemination of results will be facilitated through the Center member companies
as well as through the industry relationships that each collaborating
institution has developed (through extensive previous industry and university
project work). CARD personnel are committed to promoting cultural diversity, and
enhancing the participation of women and underrepresented students and faculty
in the Center's work. CARD will take a leadership role in promoting policies
that will enhance the nation's goal in promoting advanced manufacturing, improve
profitability of participating industries, and develop well-educated,
industrially-savvy, highly skilled next generation STEM workforce; this will be
pivotal to the US for securing its sustainable manufacturing leadership in an
increasingly competitive global marketplace.