* 1624837
* SensorSpace:  A Cutting-edge Facility for Environmental Sensor Design, Production, and Deployment for Research and Education at Flathead Lake Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* James Elser, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 413,065.00

Environmental scientists need access to sensitive and affordable environmental
sensors in order study dynamic environments in lakes, streams, forests,
grasslands, and other habitats. In the past, scientists have needed to rely on
expensive commercial instruments or to settle for lower-quality sensors that
they fabricate themselves. However, in recent years a "maker movement" has
transformed access to sophisticated design and fabrication capabilities, leading
to innovation in a variety of sectors. This grant will fund the creation of a
?maker space? for sensors at the University of Montana's Flathead Lake
Biological Station that will serve as a regional and indeed national resource
for environmental scientists and engineers to use to develop, fabricate, and
test sophisticated instruments for their research and monitoring projects. The
FLBS "Sensor Space" will also be a resource for members of the local and
regional community (including tribal members) to use, empowering "citizen
science" and inspiring students at various levels (K-12, college) to continue
studies in science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
fund the creation of a sophisticated "maker space" for environmental sensor
design, fabrication, and testing at the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS)
of the University of Montana, a world-renowned research and education center
whose mission focus is limnology, the study of inland waters
(http://flbs.umt.edu/). The proposed facility, which we call the "FLBS
SensorSpace", will advance a variety of cutting-edge research areas, such as:
novel networked sensors for high-resolution physiochemical monitoring; eDNA
detection with automated in situ genomic analyzers; stream turbulence and
bedload monitoring with acoustic profilers; single-cell genomics with
microfluidic devices; high resolution ground-truthing of passive optical
sensors; and in situ stream metabolism assessment from continuous physical-
chemical profiling, to name a few. Four core technology zones will define the
proposed FLBS SensorSpace: Manufacturing, Optics, Microfluidics, and Embedded
Systems. In addition to these four core capacities, the facility will include a
meeting space where researchers can work/teach/collaborate in a flexible manner,
a computer terminal bench, a teaching/reading area, and a technology showcase
display. This facility will advance ongoing and anticipated research at FLBS and
help make the station a regional magnet for scientists and students interested
in developing and field-testing customized sensor systems suited to their needs,
ranging from the most basic to the most advanced capabilities currently
available. The SensorSpace will also advance education, public appreciation of
science, and commercial applications. This will occur via integration of the
SensorSpace into the curricula of our summer course offerings and development of
a new course, "Environmental Sensor Design and Production"; via collaboration
with Salish Kootenai College; via programs for high school students; via efforts
to establish a freestanding Citizen Science program at FLBS; and via use of the
SensorSpace to attract environmental scientists, students, entrepreneurs, and
businesses interested in developing sensors and other instrumentation as part of
their research and development portfolio, leading to economic benefits and
intellectual property.