* 1624461
* Developing a Collaborative and Strategic Vision for Mohonk Preserve's Daniel Smiley Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Kathleen Weathers, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 24,998.00

Mohonk Preserve is New York State's largest non-profit nature preserve with
outdoor recreational and educational activities. Located 90 miles northwest of
New York City on the Shawangunk Ridge in the Mid-Hudson Valley, the Preserve
serves a regional and international set of researchers, educators, students, and
recreationalists. The Preserve's research collection includes a unique body of
materials spanning natural and cultural history, geology, archaeology,
climatology, ecology, and land-use history in the Hudson Valley. Long-term
datasets comprise one of the most extensive natural history (phenology),
weather, and lake sampling records in North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mohonk
Preserve, in partnership with The Cary Institute and the State University of New
York at New Paltz, will lead a community strategic visioning process for Mohonk
Preserve's Daniel Smiley Research Center for the benefit of science, education,
and outreach. The planning process will draw regional as well as international
scientists, students, and citizens to participate in four workshops to explore
ideas and methods by which the Preserve can build on the successes of its long-
term data monitoring and collecting program to better serve an ever-expanding
and more diverse network of research and educational stakeholders. This process
will catalyze new collaborations, syntheses, curricula, sharing of resources,
and infrastructure investments in alignment with mission and strategic goals of
Mohonk Preserve and partner institutions. The resulting expansion of research
activities will benefit researchers of all academic levels, extend the scope of
the Preserve's Daniel Smiley Research Center from local to regional and global,
provide new learning opportunities for K-12 and undergraduate students,
community recreationists, and citizen scientists, and increase outreach to
visiting recreationalists.