* 1624890
* Post-Conflict Recovery, Disaster Mitigation, and Extractive Energy Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kristin Doughty, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 136,824.00

Americans, like people around the world, increasingly seek innovative solutions
to meet the growing demand for energy, while also minimizing anthropogenic
climate impacts and reducing political conflicts at home and abroad. At the same
time, the extraction of energy resources such as natural gas can paradoxically
promote violence and lead to environmental disasters that halt the economic
development they were designed to achieve. This project uses cultural
anthropology fieldwork to explore the linkages between official efforts to
control violence and nature, how energy projects and power relate to peace. The
data and findings from this research will aid governments and businesses
pursuing energy development projects, and the civil society organizations and
academics working with them, to better understand their meanings and effects.
This knowledge and awareness may help lead to more effective policies and
projects that stop cycles of political violence, dehumanization, and
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kristin Doughty of the University of Rochester
will examine how the cultural politics of energy, risk of natural disaster, and
reconciliation are intertwined within post-conflict contexts. Rwanda's Lake Kivu
provides a uniquely productive site for this study because of its distinct
chemical composition and its location in a place recovering from genocide. Over
the past decade, while rebuilding the country in the wake of the 1994 genocide,
the Rwandan government has developed contracts to build industrial-scale gas-
fueled power projects to extract methane from Lake Kivu. The methane extraction
project has two stated aims: first, to reduce dangerous levels of unstable
gasses dissolved in the lake and thus prevent it from an unpredictable, and
deadly, explosion; and second, to provide much-needed power to fuel development
for the region and country. The PI, who has conducted research in Rwanda since
2002, will conduct to study how people living alongside the lake experience the
transformations brought about by the gas extraction project. Working closely
with the Rwandan Lake Kivu Monitoring Program, the PI will collect data through
participant observation, interviews, life histories, and document analysis. This
research project aims to improve scientific understandings of this innovative
methane extraction project. This project can help improve the effectiveness of
this and other energy extraction projects and reduce their unintended negative
impacts by providing long-term, empirically rich, qualitative, historicized
research that captures the diverse perspectives of the people
affected.&lt;br/&gt;