* 1624825
* I/UCRC: UTSA Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Site Addition to the iPerform Center for Assistive Technologies to Enhance Human Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* John Quarles, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Today there exists a mass consumer demand and a strong industrial need for
Assistive Technology (AT) that is portable and mobile and that will enhance
human performance for healthy people as well as those with chronic health and
mobility difficulties. The current I/UCRC iPerform Center for Assistive
Technologies to Enhance Human Performance has minimally targeted this much
needed focus area in AT. The proposed University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA)
site with its long established collaboration with UT Health Science Center SA
(UTHSCSA), the support of the Military Health Institute and San Antonio's
burgeoning entrepreneurial base aims to add significant value to the existing
center. The new center based at UTSA and partnered with UTHSCSA will bring
together unique expertise from computer science, engineering and health fields
that better inform the development and testing of a new generation of mobile
assistive technologies driven by a comprehensive understanding of human health
and user needs and informed by technological constraints as well as
possibilities. The UTSA center site will promote the development of AT research
infrastructure in industry, health facilities, research centers and academia. It
will address real-world problems, generate new types of jobs, products and
services. It will impact all areas where a human has the potential to improve.
The center site will also play an important role in training of scientists and
engineers, and health professionals facilitating transfer of technology to the
private and government sectors and address compelling real world problems that
increase industry and individual productivity, improve human health, lower costs
and span both the research and outreach needs of its members.

Efforts will be made to increase diversity in the center. UTSA is a minority-
serving institution with a large population of minority (57% Hispanic) students.
UTSA has a strong history of involving the participation of underrepresented
groups in research efforts. The PIs are devoted to attracting and mentoring
female and underrepresented minority students in interdisciplinary projects,
honors thesis research, and internships at the interface of health sciences and
technology. PI Simmonds is female faculty. Moreover, both PI Quarles and PI
Simmonds have significant disabilities that give them unique perspectives on
this research area and the needs of the end users. The project increases the
diversity of learning perspectives by bringing together faculty, researchers,
clinicians, and students from different institutions and disciplines. It offers
new opportunities to engage scientists with cultural diversity in joint efforts
that infuse teaching and learning in a compelling application.



The primary objective of this planning grant is to attract and bring together
potential industrial partners, research centers and service organizations that
could benefit from mobile AT to join the proposed UTSA site of the existing
I/UCRC iPerform center with a special emphasis on the military health sector,
which has a large presence in San Antonio. At the meeting, the team will discuss
the integration with current center policies, roles of all participants, and
plans to attract new members. During the planning phase, UTSA (lead institution)
and UTHSCSA (subcontracted institution) will collectively organize a meeting
that includes all entities that expressed interest in joining as members, as
well as additional companies that the team did not have time to contact about
the center but deal with ATs.

Specifically, the UTSA site of the iPerform center aims to (a) attract support
towards the commercialization of mobile AT products and (b) promote innovation
in academia that is driven by human health needs and has industrial scalability.
In work environments, the site's proposed technology aims to improve work
efficiency, identify safety risks, reduce the learning curve and improve the
outcomes of worker training, especially health professional training, through
simulations and improve resource allocation, creativity and communication. In
healthcare environments, the site will develop mobile tools that can enhance
sensory, motor and cognitive capabilities, improve training, enable remote
monitoring, and management, predict risk for those with chronic health problems
(e.g., the elderly who live alone), monitor sleep and activity disorders, create
novel robotic assistants, enable real-time analysis of patient data, and develop
and test novel augmented and virtual reality therapies.