* 1624707
* Construction of Research Aviaries at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Barney Schlinger, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 114,427.00

Tropical manakins are an extraordinary group of birds with numerous
physiological and anatomical adaptations that underlie their magnificent social
systems and courtship routines. Whereas previous study of these birds has been
performed on wild populations, aviaries built at the Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute (STRI) in Gamboa Panama will be used to maintain birds in
captivity under semi-natural (surrounded by forest) conditions. Some birds
housed in these aviaries will be used for breeding purposes to enable collection
and study of manakin embryos and hatchlings. Other birds will be used for long-
term study of the development of behavior, for hormonal or behavioral
manipulations, for physiological measures using miniaturized telemetry, for
hybridization studies and for tissue collection from birds of known lineage and
behavioral and physiological condition. Importantly, the study of manakins is
now in an excellent position to progress rapidly as a very high quality genomic
sequence is now available for the golden-collared manakin (Manacus vitellinus)
of Panama, and genomes have recently been completed for two other genera. These
resources create excellent potential for using genetic resources to understand
how these behavioral, physiological and morphological phenotypes develop.

Recently, a cohort of manakin biologists was awarded a NSF Research Coordination
Network (RCN) grant to stimulate genome-enabled, multidisciplinary study of this
bird group. The research objectives of this group, as well as that of many other
avian biologists, will be able to progress more rapidly by the study of birds in
these semi-natural captive conditions. In addition, the presence of STRI
scientists as well as the large number of visiting scientists that visit STRI in
Gamboa will encourage collaboration and the creation of new scientific endeavors
with application to other vertebrates and even humans. Moreover, video coverage
of the birds in the aviaries will be made available to the public for teaching
purposes. For more information please visit http://www.stri.si.edu/.