* 1624191
* RCN-UBE: 3dNaturalists bioblitzes, citizen science, and undergraduate learning
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2023
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 596,098.00

This RCN-UBE project seeks to bring together scholars and practitioners to
explore big data initiatives at the intersections between citizen science,
minority participation, student learning and protected areas management. The
network will have three main activities: (1) interdisciplinary workshops that
bring together practitioners, academics, agency managers and students; (2)
student internships that provide introductory research experience for students
using citizen science data and spatial and temporal datasets; and (3)
collaborative assessments of student learning experiences. The network will
focus on citizen science data collected for biodiversity questions--specifically
species identification, species occurrence, and habitat parameters. The bioblitz
activities, large public events focused on a 24 hour survey of biological
diversity, are tools that engage citizens in science using inventories,
smartphone apps, and other approaches. The addition of science parameters to the
citizen science tool coupled with team learning activities engages students in
both science and discovery. While an increasing number of studies focus on
helping students decipher science, most assessment tools only indirectly measure
student engagement and leadership in the sciences. The intellectual merit of
this project is that it addresses the growing use of citizen science tools in
the field and explores the potential for citizen science activities as new
innovative approaches to engage underrepresented minority students in STEM
especially using activities outside of the classroom and in the context of local
communities. It is envisaged that these assessments will have both summative and
formative applications to broadening participation in the environmental
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include the
faculty who come from a variety of biology and social science sub-disciplines at
different career levels and from a wide range of institutions. In addition, the
participating students come from many different types of institutions including
community colleges, minority serving institutions and undergraduate
institutions. Both faculty and students reflect the growing diversity of the
United States. Underrepresented minorities and especially students interested in
connections to communities are selected as a part of a team that participates in
the bioblitzes. Students act as both research assistants and citizen sciences
during the bioblitz so they both learn the science and grow into leadership. As
a key outcome, the common standards and assessments will be used across multiple
institutions and disciplines of biology to determine how discovery experiences
using citizen science and informal settings outside the classroom can engage
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).