* 1624877
* EAR-PF Whole-stream metabolism dependence on particulate organic carbon and microbes from urban point sources
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Drummond, Drummond                Jennifer       D
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2018
* USD 184,000.00

Dr. Jennifer Drummond has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at the Center for Advance Studies in
Blanes, Spain, and the Desert Research Institute in Reno, NV. The overall aim of
the project is to examine how particulate organic carbon and microbes from
wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) effluents influence the metabolism of
recipient streams. This work will improve the understanding of the impacts of
environmental alterations derived from urban activity on stream ecosystem
functioning. The information can be used to guide management and policy
decisions related to balancing human and environmental needs for sustainable
water resources. The project addresses a worldwide issue of concern and the
research results will be shared with multiple audiences in Spain, Europe, and
the United States. The education plan will consist of contributions to a massive
open on-line course and participation in MOVILAB. The MOVILAB travels to
different villages and gives local kids and adults the opportunity to have
hands-on experience while learning about current environmental topics.

The research plan will include experimental, field and laboratory work together
with computational development and analysis. The project will result in a unique
data set on the mechanisms underlying (i) transport and retention behavior of
particulate organic carbon (POC) and microbes in urban channels and (ii) how
this affects the metabolism of WWTP-influenced stream ecosystems. Furthermore, a
computational model will be developed that combines transport and retention of
solutes, POC, and microbes with the metabolic activity of the stream. This model
can be used to link scales of solute and particle retention and examine the
controlling mechanism of in-stream metabolism.

This award was supported with funding from the Office of International Science &
Engineering.