* 1624750
* The importance of confidence in predicting labor market outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Katherine Coffman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2016
* USD 139,934.00

Despite great progress over the last half century, there continue to be large
gender differences in labor market outcomes. On average, women earn
approximately 78 cents for every dollar earned by men (Goldin 2015).
Professional leaders continue to be overwhelmingly male: among S&P 500 firms,
4.2% of CEOs are female, and women make up only 19.2% of corporate board members
(Catalyst 2015a). And, in academia, there continues to be evidence for a leaky
pipeline. Half of all tenure-track positions but only 37.5% of tenured positions
in the United States in 2013 were held by women (Catalyst 2015b). Within
economics, women make up 30% of assistant professors, 23.5% of associate
professors, and just 12.1% of full professors (CSWEP 2014). Other STEM
disciplines show similar patterns. Developing effective policy interventions
demands that we understand more about what drives these patterns. Recent
research in experimental economics has indicated that gender differences in
preferences, in particular in risk preferences and willingness to compete, have
important predictive power for labor market outcomes including occupational
choice and earnings. The current project studies gender differences in
preferences and their interaction with important labor market institutions. This
project consists of two laboratory experiments. In the first study, the PI
explores an under-studied but important labor market decision: willingness to
put oneself forward for promotion. She designs a careful laboratory experiment
aimed at understanding which features of the labor market environment impact
men's and women's willingness to apply for more challenging but higher return
work. In the second study, she digs more deeply into the relationship between
gender stereotypes and self-confidence, attempting to understand how
stereotypical beliefs impact an individual?s confidence in her own ability and
how this confidence predicts payoff-relevant decisions. These studies will
contribute to a growing literature documenting the importance of gender
differences in preferences in predicting labor market outcomes and earnings.
These studies both follow the approach of using the controlled environment of
the laboratory to isolate a gender difference in the domain of interest and to
distinguish between competing explanations for the patterns we observe. Both
projects consist of novel experimental frameworks that may be valuable to other
researchers; in particular, the adaptable framework she proposes for
understanding the decision to apply for promotion lends itself to studying a
broader set of workplace-related questions in the future.