* 1624317
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Frontline Work Identifies and Categorizes Human Trafficking
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Hannah Britton, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 29,607.00

This project explores how frontline workers identify and assist vulnerable,
exploited, andtrafficked persons in the U.S. As anti-trafficking efforts and
legislation increase, service providers increasingly face a growing client base
that includes trafficked persons. The medical, legal, law enforcement, and
social service sectors must disseminate services while also navigating competing
understandings of human trafficking. In particular, human trafficking is
frequently mobilized in binaries: victims or criminals, survivors or
perpetrators, moral or immoral. This project seeks to understand how service
providers use these frames -- specifically, concepts of "deserving" or
"undeserving" trafficked persons -- to navigate their workloads and interact
with their clients. While much scholarship has focused on both the importance of
frontline workers and domestic human trafficking efforts, little has been done
to bring these two fields together.

This project links street-level bureaucracy theory to the study of human
trafficking in Midwestern and rural communities, honing in on the role of
frontline workers in anti-trafficking efforts. In order to address the unique
perspectives of service providers, this project uses both surveys and semi-
structured interviews. Surveys will provide the scope of how anti-trafficking
efforts manifest, while semi-structured interviews provide a broader space for
service providers? own narratives of their work.