* 1624120
* SBP: Gender Representation in Political Science Graduate Training
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Heidi Hardt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 62,733.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articles and books authored by female
scholars remain underrepresented in the syllabi of graduate coursework despite
an increase in women's participation in the sciences. In political science,
recent studies have demonstrated that scholars cite women less frequently than
men in publications. Citations matter because they shape hiring and promotion
decisions. Given that the citation gap may begin in graduate coursework, the PIs
investigate gender representation in the domain of graduate training. What
graduate students are required to read shapes their understanding of who are the
leading scholars and what scholarship is considered important. By increasing
public awareness of women's representation in graduate training, this project
will lead to more scholars considering gender diversity as they prepare their
syllabi. The project will produce a database and software that scholars can use
to diversify their syllabi. The project aims to have a long-term impact on
gender equality in the sciences. Increasing understanding of women scholars'
representation in graduate training cultivates an inclusive science and
engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the representation of
male and female scholars in the training of political science doctoral students.
Graduate syllabi and comprehensive exam reading lists will be collected in order
to establish an original, publicly-available database of works assigned to
political science doctoral students from across the subfields of political
science. The database will be used to examine two questions: (1) To what extent
are female scholars represented in assigned works? (2) What factors affect
variation in gender representation in the works that faculty and graduate
programs assign?. Factors hypothesized to affect rates of assigning female
authors include instructor gender, age, race/ethnicity, national origin, sexual
orientation, academic rank and years in the profession. The project will also
produce free, open-source software to convert syllabi text into a CSV formatted
list and to code the genders of authors.