* 1624731
* I/UCRC: Center for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Madhavan Swaminathan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

The semiconductor industry is perennially one of America's top exporters.
Worldwide semiconductor &lt;br/&gt;sales for 2014 reached $335.8 billion, and
the number of U.S. jobs in this sector was estimated to be &lt;br/&gt;around
250,000 in 2013. More broadly, the U.S. tech industry, which depends on
semiconductor &lt;br/&gt;innovation to spur new products and applications, is
itself estimated to represent no less than 5.7% of the &lt;br/&gt;entire U.S.
private sector workforce (at nearly 6.5 million jobs), and with a tech industry
payroll of $654 &lt;br/&gt;billion in 2014, it accounted for over 11% of all
U.S. private sector payroll. Yet despite its success, the &lt;br/&gt;industry
must continue to innovate if the U.S. is to retain global leadership in this
highly competitive area. &lt;br/&gt;The complexity of modern microelectronic
products necessitates the use of computer tools to formulate &lt;br/&gt;and
verify product designs prior to manufacturing. When a product doesn't operate as
intended or suffers &lt;br/&gt;early failures, this can often be attributed to
inadequacy of the models used during the design process. In &lt;br/&gt;fact, the
shortcomings of existing approaches for system component modeling have become a
serious &lt;br/&gt;impediment to continued innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML) proposes to
create &lt;br/&gt;machine-learning algorithms to derive models used for
electronic design automation with the objective of &lt;br/&gt;enabling fast,
accurate design of microelectronic circuits and systems. Success will make it
much easier &lt;br/&gt;and cheaper to optimize a system design, allowing the
industry to produce lower-power and lower-cost &lt;br/&gt;electronic systems
without sacrificing functionality. The eventual result will be significant
growth in &lt;br/&gt;capabilities that will drive innovation throughout the
electronics industry, leading to new devices and &lt;br/&gt;applications,
continued entrepreneurial leadership, and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While achieving those goals, CAEML will also focus
on diversifying the undergraduate engineering &lt;br/&gt;student body and
improving the undergraduate experience. Students from groups traditionally
&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented in engineering will be targeted for recruitment as
undergraduate research assistants. &lt;br/&gt;Member companies will provide
internships and mentors for participating students, and the diverse
&lt;br/&gt;graduate and undergraduate student researchers in CAEML will receive
hands-on multidisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;education. CAEML will also participate in
all three site universities' existing avenues for student and &lt;br/&gt;faculty
engagement with local youth. In particular, university-based summer camps are a
tried and tested &lt;br/&gt;method of making high-school students familiar with
and comfortable on our campuses. The HOT DAYS &lt;br/&gt;@ Georgia Tech
(https://www.ece.gatech.edu/outreach/hot-days) camp is a week-long summer
program &lt;br/&gt;designed to introduce high-school students to electrical and
computer engineering concepts through &lt;br/&gt;various half-day modules
including building a computer, working with robots, using music synthesis
&lt;br/&gt;technology, building simple digital logic circuits and constructing a
speaker from common household &lt;br/&gt;items. Additional modules covering
CAEML research areas will be developed and incorporated into the
&lt;br/&gt;camp's schedule. CAEML undergraduate and graduate students can serve
as counselors or instructors &lt;br/&gt;for camps. Georgia Tech's Center for
Education Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing &lt;br/&gt;(CEISMC)
hosts a variety of camps and programs for K-12 teachers, as well as students.
CAEML faculty &lt;br/&gt;at Georgia Tech will participate in that effort as well
as the NSF-funded Summer Teacher Experience in &lt;br/&gt;Packaging, Utilizing
Physics (STEP-UP) Program (https://www.ece.gatech.edu/outreach/step-
up-&lt;br/&gt;program), which is an eight-week research experience for metro
Atlanta high-school physics
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced
Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML) will create
machine-&lt;br/&gt;learning algorithms to derive models used for electronic
design automation, with the objective of enabling &lt;br/&gt;fast, accurate
design of microelectronic circuits and systems. The electronics industry's
continued ability &lt;br/&gt;to innovate requires the creation of optimization
methodologies that result in low-power integrated &lt;br/&gt;systems that meet
performance specifications, despite being composed of components whose
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics exhibit variability and that operate in different
physical or signal domains. Today, &lt;br/&gt;shortcomings in accuracy and
comprehensiveness of component-level behavioral models impede the
&lt;br/&gt;advancement of computer-aided electronic system design optimization.
The model accuracy also impacts &lt;br/&gt;system verification. Ultimately, the
proper functionality of an electronic system is verified through testing
&lt;br/&gt;of a representative sample. However, modern electronic systems are so
complex that it is unthinkable to &lt;br/&gt;bring one to the manufacturing
stage without first verifying its operation using simulation. Today,
&lt;br/&gt;simulation generally does not ensure that an integrated circuit or
electronic system will pass qualification &lt;br/&gt;testing the first time, and
failures are often attributed to insufficiency of the simulation models. With an
&lt;br/&gt;improved modeling capability, one could achieve better design
efficiency, and also perform design &lt;br/&gt;optimization. For system
simulation, behavioral models of the components' terminal responses are
&lt;br/&gt;desired for both computational tractability and protection of
intellectual property. Despite many years of &lt;br/&gt;significant effort by
the electronic design automation community, there is not a general, systematic
&lt;br/&gt;method to generate accurate and comprehensive behavioral models, in
part because of the nonlinear, &lt;br/&gt;complex, and multi-port nature of the
components being modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML will pioneer the use of
machine-learning methods to extract behavioral models of electronic
&lt;br/&gt;components and subsystems from simulation waveforms and/or
measurement data. The Center will make &lt;br/&gt;2 primary contributions to the
field of machine learning: it will demonstrate the application of machine
&lt;br/&gt;learning to electronics modeling, and develop the entire machine-
learning pipeline. Historically, machine-&lt;br/&gt;learning theorists have
focused on the model learning and evaluation tasks, but CAEML will focus on
&lt;br/&gt;end-to-end performance of the pipeline, including data acquisition,
selection and filtering, as well as cost &lt;br/&gt;function specification.
CAEML will develop a methodology to use prior knowledge, i.e., physical
&lt;br/&gt;constraints and the domain knowledge provided by designers, to speed
up the learning process. Novel &lt;br/&gt;methods of incorporating component
variability, including that due to semiconductor process variations,
&lt;br/&gt;will be developed. The intended end-users are electronic design
automation (EDA) tool developers, IC &lt;br/&gt;design houses, and system design
and manufacturing companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML consists of 3 sites:
Illinois, Georgia Tech, and NC State. The scope of research at each site
&lt;br/&gt;encompasses both algorithm development and the application of the
derived models to a variety of IC &lt;br/&gt;and system design tasks.
Investigators at all 3 university sites have unique skills and expertise while
&lt;br/&gt;sharing interests in electronic design automation, IC design, system-
level signal integrity, and power &lt;br/&gt;distribution. To leverage the
cross-campus expertise, many of the Center's proposed projects involve
&lt;br/&gt;investigators from more than one site. The Georgia Tech investigators
have special expertise in &lt;br/&gt;advanced IC packaging, power integrity,
multi-physics simulation, computational electromagnetics, neural
&lt;br/&gt;networks, optimization and system integration. All three sites have
strong research records in the fields of &lt;br/&gt;signal integrity analysis
and electronic design automation. Excellent computational resources are
&lt;br/&gt;available at Georgia Tech for the proposed work including extensive
measurement and fabrication &lt;br/&gt;facilities.