* 1624414
* Effects of Saharan Dust on the African Easterly Jet-African Easterly Wave System
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Shu-Hua Chen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,580.00

North Africa is home to the African easterly jet, a current of strong easterly
winds located in the lower atmosphere. The African easterly jet often gives
birth to weather systems known as African easterly waves. Together the jet and
the waves form a complex system whose influence on weather can extend to the
United States. That influence often manifests as tropical cyclones, whose
genesis has been linked to the easterly waves. Consequently, to understand the
connection between the weather over North Africa and the development of tropical
cyclones, it is important to understand the processes that affect the African
easterly jet&amp;#8210;African easterly wave system. Of those processes, the
heating effects of Saharan dust storms are among the least understood, yet
potentially among the most important. The central objective of this proposal is
to advance understanding of the effects of Saharan dust storms on the intra-
seasonal and inter-annual variability of the African easterly
jet&amp;#8210;African easterly wave system. To achieve this objective, a unified
work plan is developed that combines numerical experiments, observational
analysis, and model verification. To guide the numerical experiments and to aid
in the interpretation of the results, a theoretical framework will be developed
that exposes the dust-modified physics operating within the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merits of the proposed research include:
understanding the pathways that communicate the effects of Saharan dust to the
African easterly jet&amp;#8210;African easterly wave system; providing a
physical basis for explaining how Saharan dust affects the temporal variability
of the system; and evaluating the importance of Saharan dust to the life cycles
of the easterly waves. The broader impacts of the proposed research include:
additional understanding of how Saharan dust affects the circulation over North
Africa, which will aid the scientific community?s efforts to improve weather
forecasts for the region; improved representation of the dust-modified system,
which will benefit future studies that seek to advance understanding and improve
forecasting of tropical cyclones over the Eastern Atlantic Ocean; development of
a theoretical framework for understanding the dust-modified circulation, which
can be used as an interpretive tool for numerical modeling and observational
studies of the weather over North Africa; and the scientific training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the discipline of atmospheric sciences.