* 1624346
* Political Instability and Language Endangerment
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Shobhana Chelliah, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2020
* USD 42,515.00

Political instability and violence create the environment for language loss and
resulting social instability. Establishing the intersecting causes and
consequences of political and social instability as tied to language is of
interest to national security. The purpose of the Political Instability and
Language Endangerment Conference is to develop a thorough understanding of how
political instability and violence break apart communities and erode their
ability to pass down their written and spoken word. This interdisciplinary
conference will bring together experts from political science, linguistics and
other fields to develop a global and comprehensive account of the intersection
of politics and language endangerment. Broader impacts include the engagement of
undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom are first generation and
themselves from underrepresented groups, by providing networking and co-
authoring opportunities to mentor students and to provide training that will be
invaluable in both private and public sector work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Led by
an interdisciplinary team of linguists and political scientists from the
University of North Texas, the Political Instability and Language Endangerment
Conference will integrate knowledge from both disciplines and will produce new
strategies for interdisciplinary research. The dominant paradigm for
understanding the causes of language endangerment takes into consideration local
social and economic factors. The potential for a more comprehensive
understanding is possible through the perspective of political science which
takes into account the role of violence, power and resources in societies and
across institutions of governance. In order to stimulate research utilizing this
novel interdisciplinary perspective, conference participants will explore (1)
how government policy, instability due to war and other forms of conflict lead
to language endangerment; (2) how instability due to economically forced
immigration contributes to language endangerment; and (3) how political conflict
due to language endangerment and national language policies can lead to
political protest, unrest and violence. The resulting white paper and edited
volume will be invaluable resources for practitioners, academics, and most
importantly, the affected communities to develop strategies for language
preservation. A follow-up conference envisioned for the Smithsonian Institution
will help raise greater public awareness of this phenomenon.