* 1624654
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nucleic Acid Analyzer for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Melanie Griffin, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2019
* USD 65,063.00

An award is made to Kennesaw State University (KSU) to fund an electrophoretic
nucleic acids analyzer and accessories for the use in multidisciplinary research
and research training. Electrophoresis is the primary means of analyzing nucleic
acids, separating nucleic acids based on their size and, to a lesser extent,
conformation. Through an electrophoretic analysis, critical qualitative and
quantitative information regarding the composition of a nucleic acid sample can
be obtained. The nucleic acid analyzer will be part of the existing massively
parallel / next generation sequencing facility, including an Ion Torrent
Personal Genome Machine semiconductor sequencer (PI Van Dyke), thereby
significantly expanding facility capabilities. Primary benefits will be in
research, including projects involving undergraduate and graduate (Master of
Science in Integrative Biology, Master of Science in Chemical Sciences)
students. Additionally, programs that enhance research access to under-
represented populations, including KSU's NIH-funded Peach State Bridges to the
Doctorate and NSF-funded Chemistry and Biochemistry Summer Undergraduate
Research Experiences programs, will benefit from this instrumentation.
Involvement of the facility with course curricula is also planned, especially
given the increasing importance of next-generation sequencing and transcriptome
analysis in both health-related and research fields. Hands-on training in the
technology used for contemporary nucleic acid sample quality control will better
prepare KSU trainees for a broad range of STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
electrophoretic nucleic acids analyzer provides automated sample processing and
scalable throughput for a variety of DNA and RNA quality control applications.
For example, they are routinely used to determine the integrity of genomic DNA
samples before their use in involved and costly procedures such as next
generation sequencing, microarrays, and quantitative PCR. The nucleic acids
analyzer will be used initially by a core group of five laboratories at KSU and
their collaborators. Dr. Michael Van Dyke investigates orphan transcriptional
regulators in a variety of organisms, including E. coli and Thermus
thermophilus. Dr. Martin Hudson studies the role of heparan sulfate
proteoglycans and anosmin-like proteins in nervous system development, using C.
elegans and stem cell models of nervous system differentiation. Dr. Joel McNeal
investigates photosynthetic gene evolution, host/parasite interactions, and
microbial endophytes in the parasitic plant genus Cuscuta. Dr. Melanie Griffin
studies the global targets of the leucine response protein in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Dr. Marcus Davis explores the developmental mechanisms that pattern
vertebrate appendages (fins and limbs) and the evolution of HOX gene regulation.
Nucleic acids analysis will provide their materials, ranging from
combinatorially selected fusion libraries to developmental stage-selected RNAs,
with essential quality control assessments, thereby increasing the likelihood of
success in their research and teaching endeavors.