* 1624600
* FSML: Improvements to the Capacity of the Kewalo Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Robert Richmond, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,210.00

The Kewalo Marine Laboratory (KML) is one of only three marine research
facilities in the state of Hawaii, which uses modern molecular techniques along
with other laboratory and field-based research to understand basic principles of
marine biodiversity, resilience and ecosystem responses. Faculty, postdoctoral
associates, undergraduate and graduate students and visitors are all involved in
research of fundamental importance and applied value for academic,
environmental, biomedical and conservation science. Research at the Kewalo
Marine Laboratory uses marine organisms to study a variety of biological
phenomena and processes that range from molecules to ecosystems. The common
thread in all KML research programs is the important use of molecular techniques
that require specific instrumentation to detect, quantify, and manipulate small
quantities of rare and precious biomaterials from organisms maintained in a high
quality flow through sea water system. New and upgraded equipment and
instrumentation will help KML users keep pace with ever-evolving molecular
techniques and associated research opportunities through access to new multi-
user instruments and an upgraded flowing seawater system and will enhance and
expand research and training capabilities at KML. The instruments will allow
students and trainees to employ cutting edge technologies to address fundamental
problems in cellular, developmental, evolutionary, and environmental biology of
the unique Hawaiian marine biodiversity. The improvements will also support
training programs for Native Hawaiian and Pacific Island students who are highly
under-represented in the STEM disciplines.

Marine laboratories provide unprecedented access to a diversity of organisms and
associated research opportunities unavailable at most research universities. At
the Kewalo Marine Laboratory, uniquely situated adjacent to living coral reefs
near downtown Honolulu, researchers and their trainees use modern cellular and
molecular approaches to investigate a wide variety of basic biological phenomena
using a full range of marine organisms, including molluscs, annelids, flatworms,
reef corals and marine microbes. The new instruments and seawater facilities
will not only facilitate research by the resident researchers of KML (and their
diverse undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows), but will
bolster the active Visiting Scientist program. Improvements will be used to
support both research and training efforts, allowing a diverse group of students
to gain a better understanding of key biological processes that will help in the
preservation of unique local and regional marine ecosystems. Additional details
on the facility, and associated research and training programs can be found on
the KML website: http://www.kewalo.hawaii.edu/index.php