* 1624420
* SusChEM: Solubility of Iron Oxides and Gold in Acidic Hydrothermal Brines: Applications to the Origin of Iron Oxide Copper-gold Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Christopher Gammons,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 115,905.00

As the world's population continues to expand and become increasingly
industrialized, there will be a steady if not increasing need to discover new
mineral deposits to provide the raw commodities that humans have come to depend
on. In the case of gold, several decades of aggressive exploration by the mining
industry in the 1970s and 1980s led to a global boom in the discovery of
economically mineable gold deposits. However, the rate of discovery of new gold
deposits has greatly declined in the past 10 years, partly because of a downturn
in the industry, and partly because most of the deposits that are near surface
and that fit conventional exploration models have already been discovered. This
project will investigate the causative origins of a newly recognized class of
hydrothermal gold deposits, referred to as 'iron oxide copper gold' (IOCG)
deposits, that has the potential to generate a new cycle of exploration and
discovery in the metal mining industry. Despite the fact that the IOCG class
includes one of the largest metal deposits in the world - Olympic Dam, Australia
- there is no consensus as to how - in a geologic, geochemical, petrologic, or
plate tectonic sense - these deposits form. Part of the reason for this lack of
consensus is a gap in our understanding at a fundamental, thermodynamic level of
how metals such as iron, gold, and copper dissolve and precipitate in high
temperature hydrothermal fluids. This project will help fill in this knowledge
gap by performing several sets of hydrothermal experiments under controlled
laboratory conditions. This type of study will have direct benefits to the
mining industry and to society in general, which demands a steady supply of
these mineral commodities. As for any scientific study that generates new, high-
quality thermodynamic data, the results will also be useful to scientists in
other disciplines to further understand the processes that have shaped the
ancient and present-day Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most researchers agree that
the fluids that form IOCG deposits were hot, saline brines that were unusually
oxidized: beyond this the ore deposit models diverge. This project will examine
the solubility of iron oxide and gold in acidic, oxidized, saline brines at
temperatures of 100 to 350 degrees C, and at oxidation states that are buffered
near the aqueous ferric (Fe3+)/ferrous (Fe2+) boundary. The project will
generate new thermodynamic data on the stability of aqueous ferric-, ferrous-,
and gold-chloride complexes. The new data will be used to develop more accurate
geochemical models for how IOCG deposits (and other types of Au-Cu-Fe deposits)
form.