* 1624632
* I/UCRC: University of Michigan Planning Grant:   I/UCRC for the Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Adda Athanasopoulos-Zekkos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) or "drones" have captured our attention as a
means to collect aerial sensor data and carry small payloads. Agriculture,
newsgathering, and small package delivery are some of the numerous emerging
applications. Numerous research challenges in safety, airspace integration, and
complex or large-scale deployments remain. The Center for UAS (C-UAS) is an NSF-
supported I/UCRC supporting a wide range of research topics in UAS sensing and
control, vehicle and payload management, and multi-vehicle cooperation. C-UAS
(https://c-uas.byu.edu/) has recently grown to include Virginia Tech, and the
University of Michigan (UM) was recently invited by the C-UAS team to become a
new C-UAS university site pending NSF approval. This planning grant will help
the University of Michigan secure industrial partners and plan projects that
both complement and extend the C-UAS team and ongoing C-UAS projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a new site for an existing I/UCRC, the
University of Michigan will adopt policies, guidelines, and an organizational
structure consistent with C-UAS and UM practices. UM site operational procedures
and personnel have been defined. A set of possible projects are summarized with
connection to other C-UAS projects and industry members, twelve of which have
provided letters of interest for this planning grant proposal. Education,
outreach, and involvement of underrepresented groups are keys to success that
complement research project activity. The planning grant will be used to support
travel by the UM team to key companies and a 1.5 day UM site planning workshop
hosted at UM. A comprehensive report on the workshop and industry visits will be
prepared and shared with C-UAS, potential and committed industry partners,
workshop attendees, and NSF. Throughout the site planning effort, the UM site
team will maintain close contact with C-UAS leadership to ensure UM will be an
effective new university site.