* 1624398
* Technological Origins: Environmental and Behavioral Context of the Earliest Tool Users
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 306,797.00

This award supports a three-year paleoanthropological investigation to expand
our understanding of hominin behavior and ecology. Specifically, the
investigators will analyze evidence of early hominin stone tool use, which is
thought to have been a critical behavioral adaptation leading to the appearance
of our own genus, Homo. The investigators have identified geological sediments
dating from 3.4-2.6 million years ago that have abundant well-preserved fossils
and may include indications of the production and use of chipped and pounded
stone tools. The research will involve fieldwork and the use of novel techniques
for analyzing stone artifacts as well as bones with evidence of butchery. In
addition to advancing our knowledge about the origins of our own species, the
project will support student training and community science outreach. Activities
will include coordinating research activities with a paleoanthropological field
school, inclusion of researchers and students from underrepresented groups in
STEM fields, and graduate student Public Understanding of Science internships
and outreach efforts at the Smithsonian Institution. The paleontological data
derived from this project will become part of the Turkana Paleontology Database,
an effort initially funded by NSF that makes paleontological data publicly
available through the Evolution of Terrestrial Ecosystems Program and the
National Museums of Kenya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are unique in their
ability to use technology to adapt to diverse ecological scenarios. Yet, the
origins of our technological prowess and the ways in which human technological
behavior impacted dietary ecology in our hominin ancestors are not fully
understood. The investigators will conduct three field seasons of
paleoanthropological research at the Koobi Fora Formation in the Turkana Basin
of Kenya. The research will involve intensive fieldwork and analyses of stone
artifacts, bones with evidence of butchery, and tools that have been used for
percussive activities. The investigators have developed new methodologies that
can identify artifacts (pounding tools) and cut marked bones even in low-density
archeological contexts. The team will also carry out high-resolution
stratigraphically delimited surveys to collect paleontological, paleobotanical,
and geochemical contextual data. This research has direct impacts on our
understanding of how and when our hominin ancestors began to use tools to
enhance their fitness and will help to place the earliest stone tool users in a
broader climatic context of Pliocene eastern Africa.