* 1624077
* Constructing a model from the spreading centers to backarc: Resolving geophysical characteristics of segmentation in Cascadia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Haiying Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,469.00

Subduction plays a major role in driving plate tectonics on Earth and controls
many fundamental tectonic processes. Subduction zones are the source of many
great earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, and landslides, all of which
have significant impacts on natural systems and society. One intriguing
characteristic of subduction zones worldwide is the presence of along-strike
variation (segmentation) in a wide variety of properties and processes.
Understanding along-strike variation is key to our understanding of many
subduction/arc processes, such as magmatism and earthquake hazards. The Cascadia
subduction zone in the Pacific Northwest exhibits along-strike variation in many
aspects, spanning from the spreading center to the backarc. A superb data set is
available with the deployments of the EarthScope Transportable Array, the
Cascadia Initiative Amphibious Array, and many flexible arrays. This project
aims to provide constraints on the relationships between structure of the
incoming plate and the along-strike variation of the subducted slab, mantle
wedge, and lithospheric base by generating a high-resolution three-dimensional
velocity model for the entire Cascadia subduction zone. High-resolution
characterization of the crust structure is also critical to refine seismic
hazard assessment in the Pacific Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic
tomography provides a powerful way to delineate the three dimensionality of
subduction-related processe and to constrain the relations among the various
modes of segmentation. Recent seismic studies image discrete low-velocity
volumes along the forearc at shallow depths, beneath the oceanic Moho around the
trench, and beneath the back-arc within the mantle, indicating structural
correlations from offshore to onshore. I will implement a joint 3D full-wave
simulation and inversion of ambient noise and regional earthquake arrivals,
which will provide the highest possible resolution for the Juan de Fuca and
Gorda plates prior to and after subduction. Specifically, this proposal will
address the following scientific questions: (1) What are the geometry and
properties of the Juan de Fuca and Gorda plates prior to and after subduction?
What is the role of the incoming oceanic plate(s) on the segmentation? (2) What
structural correlations can be imaged from the spreading centers to the backarc
that may give insight to the segmentation? What are the resolvable dimensions of
the segmented features from the crust to the upper mantle? Understanding of
subduction-related segmentation obtained in this study will provide a key
perspective that can be applied to other subduction zones, which has broad
importance to Earth and Planetary Sciences. One female early-career
geoscientist, who is in the process of establishing a new seismology group at
UMASS-Amherst, will be supported for the career development. The proposed work
will support training of undergraduate and graduate students. The related
products will be integrated into ongoing public outreach and introductory
classes in Earth Science. Wave propagation simulation and ground motion maps are
great tools to educate the public in New England about seismic hazards. The
outcome will be introduced to 8th-12th grade girls through the Girls Inc.
Eureka! Program, a strong STEM-based collaboration between Girls Inc. of
Holyoke, Massachusetts and UMASS.