* 1624545
* Timescales of Crystallization, Ore Formation, and
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jill VanTongeren, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,939.00

The thermal evolution of a magma chamber is the primary control on the
geochemical evolution of a magma, its eruption potential, and the development of
valuable PGE and hydrothermal ore bodies. Traditionally, large magma chambers
are thought to cool and crystallize very slowly, allowing for significant
physical and chemical reorganization to occur. New geochronologic age data from
U-Pb in the mineral zircon and Ar-Ar in the minerals biotite and plagioclase
from the world?s largest exposed magma chamber, the Bushveld Complex of South
Africa, have recently challenged this long-standing assumption, and suggested
that the Bushveld cooled very rapidly from its molten state (approximately
1200-1300°C) down to the ambient crustal temperature (between 150- 300°C). The
work proposed here will specifically test several possible cooling paths from
the liquid state to the point at which the magma is completely solidified
(between 800-900°C) as well as cooling paths from the solid state down to the
ambient crustal geotherm. The results will have major implications for two
societally relevant issues. First, quantification of the timescale of
solidification in large magma chambers will inform modern day volcanic hazard
monitoring during magma recharge events and volcanic eruptions. Second,
quantifying how fast magmas solidify and evolve will inform our understanding of
when and how valuable and strategic metal deposits form (the Bushveld Complex of
South Africa contains over 70% of the world?s proven Platinum reserves and
numerous other important and strategic metals). In addition, the mid-low
temperature cooling rate results will also provide an estimate of the rate of
paleo-magnetic reversals (of which there are 7 in the Bushveld Complex) over 2
billion years ago. The rate of magnetic reversals is related to the dynamics of
inner core solidification and formation of the geodynamo, which is not well
understood beyond the last 500 million years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will employ a combination of six separate geothermometers and
geochronometers with a range of closure temperatures (Tc). The PI and students
will quantify the liquidus temperature at each level of stratigraphy using the
plagioclase-pyroxene and/or pyroxene-pyroxene REE thermometer (Study 1). The
high-temperature cooling rate will be determined using the Ca in orthopyroxene
and Ca-Mg exchange in two pyroxenes thermometers (Study 2). The solidus
temperature and absolute age of the solidus will be quantified by U-Pb zircon
thermochronology already in progress, and the Ti-in-zircon thermometer (Study
3). The mid-low temperature cooling history will be quantified by Ca diffusion
in olivine (Study 4) and Fe-Ti oxides (Study 5). The low-temperature cooling
ages will be determined by Ar-Ar thermochronology in plagioclase, biotite, and
hornblende mineral pairs (Study 6). The advantage of this approach is that the
cooling rates determined by diffusion and solvus thermometry will be bracketed
at high and low temperature by absolute ages from U-Pb and Ar-Ar
thermochronology. Additional implications not mentioned above include:
quantification of the evolution of oxygen fugacity during fractional
crystallization; and, investigation of the rates and processes of hydrothermal
ore formation (specifically Zn, F, Sn) during mid-low temperature hydrothermal
circulation and contact metamorphism. &lt;br/&gt;