* 1624551
* Collaborative Research: Paleoseismic Evidence of Earthquakes and Tsunamis along the Southern Part of the Japan Trench
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 143,403.00

There is an extensive instrumental, historical, and geological record of
tsunamigenic-earthquakes originating from the northern and middle parts of the
Japan Trench that documents the last several thousand years of earthquakes and
tsunamis, including the magnitude 9 Tohoku earthquake in 2011. This earthquake
ruptured five segments along the northern and middle parts of the Trench, but
failed to rupture through the southern part, which is near metropolitan Tokyo.
The seismic risk for this portion of the trench is uncertain because of the
possibility that stress transferred southwards during the 2011 earthquake and
that this part of the subduction zone is locked. Furthermore, the instrumental
and historical record is sparse with only one tsunamigenic-earthquake on record
(CE 1677 Empo earthquake) and lack of long-term geological data. A research team
from University of Southern Mississippi and Rutgers University in collaboration
with Japanese researchers will employ an innovative combination of field,
laboratory (sedimentary, microfossil, and radiometric analyses), statistical,
and modeling techniques to a series of possible tsunami deposits in order to
determine the tsunami and earthquake history of the southern Japan Trench, data
which is very important for anticipating future disasters. Besides providing an
improved understanding of seismic risk in the Tokyo region, additional benefits
to society include improved STEM education though outreach to middle school
students and development of a globally competitive STEM workforce through
training of graduate and undergraduate students and post-doctoral fellow
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detection and characterization of tsunami
deposits preserved in coastal sediments provides a long-term record of past
earthquakes. This project focuses on three candidate-tsunami sands that are
preserved in coastal rice fields in the Kujukuri beaches, a strand plain located
on the Boso Peninsula approximately 50 km east of Tokyo. The identification of
tsunami deposits using proxy analyses (grain size and microfossil), with
Bayesian age-depth models and tsunami simulation models, will resolve whether
the southern part of the trench can produce future earthquakes that are similar
in size as the 2011 Tohoku event. Well-constrained ages for each candidate
tsunami will permit an accurate estimation of the shoreline position, and thus,
inundation distance at the time of deposition. By integrating these changing
shoreline positions into previously developed tsunami simulation models (e.g.,
2011 Tohoku and CE 1677 Empo models), the research team will test whether
previous middle/northern or southern trench ruptures could have deposited the
tsunami sands on the Boso Peninsula.