* 1624906
* PRIUM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* William Martin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2022
* USD 285,402.00

A mathematical proof can be thought of as an argument that uses accepted rules
of logic to validate the claims in a mathematical statement. Becoming proficient
at producing mathematically valid proofs is one of the central expectation for
undergraduate mathematics majors, but has also been identified as one of the key
challenges that these students face. Working toward addressing this problem,
this project, "Promoting Reasoning In Undergraduate Mathematics (PRIUM)", will
implement a cycle of assessing student knowledge, planning and implementing
instructional responses to those findings, assessing learning, followed by
reflection on assessment outcomes and further course revision. More
specifically, the project will employ results from a strong body of research in
undergraduate mathematics education (RUME) about student learning and
understanding of mathematical proving in order to inform instructional and
assessment decisions in upper-division undergraduate mathematics courses that
focus on mathematical proofs. Key to this project is the collaboration between
mathematics educators who are experts in the research about student learning and
research mathematicians who are the instructors of the courses. Also key to this
project is the emphasis on connecting education research and classroom
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators from Georgia State
University (GSU) and North Dakota State University (NDSU) will support research
mathematicians in the implementation of education-research-based methods for
teaching and assessing learning of proof at two large state universities. Using
interviews, surveys, artifacts (e.g., annual department assessment reports), and
discussions/presentations at mini-conferences, the proposed project will address
the following research questions: (1) How do mathematicians make use of a RUME-
based model for assessing proof in their instruction? (2) What impact does this
approach have on student understanding of proof made evident by the extent to
which students demonstrate a qualitative understanding of the local and global
concepts of proofs? (3) How does this collaboration between mathematicians and
mathematics educators impact professors' attitudes toward implementing research-
based methods of mathematics teaching and assessment? (4) What changes, if any,
have the participating mathematics departments instituted as a result of this
project over a three-year period?