* 1624131
* Large-scale Terrane Displacement in the Arctic: Evidence from Faults in the Northern Yukon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Justin Strauss, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 241,522.00

The shapes of the continents are modified over time by a variety of tectonic
processes including large-scale horizontal transport of crustal fragments. This
project explores the idea that this process was important in shaping the current
configuration of the North American Arctic region. The research team will
investigate a major fault system - the Kaltag-Porcupine fault system - in
northern Yukon, Canada to determine if it accommodated horizontal movement of a
large portion of the Arctic region and, if so, when this occurred. This research
project will not only further our understanding of large-scale transport of
crustal fragments along continent-scale strike-slip systems, but also provide
new insights into the tectonic evolution of the poorly understood Arctic region
of North America, a region important for its natural resources. The study will
promote international collaboration between academic researchers at two U.S.
institutions, two Canadian and German universities, and government research
agencies in both Germany, Canada, and the United States. The collaborative
international effort will also generate research opportunities and training for
undergraduate and graduate students at both Dartmouth College and the University
of Iowa, as well as a series of public lectures and a new museum exhibit in the
Upper Valley of New England.

Recent models for the Paleozoic tectonic evolution of the Arctic highlight
significant, yet poorly understood, margin-parallel transport of crustal
fragments relative to the North American craton; however, very little is known
about the hypothetical structures that accommodated these displacements. The
goal of this research project is to study the Kaltag-Porcupine fault system of
Yukon, Canada, a craton-bounding structure that potentially accommodated the
displacement of Arctic Alaska and other Arctic terranes across the northern
margin of Laurentia. The fault system was probably reactivated during the
Mesozoic and Tertiary, but may be a much older early Paleozoic structure. The
research team aims to determine if the structure separates geologic units with
different histories and paleogeographic origins and if there is any evidence for
Paleozoic displacement on the structure. This project will involve: 1)
development of a large, stratigraphically-constrained provenance data set,
consisting of sandstone petrography, large-N detrital zircon U/Pb geochronology
and hafnium isotopes, and major and trace element geochemistry and neodymium
isotopes on mudstone, from previously collected and new samples of late
Neoproterozoic-Silurian strata in the North Slope subterrane and Yukon block of
northwestern Canada; and 2) a detailed structural and geochronological
examination of the Kaltag-Porcupine fault system in northern Yukon, Canada. This
multidisciplinary project will fundamentally inform tectonic models for the
evolution of the Arctic and northwestern margin of North America.