* 1624239
* Informal Currencies as a Response to Economic Crisis
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Ida Susser, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2017
* USD 20,160.00

Monetary unions are created to foster political, social, and economic
integration among a group of member states by facilitating the free movement of
people, goods, services, and capital. The research supported by this award asks,
What happens when one of the monetary union's member nations faces economic
crisis and its citizens respond in part by establishing monetary systems of
their own? Are they just demonstrating human resiliency and adaptability? Or are
they also challenging the very idea of having a formal shared market and
associated currency that do not correspond to the nation with which people
identify? There is now a global movement towards greater economic integration,
so these are important questions for all of us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;City
University of New York doctoral student, Helen Panagiotopoulos, with the
supervision of Dr. Ida Susser, will address these questions through 15 months of
ethnographic research in Greece. Greece is an appropriate site for the research
because in 2009, faced with debts it could not pay, the Greek government
instituted austerity measures as a condition of obtaining outside financial
assistance. The austerity measures were followed by economic depression, large
increases in unemployment, and a widepsread shortage of money. In this context,
people established a variety of currency alternatives to acquire the goods and
services they needed to survive, without euros, the currency of their monetary
union, the Eurozone. These alternative currencies include Local Exchange Trading
Schemes, such as barter, time banking, and mutual credit clearing, and crypto
currencies such as Bitcoin and Free Coin. The researcher will carry out research
in three sites, each of which is associated with a different alternative
currency system. She will collect data through extended case analysis,
interviews, participant observation, archival research, text analysis and
analysis of online databases. Findings from this research will improve social
scientific theory of the relationship between currencies, national sovereignty,
and citizen allegiance. They will also be of interest to policy makers who need
to understand how currencies shape social and political life and how people
understand money and value.