* 1624836
* Phase II I/UCRC Colorado School of Mines Site: Center for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys (CANFSA)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Michael Kaufman, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 908,990.00

The Center for Advanced Non-Ferrous Structural Alloys (CANFSA) at the Colorado
School of Mines (CSM) consists of students, post-docs and faculty who work with
their CANFSA counterparts at Iowa State University (ISU) to engage with
scientists and engineers from both industry and government laboratories in
research on the fundamentals of the physical and mechanical metallurgy of non-
ferrous alloys (i.e., alloying and processing effects on microstructure,
properties and performance). The motivation for CANFSA is to address the
national decline in the training of students in this area that is critical to
U.S. dominance in high performance materials, structures and advanced
manufacturing. Today, there are only a few universities remaining who train
students in these core science and engineering areas that are so critical to our
industries, especially as National investments are made in new advanced
materials and manufacturing strategies. In fact, these declines have greatly
reduced; the synergies that existed previously between faculty, students, and
the relevant industries, and this, in turn, significantly weakened the technical
dominance of US industries that rely heavily&amp;#8192; on these materials.
CANFSA was organized to counter this trend by conducting fundamental scientific
studies on these advanced materials and their manufacturing, thereby filling
this critical workforce development gap and
simultaneously&lt;br/&gt;contributing to U.S. global industrial
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of CANFSA is to conduct
critical basic and applied physical metallurgy;research of direct relevance to
the industries that develop, manufacture and use advanced &amp;#8192;non-ferrous
structural alloys, and to train students in these important subjects. This is
accomplished by engaging students in topics of importance to industry and
government labs, and to have both faculty members and external mentors guide the
students' fundamental research. The specific details of the projects that are
conducted within the Center vary as topics are selected that have the most
direct relevance for the partners from industry and the national laboratories.
To date, the Center has conducted leading research in the areas of: thermal and
mechanical processing of non-ferrous alloys (e.g., 3rd Generation Al-Li alloys,
texture anisotropy of Ti-6Al-4V); ultrafine grained alloys and their mechanical
behavior (e.g., Ti and Mg); aging of high-strength beta-Ti alloys; processing of
microeutectic Al alloys; microstructural evolution (e.g., Ni-Ti-Hf
intermetallics, Ni-based superalloys, high entropy alloys); multi-layer
coatings; lube-free die casting; and the role of trace elements and small
microstructural variations on mechanical properties. To conduct these varied
research projects and accomplish the goals of the Center, faculty members with
complementary ;expertise in the areas of theory, modeling, processing and
characterization are working together with members from industry and government
laboratories. Mines has a variety of state-of-the-art processing and
characterization tools that students, post-docs, and faculty use to address
complex, yet precompetitive, projects that are of interest to a number of the
our member companies. The expertise at Mines is complementary to that at ISU
and, collectively, CANFSA is able to offer unique capabilities to its
membership.