* 1624453
* Enhancing Capacity for Research and Education at the CCMI Little Cayman Research Centre
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Carrie Manfrino, Central Caribbean Marine Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 266,281.00

Little Cayman is one of the least developed tropical islands in the Caribbean,
yet it provides a unique opportunity for research because of the facilities
developed by the Central Caribbean Marine Institute (CCMI) in 2005. CCMI's
Little Cayman Research Centre (LCRC) provides an ideal facility where the reefs
are under minimal local anthropogenic stress and are far removed from
continental influences. Due to low population density and well-established
marine protected areas, Little Cayman provides the rare opportunity to separate
anthropogenic from environmental effects on coral reefs and their inhabitants.
LCRC provides the laboratories, classroom, accommodations, vehicles, boats, and
oceanographic instrumentation for scientists to conduct this vital research.
Research at LCRC has led to major breakthroughs including the discovery of new
marine invertebrates, improved understanding of low light reefs, advanced
paleoclimatic reconstructions, a new physical oceanographic model for diurnal
heating of shallow seas, and simulated ocean pH for 2100 to evaluate
interactions between ocean acidification and calcification. This work is
transforming knowledge and understanding of fundamental oceanographic processes
and of mechanisms that drive coral reef stress and resilience. The facilities
improvements shall further advance discovery and scientific understanding while
promoting teaching, training, and learning through programs held at LCRC: K-12
Marine Ecology and undergraduate courses, the Little Cayman Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU), the Earthwatch Institute, and a new Dive with Heroes
program for disabled US military veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing
number of new partnerships with leading academics and institutions highlight the
importance of LCRC to the wider community and are resulting in more visiting
scientists. This proposal seeks to meet the growing needs of the visiting
scientists and students at LCRC by i) renovating the main building to double on-
site accommodations intended for visiting scientists and graduate students, (ii)
modifying and updating common areas (dining room, bathhouse) to support the
increase in occupancy during its research and education programs, and (iii)
upgrading to hurricane-rated windows and doors in order to reduce the chances of
weather adversely affecting the research projects and to improve the safety of
both people and equipment. The field station renovations in this proposal will
allow the programs at LCRC to run more efficiently and simultaneously due to the
increased capacity and capabilities. The programs conducted at LCRC shall
continue to be broadly disseminated though peer-reviewed scientific
publications, scientific conferences, a monthly news channel segment, newspaper
and magazine articles, weekly lecture series, and social media network updates.
For more information about LCRC visit http://reefresearch.org/lcrc/.