* 1624583
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Between Transpressional Structures at the North American-Caribbean Plate Boundary: Geophysical Imaging Beneath Lake Azuei, Haiti
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* John King, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 10/31/2020
* USD 408,255.00

Motion along plate boundaries where two plates collide, such as subduction or
continental collision zones, is typically head-on. In some cases, the collisions
are more oblique, a situation that sets up a complex pattern of crustal
deformation. Some deformation is accommodated by faults that allow crustal
blocks to slide by each other and some deformation is accommodated by
development of folds and faults with both a vertical and horizontal component of
motion. The boundary between the Caribbean and North American plates is such a
case. A research team of scientists from the University of Rhode Island, City
University of New York, and University d'Etat de Haiti is carrying out a seismic
reflection and sediment coring study on Lake Azuei, Haiti, in order determine
how the faults in this region are moving in response to oblique plate collision.
This region is of particular interest because the study area lies just to the
east of the rupture zone of the January 12, 2010 magnitude 7.0 Haiti earthquake,
the catastrophic event that devastated the capital Port-au-Prince and
surrounding regions. In addition to shedding light on how motion along this
plate boundary is accommodated, this study will provide some critical
information needed for a meaningful assessment of the seismic hazards facing
this densely populated region. The project will advance other desired societal
outcomes through: involvement of education major students in the project;
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through graduate
and undergraduate student training; and close collaboration with Haitian
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To a first order, the Caribbean plate is moving
east-northeastward at about 2 cm/yr relative to the North American plate,
implying an oblique convergence between the two plates. This oblique convergence
is partly accommodated across the island of Hispaniola by the partitioning of
motion between two east-west left-lateral transform faults and a fold-and-thrust
belt that strikes northwest-southeast. Surprisingly, the 2010 Mw7.0 Haiti
earthquake did not rupture along the well-defined trace of the Enriquillo-
Plantain Garden Fault, the southern transform fault. Instead, slip occurred on
an unsuspected blind oblique thrust fault that abuts the strike-slip fault.
Similar hazardous interactions between strike-slip and thrust faults are
expected elsewhere along Hispaniola. In particular, Lake Azuei, located about 30
km east of Haiti's capital city of Port-au-Prince, is bisected by the
Enriquillo-Plantain Garden Fault and is bounded to the north and east by the
Haiti fold-and-thrust belt. This project employs a high-resolution multichannel
seismic reflection survey and CHIRP sub-bottom profiling to image both strike-
slip and thrust-fold structures where they meet beneath Lake Azuei and will
determine the spatial and temporal relations between them. Lake Azuei, a shallow
lake located about 60 km east of the 2010 epicenter, is crossed by the
Enriquillo-Plantain Garden Fault and is also bounded by the Haiti fold-and-
thrust belt. A two-week survey will produce a dense grid of high-resolution
multichannel seismic reflection profiles with an expected penetration of at
least a few hundred meters below the lake bed. CHIRP subbottom profiles will be
acquired concurrently; these will provide an even higher stratigraphic
resolution (sub-meter) but with a lower penetration (up to 20 m). In addition,
the seismic stratigraphy will be ground-truthed with a series of short sediment
cores. These cores will be sited where seismic data indicate that deeper (older)
seismic horizons intersect the lake bed. Sediment samples will be dated using a
combination of paleomagnetic measurements and radioisotopic methods in order to
establish a Holocene chronostratigraphy for Lake Azuei. The careful
stratigraphic analysis of the seismic reflection and CHIRP profiles will result
in a digital representation of faults, folds, and sequence boundaries in three-
dimensions. Together with the stratigraphic analysis of the sediment cores, this
project will thus characterize the spatial and temporal relations between the
two sets of oblique structures.