* 1624602
* Phase II U. of Colorado Boulder Site: Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2023
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

A membrane is a selective barrier that enables some small particles, molecules
or ions to pass through but rejects others. Membrane-based separations offer a
number of advantages over conventional processes used in chemical separations.
They are often more energy efficient, more environmentally friendly, easier to
scale-up for manufacturing, and more compatible with process streams, and thus
provide lower-cost separation in a wide range of critical applications including
sea water desalination, food and beverage production, pharmaceutical processing
and blood dialysis. The University of Colorado Boulder site of the MAST Center
is focused on providing more advanced membranes for future separations needs as
well as leading the development of new separations processes. This work
addresses critical national economic competitiveness, defense and health
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAST Center is a multi-campus industry-
university collaborative research Center with the University of Colorado Boulder
(UCB) as one of the three sites that (1) conduct fundamental and applied
research in the field of membranes via innovative materials and processes to
facilitate the use of membrane technology for current and emerging industrial
applications; (2) sustain U.S. technological leadership in membrane materials
and membrane-based separation processes and accelerate commercialization by
Center industrial sponsors of novel, sustainable and innovative technologies;
and (3) provide undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers with a
superior educational and research experience that will enable them to become
productive and effective professionals. Research at the UCB site is focused on
the development of novel membrane materials and structures, innovative membrane
characterization techniques and the generation of fundamental and applied
knowledge regarding selective molecular transport mechanisms and membrane
fouling. The technical expertise represented by participating UCB faculty from
five academic departments is focused on important membrane applications in
water, energy, and barrier materials.