* 1625150
* EAR-PF:  Combining Proxy Records and Model Data to Investigate Changing Flood Risks for the U.S. Atlantic Coast during the Past Millennium
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Andra Garner, Reed                    Andra          J
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Andra J. Garner has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Rutgers University. This investigation will
focus on studying flooding events during the last millennium in the area around
New York City (NYC). The project has two objectives: (1) to assess the
effectiveness of a computer model that simulates storm surge heights along the
U.S. Atlantic coast; and (2) to examine changing coastal flood risks for the
U.S. Atlantic coast over the past millennium. The first objective will be
accomplished by comparing proxy records of flooding events and relative sea
level rise from along the U.S. Atlantic coast with synthetic tropical cyclones
and storm surge datasets derived from Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 5 (CMIP5) Last Millennium simulations. To accomplish the second objective,
Dr. Reed will collect a sediment core from Union Beach, NJ, to develop a new
proxy record of sea level for the region. Results from this fellowship will
inform coastal adaptation strategies in high risk regions, providing methods for
predicting and mitigating the effects of floods. Outreach activities associated
with this work will be carried out in partnership with Rutgers' Raritan River
initiative and will consist of using data from the project in lesson plans for
local high school and undergraduate classes.

Computer simulations models of flood heights during the Common Era will be
compared to proxies to examine inconsistencies between model results and
sediment records and explore possible reasons for these inconsistencies, such as
model forcings, model biases, and internal variability. The new sediment core
will be used to investigate return periods during the past millennium of extreme
flooding events in New York City and the potential causes of an increased
frequency of tropical cyclone landfalls in the region during the latter portion
of the Little Ice Age.