* 1625987
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D Digital Image Correlation System to Enhance Research and Teaching at Kettering University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Massoud Tavakoli, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 183,835.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award supports the acquisition of a three
dimensional Digital Image Correlation (DIC) system, including a pair of high
speed cameras and associated software and hardware. DIC is state-of-the-art
optical measurement technology that uses photographs to monitor the dynamic
movement of objects. Kettering researchers will use the DIC instrumentation to
advance fundamental research in a number of areas leading to more fuel efficient
and crash-resistant vehicles, a more effective renewable energy supply, and
improved human health. The DIC system will provide data for the study of
advanced materials at Kettering University. It will facilitate the development
of computational models to predict the behavior of complex structures; in wind
energy, automotive and medical applications. It will highlight opportunities for
improving the performance of structures used in a broad range of fields.
Conventional measurement tools, such as accelerometers, cannot be used for these
applications because several sensors are required to adequately instrument a
large surface area, and adding so many sensors to a lightweight structure may
alter the dynamic response of the structure, obscuring the true problem or
opportunity. The non-contact measurement system will allow Kettering researchers
to understand these systems in new and deeply important ways. In addition to
supporting research and development at Kettering, the DIC system will also be
integrated into the curriculum in several courses (e.g. Experimental Mechanics
and Automotive NVH). In these courses, the visual representation of the
deformation field will enhance the students understanding of the physical
behavior of structures. It will also ensure that undergraduate and graduate
students are exposed to state-of-the-art experimental techniques, equipping them
for the work of creating the next generation of structural designs. The new
instrument will also be used for outreach to K12 and pre-college students
through existing Kettering outreach programs such as Academically Interested
Minds (AIMs) and Lives Improve Through Engineering (LITE) programs. By providing
graphically stimulating photos and videos, it will make the science of design
analysis approachable to a broader audience, inspiring an interest in
engineering design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The DIC system will enable several
fundamental research activities at Kettering University. For example, Kettering
researchers will use the non-contacting capabilities of the DIC system for
fundamental research on structural health monitoring (SHM) of rotating
structures such as wind turbines and helicopter rotors. Blade failures are a
significant problem for these systems, but challenges with data transmission and
mass loading limit the effectiveness of monitoring with conventional contact
sensors. This award enables researchers at Kettering University to develop new
SHM techniques to prevent catastrophic failures in these structures. By
integrating the finite element method with digital image correlation and a modal
expansion technique, the researchers will enhance DIC capabilities for
identifying damages inside structures and on locations where cameras do not have
line of sight. In another area of study, researchers at Kettering will use the
instrument to advance work underway within the orthopaedic biomechanics research
group. This project focuses on improving methods used to treat bone fracture.
Current treatments involve plates, screws, and nail designs that are based on
devices used in non-biological environments. Clinical use has shown that
problems unique to the living environment plague these devices and can lead to
poor healing. By using the full-field data from the DIC system, and working
between experiments and simulation, researchers aim to identify best practices
for modeling the bone/metal interface. This knowledge will facilitate further
experimental and simulation work toward optimizing the interface to provide
optimal pressure and strain fields for healing.