* 1625712
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gas Chromatography Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer for Research and Teaching at Maine Maritime Academy
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Scott Eaton, Maine Maritime Academy
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 05/31/2018
* USD 381,585.00

This project enables Maine Maritime Academy (MMA) to purchase and maintain a gas
chromatograph - tandem mass spectrometry instrument (GC-MS/MS). This instrument
will play a vital role in the research of a number of Maine Maritime faculty and
a supporting role in the research of partners and collaborators at other Maine
colleges/universities, a regional conservation group, and the environmental
laboratory of a native Maine tribe. The instrument will also be immediately
incorporated into the curricula of eight MMA classes offered by the Engineering
and Ocean Science departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of novel research
projects across diverse fields of study will be enabled by the GC-MS/MS system
resulting from this project including biofuel chemistry, marine and
environmental chemistry, ocean science, water pollution and remediation and
bioengineering. In particular, molecular reactions important to biomass
thermochemical conversions to fuels and chemicals; the characterization,
transport and fate of persistent organic pollutants, such as dioxins and furans,
in atmospheric and marine environments will be mapped locally to predict
impacts; environmental and human processes on the impact and fate of organic
anthropogenic contaminants, such as PAHs, PCBs and oil, will be quantified
leading to enhanced environmental forensics capabilities; low energy
desulfurization pathways for residual petroleum and bitumen feedstock upgrading
will be developed; and the presence and techno-economic feasibility of isolating
new compounds from understudied micro-algae extracellular environments will be
explored. These projects will engage the entire Maine Maritime Academy community
including undergraduate student researchers, students in the classroom, and
faculty and staff.