* 1625221
* Constraints on fault mechanics and seismic hazard from the integration of high- resolution topography and InSAR datasets
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Chelsea Scott, Scott                   Chelsea        P
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 01/31/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Chelsea P. Scott has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at Arizona State University. The
investigation will aim at improving constraints on fault slip rates estimated
from both geologic and geodetic datasets. Accurate slip rates are critical to
properly estimate future seismic activity in a region. Dr. Scott will use a
novel approach of combining high-resolution topography and satellite radar
datasets, bringing together complementary constraints on near- and far- field
ground deformation. The improved understanding of fault mechanics from this
study will result in better determination of fault slip rates in the geologic
record and on quantified uncertainties of paleoseismic slip rates. In addition,
the PI will lead workshops at the NSF-sponsored Open Topography facility, co-
develop undergraduate courses at ASU, and promote computer-coding skills with
high school women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on using near-
and far- field constraints on the magnitude and distribution of surface strain
to infer the depth variability of fault slip. The fault slip models produced
with InSAR data typically suggest little fault slip in the upper several
kilometers of the crust, which is at odds with the topography data. The first
goal of this project is to examine the distribution of fault slip inferred from
the joint inversion of InSAR and differential topography data. The second goal
of the project is to examine the implications for strain accumulation over many
earthquake cycles. The study will improve constraints on the relative
proportions of coseismic fault slip in the seismogenic crust. The improved
understanding on fault mechanics will serve as input to further work in this
project that will focus on quantifying the long-term variation in along-strike
coseismic fault slip and the ratio between slip at the surface and at depth over
many simulated earthquake cycles.