* 1625772
* ASM Concept Inventory Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Amy Chang, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 49,088.00

Soon after the report "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education was
published by AAAS (2009), the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) convened a
committee to create a document outlining the core concepts that any student in a
microbiology course should learn. With the participation of hundreds of
microbiology faculty across the country, the ASM published the ASM Curriculum
Guidelines for Undergraduate Microbiology (Merkel et al., 2012) - a
comprehensive set of six core concepts and 27 fundamental statements based on
Vision and Change. College instructors often struggle to determine if altering
teaching methods actually leads to increased student learning. This is where the
development of concept inventories can be helpful. Concept inventories are
assessments that specifically address core concepts in a particular discipline.
They are typically multiple choice instruments that use commonly held
misconceptions as distractors. In support of innovation in undergraduate biology
education, the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) established three
committees to construct, review, validate and disseminate two different concept
inventories. One concept inventory focuses on core microbiology concepts taught
in general microbiology for microbiology majors. The second concept inventory is
focused on health sciences general microbiology concepts. The third committee's
charge is the independent review of both of the concept inventories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing and validating a concept inventory is time
intensive and requires a great deal of collaboration among faculty experts. This
ASM Microbiology Concept Inventory Conference is bringing together these three
teams now that they have completed their initial work (which has taken place
using virtual meeting formats whenever there has been a need to meet). The
project is nearing the stage of development where face-to-face discussion and
planning are necessary. The two-day conference will allow a focused review of
the work that has been completed. At this conference, researchers will present
and discuss the preliminary data from the formal review as well as the initial
statistical analysis from the early in-class trials for both concept
inventories. Conference attendees will review each concept inventory for
potential gaps and write new questions as needed to fill those gaps. Once
completed, these concept inventories will be useful tools that will be available
to hundreds of microbiology faculty teaching tens of thousands of microbiology
students. Concept inventories that can accurately and reliably measure student
learning gains can be widely used by faculty teaching microbiology. Lastly, the
concept inventory teams will discuss and determine the best mechanism to both
store and disseminate the completed concept inventories once they are validated
after statistical analysis of each question after the concept inventories have
been used on a larger, nationwide scale.