* 1625532
* Leveraging the AAU Undergraduate STEM Education Initiative to understand and advance the institutionalization of STEM teaching &amp; learning reforms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Mary Sorcinelli, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 692,522.00

This project will study the institutional transformation processes initiated
through the Association of American Universities (AAU) Undergraduate STEM
Education Initiative -- a comprehensive change initiative launched in 2011 with
funding from the Helmsley Charitable Trust. This is an ambitious project, which
seeks to increase the importance of undergraduate STEM education in the nation's
top research universities by promoting the implementation of a more systemic
view of educational reform. This earlier project initiated change within eight
university participants that were selected from a larger pool of AAU applicants
to receive seed grants of $500K from AAU. The current project is guided by AAU's
"Framework for Systemic Change in Undergraduate STEM Teaching and Learning,"
developed from leading theories and research on institutional change. That
Framework identifies a set of key institutional elements that need to be
addressed in order to bring about sustainable change, emphasizing the separate
roles of senior university administrators (the top-down component), individual
faculty (the bottom-up component), sub academic units in the form of departments
and colleges (a middle-out component), and the professional disciplines. The
project will document the intricacies of reform within each of the eight
universities, producing a set of eight case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in going beyond the initial phase of
implementing the reforms to asking the questions about what factors at the
institutional level facilitated the launch, acceptance, success, spread and
impact of the reforms. Newer interview questions will be piggy-backed onto the
existing time frames for the follow-up inquires in year 4 of the original AAU
project's time frame (2016) and additional entities and individuals with the
universities will be the focus of the newer investigations. Using the combined
data, the PI team expects that newer information about factors important to
reform, and the relative importance, priority, or sequence of the factors, to
emerge. There is significant value in understanding the complex processes
underlying progress at partner institutions in the Undergraduate STEM Education
Initiative. Identifying cross-cutting trends (as opposed to institution-specific
factors) would be especially valuable. The team also seeks to develop a
generalizable, research-based snapshot of successful institutional reform.