* 1625906
* MRI Consortium: Development of Sample Delivery Instrument for Femtosecond Diffraction Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Aina Cohen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

An award is made to Stanford University and The University of California, San
Francisco (UCSF) to develop a versatile and optimized sample delivery instrument
for structural biology that will make optimal use of the unique capabilities at
the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS), the world's first hard-X-ray Free
Electron Laser (XFEL), at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory (SLAC). It will
deliver a new resource available to the entire science community to study
extremely challenging problems in structural biology. By imaging the structure
and dynamics of biological molecules, at or near atomic resolution, the
instrument promises breakthroughs, from unlocking the secrets of how our cells
communicate and develop, to drug discovery and development of new vaccines.
Access to the instrument will be through peer-review and open to any structural
biologists, nationally or internationally including those from non-Ph.D. and/or
minority-serving institutions, who have challenging macromolecular structure
projects. An instrument consortium will tap into educational programs offered at
Stanford, SLAC and UCSF to provide internship opportunities related to the
development and research applications of the instrument. This includes a number
of programs geared towards undergraduates, programs for secondary school
teachers and two well-established internship programs for high school students.
The consortium will organize training programs for undergraduate students, M.S.
and Ph.D. students, postdocs, and researchers who are new to XFEL research and
femtosecond diffraction studies. By exposing a broader audience to the most
state-of-the-art imaging tools and the cutting-edge research opportunities
enabled by the LCLS XFEL, these opportunities will attract students into
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields through exposure
and engagement at early stages of their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will be a user facility installed on the Macromolecular Femtosecond
Crystallography (MFX) beamline at LCLS and used with the emerging technique of
femtosecond crystallography, which has shown rapid development and great promise
to expand our knowledge of the structure and function of biological
macromolecules. The proposed instrument will substantially enhance the
capability for the LCLS scientific user community to conduct leading-edge
structural biology research by expanding the experimental options for
crystallography experiments at LCLS. It will open up the possibility to collect
useful data from very small, delicate and radiation sensitive crystals of
challenging biological targets, including membrane proteins and large complexes
of proteins, DNAs and RNAs in limited supply, that have thus far eluded
structural characterization. The short pulse length and high peak brilliance of
XFEL sources can mitigate radiation damage, and enable data collection from
crystals of only a few microns or smaller in size, experiments not possible at
synchrotron beamlines. The instrument will also enable the determination of
catalytically accurate active-site structures to high resolution of sensitive
metalloenzymes that quickly undergo radiation chemistry at synchrotron x-ray
sources. Furthermore, the short (tens of fs) x-ray pulses used for these
experiments will provide access to a time domain two-to-three orders of
magnitude faster than currently accessible using synchrotrons, for enhanced
time-resolved structural studies of biochemical reaction processes. These
experimental capabilities are unique, at least in the U.S., and world leading.