* 1625908
* Collaborative Research: PRIME: Engaging STEM Undergraduate Students in Computer Science with Intelligent Tutoring Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kristy Boyer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,879.00

The "Engaging STEM Undergraduate Students in Computer Science with Intelligent
Tutoring Systems" project will see the design, development, and evaluation of
the Personalized Real-time Intelligent Mentoring Environment (PRIME) system,
which will provide adaptive problem-solving support and adaptive motivational
support to help students learn to solve computing problems. PRIME will track
each student's progress while providing real-time feedback, multiple levels of
hints, and customized problem-solving advice throughout students' learning
interactions. The project will use the block programming language "Snap!" as it
eliminates most syntax errors, freeing students to focus on concepts and
logic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introductory computing is a required component of
many STEM undergraduate curricula, and because of the fundamental importance of
computing for all STEM disciplines, courses that introduce computing to STEM
undergraduates hold enormous potential for shaping the way students develop
computational fluency that will serve them throughout their careers. The PRIME
intelligent tutoring system will be evaluated in a large introductory computing
course at North Carolina State University, which serves more than 2,000 students
each year. The PRIME environment will also be evaluated at the University of
Florida and at Florida A&amp;M University, a Historically Black University.
Experimental studies with PRIME will have a dual focus: investigating its
impacts on helping students learn about computing (analyzing problems, creating
models and abstractions, and building and refining programs) and improving
students' attitudes towards computing (self-efficacy for computing and interest
in computing).