* 1625002
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer to Enable Research and Education at the Interface of Chemistry, Biology, and Materials Science
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 332,629.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Professor William Horne
from the University of Pittsburgh and colleagues Tara Meyer and Alexander
Deiters have acquired a matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-
flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF/TOF MS). In general, mass spectrometry is
one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small
quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices. A laser impinging
on the inert matrix embedded with the sample, vaporizes and ionizes the sample.
The ions pass into the mass spectrometer where the masses of the parent ion and
its fragment ions are measured. In a time-of-flight instrument the ions are
accelerated by an electric field to allow further characterization. MALDI TOF
combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides,
proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly
sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between
sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range. This highly sensitive
technique allows identification and determination of the structure of molecules
in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the University and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students in research and research training with this modern
analytical technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
constructing structurally defined supramolecular biomaterials; (b) developing
strategies for designing biostable mimics of complex protein folding patterns;
(c) providing insights into the fundamental role of sequence in dictating
polymer properties; (d) searching for approaches for small-molecule regulation
of synthetic oligonucleotides in biological systems and (e) developing methods
for site-specific protein mutagenesis that expand beyond the 20 canonical amino
acids.