* 1625963
* Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Doyle, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 527,275.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Michael Doyle from the University of Texas San Antonio (UTSA) has acquired a 500
MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a broadband probe. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as the study of biologically-
relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists to determine the structure
of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize
specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the changing
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. The results
from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is located a general user
facility managed by highly qualified scientists and is an integral part of
research, research training and teaching in the Departments of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at this institution. The spectrometer helps in the overall
university mission by providing students in South Texas with NMR knowledge and
enabling their success in the chemical/engineering workforce. Several other
regional universities: Texas Lutheran University, St. Mary's University, TAMU
Kingsville and the University of Incarnate Word also use the instrument through
collaborations.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in: (a) synthesizing heterocyclic compounds enantioselectively; (b) exploring
new catalytic approaches to the highly stereoselective syntheses of structurally
complex organic compounds; (c) characterizing the dynamic conformational changes
of proteins; (d) exploring bioinorganic chemical catalysis, and (e) synthesizing
and biophysically understanding biomaterials.