* 1625671
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Real-time Studies of Novel Materials Processes and Functionality
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bart Bartlett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 724,730.00

Researchers at the University of Michigan, Wayne State University, Eastern
Michigan University, and Michigan State University want to watch what happens to
materials when they are poked in real time. Their common goal is to understand
how structure and chemistry of materials affect their properties, discover new
phenomena, and design new materials. In doing so they want to share their
excitement about materials science through inclusive classroom and outreach
activities. The cornerstone instrument is a variable pressure field emission gun
scanning electron microscope equipped with a unique set of complementary imaging
and analysis modalities that will transform the breadth and depth of materials
research in southeastern Michigan. The microscope will be housed in the Michigan
Center for Materials Characterization, a University of Michigan shared user
facility serving academic and industrial users from the greater Detroit area and
State of Michigan. The faculty members, through their multidisciplinary
expertise, will create a collaborative environment where experiments merge with
modeling and computation, where an entire undergraduate classroom addresses the
challenge of how to mine complex information from a microscopy dataset, and
where elementary-school-age children operate a scanning electron microscope
themselves and get to experience the exhilaration of scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in the Southeastern Michigan will
take advantage of the unique combination of complementary signals and time-
resolved probing and testing offered by the instrument, to perform novel
experiments integrating data analysis and modeling approaches. The microscope
will enable investigation of a wide range of materials (metals, semiconductors,
polymers, biomaterials, oxides, bulk, thin films, nanostructures) and therefore
a wide range of materials applications. The novelty is in the combination of
complementary detectors allowing simultaneous imaging and analysis in order to,
for instance, quantify kinetics of phase transformation under applied thermal
load or deformation, quantify defects in III-N devices or impurities in
geological materials using RS and mono-CL, or image oxidation or corrosion of
surfaces via thermal and environment control. The experimental work enabled by
the tool will be integrated with signal processing efforts to develop new data
analytic tools, statistical algorithms, and advances in predictive modeling by
leveraging machine learning and data mining. The microscope will be critical to
the continued education of our undergraduate and graduate students via its use
for in-depth classroom teaching and research training in state-of-the-art
characterization techniques. It will also be used to develop more versatile and
scalable teaching opportunities for a large body of students, post-docs, and for
external users. The PIs and senior personnel will continue to strengthen and
expand activities involving underrepresented minorities and stimulate STEM
excitement among young students.