* 1625770
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fast-scanning Confocal Microscope to Advance Biophysics, Neuroscience and Bioengineering Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Boris Shraiman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 586,812.00

An award is made to the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) to
acquire a high-resolution, fast, laser-scanning confocal microscope. This award
will allow critical problems in biophysics, neuroscience, and bioengineering to
be addressed, while substantially increasing the research and training capacity
of the campus. In particular, this new instrumentation will provide scientists
at UCSB with unprecedented abilities to measure the dynamic motions of
microscale structures in biological and bioinspired materials. Undergraduate and
graduate students will gain expertise in cutting edge technologies, imparting
new scientific knowledge, developing new materials, and understanding human
health. A partnership with the Wolf Museum of Exploration + Innovation (MOXI)
will bring the discoveries enabled by this award to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fast-scanning, high-resolution confocal
microscope with spectral detection capabilities (Leica TCS SP8x) will
substantially modernize the Neuroscience Research Institute (NRI)/Molecular
Cellular and Developmental Biology Microscopy Facility. The new instrument will
transform the institutional research capabilities for collecting quantitative,
high spatial and temporal resolution images in order to carry out NSF-funded
research addressing diverse and critical research questions in developmental
biology, quantitative biophysics, bio-inspired materials research, and
neuroscience. These include investigations of: (1) intra- and inter-cellular
interactions and the dynamics of morphogenesis and tissue remodeling; (2) human
brain development using stem cell-derived cerebral organoids; (3)"smart"
materials in which the mechanical properties can be dynamically controlled
through responsive molecular architecture; (4) the dynamics of surface
diffusion, convection and adhesion; and, (5) the molecular and biophysical
mechanisms driving tunable iridescence. In addition to the immediate gains in
speed and sensitivity, this project will provide for minor modifications to
customize the new microscope and make it compatible with a wide range of
customized biophysical tools, including a miniaturized surface forces apparatus
(SFA), high-force magnetic tweezers devices, and a scanning probe microscopy
system that combines imaging and multielectrode array technologies to map and
manipulate neural tissues in culture. Additionally, the proposed instrumentation
will be used in a variety of classroom, training, and outreach activities that
will significantly enhance the education and mentorship of graduate and
undergraduate students, and will bring diverse cohorts of students and experts
to UCSB to perform research. A new partnership between the UCSB NRI and the Wolf
Museum of Exploration + Innovation (MOXI) will engage the public in active
learning about optics, light and imaging, while sharing the important
discoveries and applications of the research enabled by this award. These
activities will substantially expand the impact of this project beyond our
campus, and will further strengthen UCSB's position as a leading institute in
quantitative biology, neuroscience, biomaterials and bioengineering research and
education.