* 1625414
* Collaborative Research:  Factors of Success in a Community-based, Interactive Engagement Learning Environment: Perspectives from a Minority Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Suazette Mooring, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2021
* USD 179,347.00

There has been significant discussion regarding the retention of
underrepresented groups in STEM, with the primary focus being on what works to
ensure that these individuals successfully transition through each juncture of
the STEM pipeline. Additionally, there is a significant body of work
characterizing the deficits of students of color who struggle in STEM learning
environments, with less focus on their narratives of success. This project seeks
to creatively address this gap in the educational research literature by
providing empirical data that describes factors that influence minority student
success in blended learning environments. It is envisioned that the work will
lead to a better understanding of minority female students as agents of their
own success and Spelman's learning environment as one which nurtures and
encourages such agency. Few studies of this nature have been conducted at
minority serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on prior NSF funding,
the PIs successfully merged a community-based element with a blended learning
environment in Spelman's general and organic chemistry courses. In the proposed
work, they plan to document what is occurring in this learning environment with
respect to engagement (metacognitive, cognitive, behavioral, and relational) and
affective traits that comprise a student's sense of agency (motivation,
efficacy, effort, and mindset). The PIs have constructed a solid well-conceived
theoretical framework for their investigations. They are taking three different
perspectives: agency, metacognition, and "Community of Inquiry" (CoI) and using
them to examine the nature of the self-regulated learning exhibited by the
students. Using a mixed methods approach to get information on "narratives of
success" within the environment, the project entails the extraction of data from
a well-established and controlled setting at Spelman College. The project has
the potential to complement efforts around the country to create curricula and
learning environments that transform students, particularly minority women, into
effective learners.