* 1625882
* MRI:  Acquisition of an FTIR spectrometer with optical cryostat for studying novel semiconductors, and ceramic and organic thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Catalin Martin, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2019
* USD 151,144.00

Through the acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometer with
extended spectral ranges and optical cryostat, this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award supports and enhances the research and educational
capabilities at Ramapo College of New Jersey (RCNJ), a predominantly
undergraduate institution. The instrument will enable several research
activities pursued by one tenure-track and one tenured faculty at RCNJ. These
activities include optical spectroscopy studies of: (a) spintronics materials,
aimed at manipulating the spin of electrons in technological applications such
as high-speed electronics, high volume storage or quantum computing; (b) hard
coating ceramic thin films for use in space and nuclear applications; and (c)
monolayer thin films of functional polymers, which play an important role in
different technologies, including liquid-liquid extraction, stabilization of
emulsions, and formation of supramolecular structures by self-assembly. The FTIR
spectrometer will also provide research and training opportunities for a
significant number of undergraduate students majoring in engineering physics,
chemistry, biochemistry and biology, will increase the enrollment in the
Research Honors course supported by the college, and will attract more
undergraduate students in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of optical reflectance
(and/or transmittance) over a wide spectral range (from THz to VIS/UV) allows
extraction of optical properties such as dielectric function, optical
conductivity, loss function, refractive index, and extinction coefficient. In
turn, these optical parameters provide critical insight into the electronic band
structure and electronic transport properties, as well as into the chemical
structure and lattice dynamics of materials. The FTIR spectrometer, with
additional capabilities, will enable several research activities, including: (a)
temperature dependent optical spectroscopy on single crystals of bulk Dirac
fermions and bulk Rashba semiconductors. The goals are to advance the
understanding of the origin of bulk Dirac band dispersion, and to provide a
reliable experimental procedure for determining the bulk Rashba parameters in
noncentrosymmetric semiconductors with strong spin-orbit coupling; (b) effects
of ion-irradiation on hard coatings of ceramic thin films. This research aims to
utilize optical spectroscopy as a non-destructive tool for assessing the effects
of irradiation on crystal and chemical structures of ceramic thin films; (c)
direct structural measurements of the orientation of functional groups in
polymer films. The main goal is to further the understanding of the structure
and orientation of polymers and proteins in mixed monolayer films.