* 1625444
* MRI: Acquisition of a Real-Time PCR System for Undergraduate Research and Education including Science Outreach.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Irene Wolf, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,919.00

An award is made to Saint Francis University's School of Sciences to acquire a
Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) system to measure gene expression and
assess gene copy number. This shared instrument will support faculty and
faculty-student collaborations among multidisciplinary fields including cell
biology, environmental engineering, biochemistry, psychology, ecology, and
developmental biology. Its overall impact is expected to be broad in
environmental assessment and reclamation because of the numerous anticipated
research projects that will make use of this instrument. Hands-on training with
this well-established molecular tool will also enhance undergraduate
biochemistry and molecular biology courses. Finally, the instrument will be
widely utilized in high school summer outreach programs to further educate and
excite young minds.

Due to the different disciplines involved, there will be a wide variety of
projects supported by this award. An environmental engineering project focuses
on determining better ways to alleviate abandoned mine drainage, a common
pollutant in Pennsylvania?s watersheds. Two ecology-based projects, one seeking
to create a better understanding of how diatoms are classified while the other
will concentrate on understanding which proteins may be responsible for enhanced
survival of dragonflies in cold temperatures. An animal development project will
look at several genes to determine if they play a role in insect eye size. Three
projects that will use mouse models or cell cultures have applications towards
human injury and diseases. For example, a study applying stress to mice will
provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning susceptibility and
resilience to chronic stress. A project exploring the signaling pathway of deer
velvet antler extract, a substance commonly used by injured athletes, may lead
to wider applications of the extract to treat injuries and organ regeneration. A
study highlighting the transcription complex of mitochondrial genes will provide
insight into how mitochondria initiate gene expression. This research is
physiologically relevant to human diseases that have been linked to
mitochondrial dysfunction. In addition to the research benefits, these projects
will enhance student learning within the School of Sciences and result in
undergraduate presentations at local and national conferences, as well as
student-authored publications.