* 1625835
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Microprobe at Syracuse University: a Central New York Regional User Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Samson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 836,819.00

1625835&lt;br/&gt;Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports acquisition of a an electron microprobe
(EMP) equipped with five wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS), an energy
dispersive spectrometer (EDS), a cathodoluminescence (CL) microscope and a LaB6
electron source to permit micron scale compositional mapping of geologic and
synthesized materials. A new electron microscope with the analytical
capabilities to be included will foster research and research training in the
solid Earth sciences, materials science and archaeology. A new EMP facility at
Syracuse will serve as a regional facility for microchemcial characterization of
solid natural and synthetic materials in central New York State, supporting the
needs of many faculty and students at over a dozen academic institutions. This
support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and
advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare given the importance of
electron microscopy for advancing understanding of the genesis of Earth
materials and in this case in particular, supporting investigator studies of the
corrosion of metallic medical implants. Thus the research supported with this
instrument immediately serves the societal interests of an aging U.S.
population. The instrument will also support the training of a next generation
scientific workforce with skills in state-of-the-art methods of materials
characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research applications that
require an electron probe for determining the micron-scale distribution of trace
element in minerals and synthesized materials will include studies of chemical
equilibrium and diffusion and reaction kinetics in rocks and minerals with
applications to the development of new geothermobarometers that promise to
advance understanding of the pressure and temperature conditions at which mid
and deep crustal mineral assemblages in exhumed metamorphic rocks formed,
studies of magmatic processes, trace element investigations of detrital mineral
phases to elucidate provenance, applied studies of the corrosion behavior of
metallic medical implants, geoforensics, and archaeological investigations of
artifact provenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***