* 1625873
* Collaborative Research: Project DIRACC: Developing and Investigating a Rigorous Approach to Conceptual Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Chandra Lewis, RMC Research Corporation, OR
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 06/30/2019
* USD 55,440.00

Calculus is an essential tool, and provides a conceptual foundation, in each of
the STEM disciplines. Acquiring deep conceptual understandings when first
learning calculus poses many difficulties for students and creates many
challenges for teachers. As a consequence, many concerted efforts in calculus
reform appear to have failed to make educationally significant differences in
student understanding that their proponents predicted. Project DIRACC:
Developing and Investigating a Rigorous Approach to Conceptual Calculus will
build on the documented success at Arizona State University's already-redesigned
and already-deployed Calculus I to redesign and implement Calculus II, and will
research students' learning in both the redesigned and traditional calculus
sequences. In addition, Project DIRACC will develop short-answer assessment
tools (also known as concept inventories) for Calculus I and Calculus II that
other institutions can use to assess, compare and contrast their students'
progress in understanding central ideas of the calculus. Students taking this
redesigned calculus sequence will be better prepared for, and will be more
likely to apply, their comprehension of rate-of-change functions and
accumulation functions in other STEM courses and to learn calculus-dependent
material in subsequent mathematics courses. The textbook produced by this
project will be made available as an open resource for others to use or build
upon. Finally, the results on students' calculus learning, and the calculus
concept inventories built to investigate students' learning, will inform future
research in these areas. Results from Project DIRACC will be disseminated widely
at regional, national and international conferences and published in peer
reviewed mathematics education journals and conference proceedings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One possible reason for the lack of effectiveness of
calculus reform is that the fundamental structure of the underlying curriculum
has remained unchanged in the vast majority of contexts where the subject is
taught. Specifically, reform projects have not focused on students' development
of richly connected meanings for rate-of-change functions and accumulation
functions, which are essential to any introductory calculus. The Project DIRACC
courses are highly conceptual because they are based upon students' development
of coherent meanings for ideas applicable throughout calculus and that also
facilitate the learning of mathematical ideas beyond calculus. The first course
addresses this challenge by making the fundamental theorem of calculus central
to every aspect of students' experience of calculus in the course. At the same
time, the Project DIRACC calculus sequence will be explicitly computational
because, as in the existing first course, students will use computers to
represent processes that define functions as models of dynamic situations, which
then become objects of study themselves. The courses will also acknowledge and
address known weaknesses in students' preparation for calculus. The calculus
concept inventories will be developed using standard instrument-development
techniques, given at the beginning and end of their respective courses, and
their psychometric properties will be established with approximately 600
students per course.