* 1625039
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Scalable Research Storage System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Kenneth De Jong, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

This project, acquiring a high-end scalable network storage system, aims to
integrate an innovative storage architecture (MEMORI) into the existing research
computing infrastructure at the institution to address the needs of both
traditional and non-traditional HPC researchers. The proponents will then
instantiate that architecture with the acquisition of the high-end scalable
network storage system. The instrumentation will be managed centrally, but
shared with the entire research community. The instrumentation enables a variety
of projects in cyber-security, mental health, climate dynamics and social
systems, all of which positively benefit the health and economic well-being of
the country. In particular, the storage system is designed to support shared
access by sister institutions, since GMU is a member of the 4-VA university
consortium that provides state-level infrastructure promoting resource sharing.
Data access by potential outside stakeholders will also be enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research computing infrastructure is unable to
support the growing storage needs for the wide variety of current research
projects involving elements of "big data." As a result, individual projects are
limited in their ability to store, mine, visualize and share large data sets.
Rather than forcing research projects to deal with these limitations on an
individual and ad hoc basis, the researchers will take advantage of recent
developments in storage technologies to provide a shared storage server capable
of supporting current storage needs and scalable in a cost-effective manner for
future needs. The proposed architecture is specifically designed to support
research projects in the humanities and social sciences, as well as the more
traditional science and engineering disciplines. Furthermore, centrally managing
the instrumentation creates a secure environment for multi-university shared
access, appropriate control of sensitive data, and a reliable framework for data
management plans, backups, and archiving. In addition, a variety of departments
offer courses in data mining, data analytics, and data visualization. These
courses are currently limited in their ability to support datasets of
significant size, and will greatly benefit from the proposed system. The library
services will be significantly enhanced by the instrumentation. Fast network
access to the system provides the ability to store local copies of large
databases for text mining research by faculty and students, as well as
visualization capabilities.