* 1625610
* Collaborative Proposal: Preparing Undergraduates for Research in STEM-related fields Using Electrophysiology (PURSUE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jane Couperus, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 154,367.00

The main goal of this cognitive neuroscience project is to develop, implement,
and disseminate best practices in cognitive electrophysiology education for
undergraduates with the aim of increasing the quality and number of education
and training opportunities for undergraduates, and increasing research outcomes
that involve undergraduate co-authors. The three specific goals are: (1) Develop
open-access curricula for cognitive electrophysiology that employ evidence-based
practices. (2) Create an open-access database of results from 6 classic event-
related potential (ERP) experiments that have been optimized in terms of best
practices in experimental design and produce highly reliable results. These data
will form the basis of class activities, lab training, and independent research
and will include a variety of individual difference measures that can also be
used for student-generated hypothesis testing. (3) Engage in ongoing improvement
of the learning materials through active engagement with a 9-member faculty
learning community of users and students active in this field. This nascent
community will be expanded by hosting a series of yearly meetings at a major
conference that will be open to all interested faculty and students and by
including undergraduate research assistants in the curriculum design and
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would address the need
for curricular materials in a burgeoning field of research that combines a
number of STEM disciplines (biology, chemistry, physics, psychology, and
electrical engineering) in a focus on cognitive neuroscience. One cognitive
neuroscience measurement technique that is particularly conducive to
undergraduate learning is cognitive electrophysiology (electroencephalography/
event-related potentials; EEG/ERP). EEG/ERP studies examine changes in scalp-
recorded brain electrical activity corresponding to cognitive processing in real
time. EEG refers to the dynamic, ongoing electrical activity recorded during
cognitive processing. ERP refers to the most commonly used method of
electrophysiological research, relying on signal averaging to extract the
activity reliably linked with specific sensory stimuli and/or motor responses
(the electrical potentials that are related to specific events). Cognitive
electrophysiology is well suited for undergraduate research because the
equipment and supplies are relatively inexpensive and the opportunities for
learning are high.