* 1625347
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Factors Contributing to Long-Term Stability in the Maintenance of Linguistic Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Sandhya Narayanan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in the methods of conducting
empirical, scientific fieldwork, explores the social and linguistic mechanisms
that produce and maintain linguistic distinctiveness between languages that have
a long history of contact. In a world that has become increasingly
linguistically and culturally complex, it is critical to understand what happens
when speakers of different languages or linguistic varieties come into contact;
to see whether they influence each other or whether linguistic differences are
used to maintain social boundaries. Most research on language contact emphasizes
the "mutual influence" aspects of contact, where the linguistic varieties in
contact converge and become more like each other. This study, in contrast,
considers a case in which linguistic boundaries have been stable for at least
half a millennium, and seeks to discover the linguistic and social reasons why
such a boundary persists today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sandhya Narayanan, under
the supervision of Dr. Bruce Mannheim of the University of Michigan, will
explore how linguistic and social boundaries are maintained between speakers of
different indigenous languages, by tracking how speakers use these languages,
how they are able to recognize and evaluate differences among themselves, and
what structural mechanisms perpetuate the boundary between them. This research
investigates the case of contact between Quechua and Aymara, two Native South
American languages spoken predominantly in Peru and Bolivia. These languages
have been in intimate contact since before the Spanish conquest, but have
maintained their linguistic distinctiveness through today. The research tests
the hypothesis that differences in the rhythmic timing structures of the
languages both maintain the linguistic boundary and - linked to behavioral
features - permit people to identify each other at a distance as speakers of one
or the other language. The project employs a range of ethnographic and
linguistic anthropological methods of data collection and analysis including
social network analysis, participant observation, interviews, linguistic life
history surveys, textual analysis, and morphosyntactic and interaction based
analysis. Findings from this research will inform the types of linguistic and
social processes that come out of situations of contact among indigenous South
Americans, and advance our understanding of the relationship between language
ideologies and language contact. In addition, there is a strong documentation
component to this research, because although both languages are still widely
spoken in the Andean region, they are in the midst of precipitous decline, and
so are endangered.