* 1625017
* EAR-PF Determining links between magma redox heterogeneity in ocean island basalts and near-surface processes of the ancient and present day
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Mary Peterson, Peterson                Mary           E
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Mary E. Peterson has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at the California Institute of
Technology. Magma generated in different tectonic settings has great geochemical
variability, in some cases reflecting traces of ancient recycled material mixing
with depleted upper mantle. This investigation will determine if the oxidation
state of the mantle source for ocean island basalts is measurably different than
either mid-ocean ridge or arc mantle sources. Understanding the oxidation state
of the magma is important because it will allow scientists to discern the depth
where mantle melting was initiated and what minerals may grow from the magma.
The analytical scope for the project involves isolating a suite of well
characterized glass and melt inclusions from lavas from three ocean island
settings (the Galapagos Archipelago, Iceland and Baffin Island) to measure
geochemical parameters that can be used to infer oxidation state of the mantle
(for example, the ratio of ferric to total iron, oxygen isotopes, volatile and
trace element concentrations). In addition, Dr. Peterson will develop and lead a
graduate level seminar, open to students in geological science, materials
science and chemistry to explore the geochemical implications of the oxidation
state of Earth materials.

The data for this investigation will be collected using micro x-ray absorption
near-edge structure spectroscopy (XANES) to measure Fe3+/total Fe ratios. These
measurements will be combined with in situ secondary ionization mass
spectrometry (SIMS) measurements of oxygen isotopes, volatile and trace
elements, to determine if variations in Fe3+/total Fe ratios of the glass are
due to shallow level processes or variability in the oxidation state of the
mantle source. These measurements will build on preliminary data from the
Galapagos while expanding to include the Iceland and Baffin Island. The results
of this study will continue to grow the existing database of synchrotron
measurements of Fe speciation in natural silicate glass in order to develop a
basic understanding of the links between magma redox and plate tectonic cycling.
By constraining the redox properties of mantle end-members, we can build a model
for the evolution of solid Earth redox and inform existing models or hypotheses
that link solid Earth and surface redox conditions in the past.