* 1625941
* MRI - Development of Continuum: A Virtualized Attentive Environment for Amplified Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Maxine Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 598,001.00

This project, developing The Continuum, a cyberinfrastructure instrument that
unifies high-resolution computer-enhanced group collaboration workspaces with
arrays of ambient sensors, aims to enable users to collaborate with local and
remote colleagues and their data more effectively utilizing a War room to
benefit the collaboration. The room itself is given the ability to anticipate
needs, improve interaction, and focus the time on discovery rather than the
technology. Continuum serves as a digital assistant providing a foundation for
new computer science research, benefits global scientific collaboratories. War
rooms benefit collaboration because they support continuous interaction and
awareness of team members, enable persistent information sharing, and encourage
mobility among team members and information. A computer enhanced war room, such
as The Continuum, which 1. Connects distributed teams with their data (whether
stored in the cloud or streamed from major computational resources over high-
speed networks), 2. Supports persistent digital artifacts, 3. Enables ultra-
high-resolution 2D and 3D stereoscopic digital media to be simultaneously
viewed, and 4. Supports ubiquitous and intuitive interaction, creates a powerful
and easy-to-use information-rich environment in support of scientific discovery.
Just as NSF cyberinfrastructure produces greater volumes and varieties of data
from data storage systems, online instrumentation and major computational
resources like XSEDE and Blue Waters, advanced visualization instruments serve
as the 'lenses' of these data generators (similar to the telescopes and
microscopes of yore), enabling researchers to peer into cyberspace to manage,
access and analyze big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuum is the culmination
of a quarter century of experience at the institution developing interactive
instruments, from the original CAVE in 1992, to the ultra-high-resolution
LambdaVision tiled LCD wall in 2004, and the hybrid-reality CAVE2 in 2012. Each
new generation of visualization instrumentation provided scientific communities
with more advanced features. Continuum development focuses on three areas: 1.
Transforming passive display walls that respond to user commands into attentive
display walls that monitor the users in a room and anticipate their needs to
improve their experience; 2. Providing an alternative approach to constructing
high-resolution visualization display walls using thin-border 4K passive stereo
Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) displays that have impressive brightness,
contrast, uniformity, off-axis viewing, and low reflectivity in brightly lit
rooms; and 4. Utilizing cloud computing to prototype future Continuum spaces
that do not require local high-end compute and display resources. Twelve funded
research projects from local institutions, in Astronomy, Astrophysics, Biology,
Combustion, Geophysics, Neuroscience, Pathology, Physics, Psychiatry, and High
Performance Computing, are poised to use Continuum for their data visualization
needs. The Continuum will open up new opportunities in computer science research
at the intersection of large-scale data visualization, human-computer
interaction, and high-speed networking. Continuum will also directly support 10
classes taught in the UIC Computer Science, Art and Design, and Biomedical
Science departments.