* 1625598
* MRI: Development of a Water Vapor and Temperature Mapping System to Study Cloud-turbulence Interactions in the Michigan Technological University (MTU) Pi-Chamber
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Raymond Shaw, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,321.00

Aerosols and clouds are among the most important factors regulating our planet's
radiative balance and climate, while interacting in complex manners. Aerosols
act as cloud nuclei, determining the formation and lifecycle of clouds;
conversely, clouds transform and remove aerosols from the atmosphere.

Turbulence plays a key role in these processes by influencing cloud droplet size
distribution, aerosol nucleation, hydration and activation, and spatial
segregation. For example, mixing by entrainment of dry air into saturated air at
the edges of a cloud is an important and still not fully understood process that
requires further laboratory and field studies. Understanding and modeling the
complex interactions between aerosols and clouds is challenging due to
turbulence-induced water vapor and temperature fluctuations at small spatial
(<100mm) and temporal (<10s) scales. Novel analytical tools need to be developed
to link these fine-structure processes to climate-relevant cloud properties.

The research enabled by the new instrument will help understanding the
intricacies of the interactions between aerosol, clouds and turbulence, and will
thus have clear and critical broader impacts, beyond simple scientific
curiosity. The project will also promote graduate and undergraduate students'
career development through hands-on research and mentoring activities and
contribute to growing the new generation of instrumentalists. To help filling
gender and minorities gaps in STEM, the project will work with the office of
institutional equity and inclusion at Michigan Technological University (MTU)
and through the Michigan College/University Partnership Program to increase the
outreach to students from under-represented groups.

The scientific objective of this development project is to design, construct and
test a new instrument for the study of the effects of turbulence on clouds and
aerosols in the Michigan Technological University's turbulent multiphase cloud
chamber. This instrument would significantly enhance the capability of the
chamber and enable new exciting research. The chamber - a community shared
facility - can generate controlled environmental and convective turbulent
conditions, and form clouds (warm, cold or mixed) through different modes (e.g.,
by expansion or by mixing through a vertical temperature gradient). In the
mixing mode, clouds can be maintained for several hours/days and therefore
microphysical properties and aerosol-cloud-turbulence interactions can be
studied in detail with no time constraints. To understand how turbulence shapes
temperature, water vapor and liquid water fields, one needs to map their spatial
and temporal distributions. To achieve this goal, the project will develop an
analytical tool for imaging temperature and water (vapor and liquid)
distributions inside the chamber without affecting the turbulent conditions,
while providing spatial and temporal resolutions relevant to the processes of
interest (~1-20 cm and ~1 s).

The remote imaging system is based on Raman scattering that carries information
on water concentrations and temperature. The instrument will become integral
part of the cloud chamber shared facility enhancing it scientific and analytical
capacity and expanding national and international collaborations. Research
enabled by the new instrument will include: a) Study of the effect of
homogeneous vs. inhomogeneous mixing on cloud droplet growth and size
distribution, the relevant length scales and how turbulence influence the
saturation ratio field. b) Small-scale details of the saturation ratio field,
how it determines initial activation, cloud droplet growth and size distribution
evolution, and how the droplet evolution caused by the saturation ratio
fluctuations feedback into the cloud turbulence. c) Effect of centimeter-scale
intermittencies on aerosol spatial segregation, humidification, activation and
droplet formation.