* 1625317
* Investigating the Limits of Arsenic Methylation in the Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Maguffin, Maguffin Scott
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Scott Maguffin has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Cornell University and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture's Dale Bumpers National Rice Research Center. The goal of this
project is to understand the process of arsenic bonding with organic compounds
in the critical zone and limiting its mobility. Dr. Maguffin will use a
combination of approaches, including geochemistry and environmental
microbiology, to study arsenic-contaminated rice paddy soils. This research will
complement ongoing efforts at the USDA Dale Bumpers Center to understand and
mitigate arsenic uptake by rice plants. Insights into soil-mediated drivers of
arsenic-organic compounds interactions will contribute to an integrated
understanding of how soil-plant-microbe interactions regulate the
bioavailability and toxicity of arsenic in rice paddy soils. Results from this
study will also have implications for development of biovolatilization as a soil
and groundwater remediation tool, since several forms of arsenic-organic
compounds species are volatile. The research results will be shared through a
joint seminar at the Dale Bumpers Center. Undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to participate in the research, and outreach events related to
arsenic in water and food will be organized, ensuring a high level of student
and community engagement with this project and the field of arsenic
biogeochemistry.

Arsenic methylation, a microbial detoxification process in which microbes
catalyze the formation of a family of methylated arsenic species, significantly
changes the toxicity, mobility, and fate of arsenic in the critical zone. The
working hypothesis for this study is that microbially-driven demethylation
competes with methylation to return arsenic to inorganic forms, and thus acts as
a "cryptic" process that suppresses the accumulation of methylated arsenic in
the environment. The investigation will use laboratory experiments to
characterize the methylation potential of microbial communities from the
different ecosystems through molecular biomarker analyses of microbial abundance
and activity, as well as through chemical analyses. Functional gene analyses
with newly designed "universal" arsM primers will produce a new level of
knowledge of the diversity, abundance, and activity of As-methylating microbes
in critical zone environments with different geochemical properties.