* 1625703
* School Safety, Security, and Educational Progress
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Anthony Peguero, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 124,492.00

SES-1625703 &lt;br/&gt;Anthony A. Peguero &lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the United States continues to be increasingly immersed
in a global competitive market, ensuring the educational progress of all youth,
as well as competitive and innovative workforce, contributes to the nation's
economic growth and sustainability. Moreover, adult socioeconomic disadvantages
and advantages faced can be often traced to youth differential educational
experiences, achievement, attainment, and progress. It has become clear that
school safety is fundamental for facilitating learning and positive educational
outcomes for youth and increasing school security measures as well as stringent
control practices have become a common as an approach towards school safety.
But, there is growing scrutiny that school surveillance and security practices
may be conditioning youth to interpret surveillance, law enforcement presence,
and juvenile and criminal justice system interventions as a "normal" part of the
school learning environment or experience for all youth. Some researchers denote
that harsh or stringent school safety or social control policies are having
detrimental educational consequences for marginalized youth, such as racial and
ethnic minority youth and the children of immigrants. Considering that it is
projected that the youth population will become mostly compromised of racial and
ethnic minorities as well as one in three youth will have at least one immigrant
parent, understanding the relationship between school safety, security, and
educational progress for the fastest growing segments of the United States youth
population is imperative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of course, safety is paramount
for learning and educational outcomes for all youth. There is some disagreement,
however, if this current approach of increased social control within schools is
ensuring educational progress or success, especially for marginalized and
vulnerable youth. Thus, this research will draw from three nationally
representative data (School Survey on Crime, Safety and Educational Longitudinal
Study of 2002, and Common Core Data) as well as incorporate multilevel
statistical analyses in order to further our knowledge about the relationship
between school safety and educational progress by exploring two broad research
questions. First, how are school safety and security policies influencing
school-level educational progress as well as the implications for racial,
ethnic, and immigration educational inequalities? Second, how are school safety
and security policies influencing student-level educational progress, especially
for racial and ethnic minority youth and the children of immigrants? Although
security measures and control practices have become ubiquitous within schools,
there is limited knowledge about how securing schools is contributing to
educational progress and success, in particular for racial and ethnic minority
youth and the children of immigrants. This proposed research seeks to contribute
to developing knowledge about safety, security, and educational progress within
the United States school system.