* 1625857
* MRI:   Acquisition of optical interferometric surface profilometer to enhance capabilities in micro- and nano-scale engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Li Jiang, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,044.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds for the acquisition of a major
research instrument that can measure and characterize surfaces, structures,
devices and applications having dimensions as small as nanometers. Such small
scale features have considerable significance in a wide variety of applications
including electronics, biomedicine, and energy, among others. The instrument to
be acquired through this proposal will allow for a better understanding of how
physical dimensions and profiles of small scale features/structures influence
their functionality and other attributes.&lt;br/&gt;When developing small scale
structures and devices, it is often required that measurements be made without
physically touching or altering the structures. There is currently no
instrumentation capable of making such measurements at Tuskegee University and
its surrounding areas. The instrumentation to be acquired through this proposal
is an optical interferometric surface profilometer. It will provide capabilities
on non-contact and non-destructive measurements to researchers at Tuskegee
University, and partners at University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa, University of
South Alabama, Alabama State University, and Alabama A &amp; M University. The
instrument will constitute a definite improvement in metrology infrastructure in
Alabama. The proposed scientific studies related to the acquired instrument will
eventually contribute to design and manufacturing methodologies that will help
the nation become more competitive in the global market. The acquired
instrumentation will positively impact educational and student research
activities at Tuskegee University, a historically black college and university.
A broader impact will be on the training of underrepresented minority
undergraduate and graduate students in emerging areas in the advanced technology
sector. In view of these various broad impacts, NSF funding for this research
instrumentation is justified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
acquired instrumentation is non-contact and non-destructive studies on surface
texture, surface roughness, film thickness, stress analysis of thin films, wear
volume measurement, particle and pore analysis from a topological perspective,
grain structure analysis and defect inspection and characterization on a diverse
range of material surfaces. The acquired optical interferometric surface
profilometer will allow for these studies with a vertical resolution of ยกร 0.1
nanometers, and lateral resolution of &lt; 500 nanometers. These studies will be
used to elucidate on basic and advanced mechanisms involved in the micro- and
nano-engineering of sensors, thin films, silicon photonics, micro-
electromechanical systems, nano-fabrication, and polymer nanocomposites,
bioengineered surfaces and structures, energy devices, and failure
characterization of medical devices and implants. A key ancillary goal is the
training of students belonging to underrepresented community in advanced
metrology techniques used in multidisciplinary research. Another goal is to
implement hands-on learning modules in undergraduate/graduate level courses in
the areas of semiconductor, microelectronics, and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual significance of the proposed activity is in the various fundamental
studies that would be conducted on the 2D/3D topology, morphology and other
aspects of micro- and nano-engineered structures and surfaces, and understanding
how these impact the properties exhibited by such small dimension entities