* 1625778
* MRI:  Aquisition of Atomic Force Microscope to Advance Texas State University Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gary Beall, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 104,476.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant
awarded to Texas State University at San Marcos (TxState) provides funding for
the acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). This high-resolution
instrument enhances the research and educational capabilities at TxState, a
Hispanic Serving Institution. Because AFM data is highly visual, the results are
accessible to non-scientists and will thus engage students not already committed
to STEM. The proposed instrument acquisition will immediately impact 58 students
and postdocs upon acquisition (with hundreds of additional users over the
lifespan of the instrument). The addition of this tool to TxState, where 55% of
the students and postdocs are underrepresented in science and engineering, will
have a long-term impact on a diverse population of students and the institution
in which they are trained. In addition, this acquisition strengthens, in
particular, the research activities of the NSF-funded PREM Center on Interfaces
in Materials (PREM: Partnerships in Research and Education in Materials). A
primary goal of the PREM Center is to increase the participation of
underrepresented minorities in materials research. Data from this instrument
will impact energy and medical-related research projects that are intended to
enrich our lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Atomic Force
Microscope (AFM) is a scanning probe technology that identifies surface features
at the nanometer scale. AFM will be used by Texas State University at San Marcos
(TxState) to advance fundamental surface science and applications in energy and
biomaterials-related research topics. Specifically, this acquisition of a AFM
Workshop Life Sciences AFM will impact the following materials research areas:
1) nanocomposites, 2) self-assembly of photoactive bioconjugates, 3)
nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion, 4) metallo-supramolecular
assembly, 5) perovskite solar cells, and 6) stimuli-responsive biomaterials.