* 1625649
* Collaborative Research: Transforming the Organic Chemistry Lab Experience: Implementation and Evaluation of a Reformed Organic Lab Curriculum Across Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Dina Newman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 419,284.00

Organic chemistry is required for college students majoring in a variety of STEM
disciplines. Traditionally, this course has been viewed as a gatekeeper and
students have considered the laboratory experience as an isolated and irrelevant
use of their time. Reformed teaching methods that increase the relevance of the
laboratory and increase student success have proven challenging to deliver,
especially when laboratories are taught by graduate teaching assistants. This
project, which builds on prior NSF-funded work (DUE Awards #1245160 and
#1245176), will develop, implement, and study innovative and easy-to-adopt
studio-based organic lab modules. These modules will transform the traditional
3-4 hour organic laboratory into a meaningful learning experience involving
trouble-shooting problems and honing lab skills. The project is a collaborative
effort between a research university (Rochester Institute of Technology) and a
community college (Monroe Community College), which will ensure the materials
are appropriate for use in both two-year and four-year settings. In
collaboration with regional partners, studies will be conducted to evaluate
student learning in other settings, as well as the ease of module adoption,
student performance, and retention rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages earlier work developing a studio-based organic laboratory curriculum
for two-year and four-year colleges, and promoting its broadened development and
implementation. Central goals of the project are enhancing students' meaningful
learning and engagement with organic chemistry, and developing a model for
implementation of reform-based curricula. To determine the impact of this
approach, the project will measure student learning and success, and evaluate
the ease and fidelity of module adoption at collaborating institutions. Given
the diverse population of students across the institutions committed to adopt
the materials and the proximity to the National Technical Institute for the
Deaf, further studies will identify retention trends for a diverse set of
student populations. This will contribute to developing a more diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. The results will be disseminated broadly via a PI-
sponsored conference, peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, a
website, and a textbook partnership.