* 1625527
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  RATIONALES UNDERLYING AND SHAPING PLEA DECISION-MAKING
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Reveka Shteynberg, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,399.00

The reality is that "criminal justice today is for the most part a system of
pleas, not a system of trials," as Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for the
majority in Lafler v. Cooper (2012). Despite this heavy reliance on plea
bargaining in the U.S. criminal justice system, the nature of plea bargain
decisions remains elusive. Although there has been influential and important
research in which defendants and court actors were interviewed about the plea
decision process, this research was mostly conducted 30 to 40 years ago about a
different court system than the one that exists today. Since then, much about
courts and the process and prevalence of plea bargaining has changed. This
project begins to fill this gap through semi-structured interviews with
defendants, defense attorneys, and prosecutors to investigate how defendants
perceive and understand the choices and imperatives with which they are faced as
they navigate the legal system. The broader impact of this project is to shed
light on how internal (individual-specific) and external (system-specific)
rationales affect plea decision-making and how perceptions of defendants'
rationales can inform the prosecutor's plea offer and the defense attorney's
advice to their clients, as well as their negotiating strategies with one
another.

The focus of this research is to triangulate and examine the factors affecting,
and rationales underlying, the plea decision from the points of view of the
defendant, defender, and prosecutor. Whereas interviews with defendants will
examine their experiences and perceptions surrounding a specific case in which
they pled guilty, defense attorneys and prosecutors will be interviewed more
generally about their perceptions of generic defendants' rationales for their
plea decisions as well as how those perceptions inform either the plea offer or
the advice about accepting the offer. All interviews will be semi-structured,
include parallel hypothetical scenarios for comparison between the three groups,
and incorporate both open- and closed-ended questions to ensure a similar and
comparable question-response structure. These open-ended responses will be
examined using an inductive and systematic approach, and will be rooted in
grounded and phenomenological theories. This will allow for observation and
documentation of multiple possible patterns, themes, and concepts that account
for variability in plea bargaining processes. In addition, to make this research
more generalizable and comparable with research from several decades ago, the
co-principal investigator will also use past research related to plea decision-
making to develop a reliable coding scheme with which to code and analyze the
open-ended interview responses in this study. Findings will be disseminated as a
series of practitioner and scholarly articles, reports, and conference
presentations portraying the rationales, factors, and perceptions underlying
plea decision-making. Ultimately, this research will allow for further
examination into legal decision-making, attorney-client and defender-prosecutor
relationships, and procedural justice as it relates to contextualizing the plea
negotiation process