* 1625529
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education at a University of Oregon Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Ramesh Jasti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 174,076.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Michael Pluth from the University of Oregon Eugene and colleague Ramesh Jasti
have acquired a high resolution liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer (LCMS)
with electrospray ionization (ESI) and ultra performance liquid chromatograhic
(UPLC) capabilities. This instrument is placed at the open access CAMCOR (Center
for Advanced Materials and Characterization in Oregon) facility at the
University of Oregon. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex mixtures. This highly sensitive technique
allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex
mixture. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides additional
structural identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they
reach the mass spectrometer. In an ESI source, a high voltage is applied to a
liquid to produce an aerosol that facilitates the production of ions. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. The instrument also broaden participation by involving diverse
students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. It also provides training opportunities to a large number of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students as well as high school
students through a variety of internship programs. The new capabilities in
CAMCOR offer great opportunities to both academic and industrial users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) studying the bottom-up organic
synthesis of single-chirality carbon nanotubes; (b) using indenofluorene and
expanded quinoidal analogues as electron-accepting scaffolds for organic
electronics; (c) using molecular probes for small molecule/ion recognition; (d)
synthesizing iron-phosphine macrocycle complexes for use as liquid phase
adsorbents in the purification of natural gas; (e) synthesizing precision
engineered nanoparticles; (f) understanding biological sulfur dihydride and (g)
using platinum(II) reagents in ribonucleic acid (RNA) biochemistry.