* 1625779
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for the Core, Multi-User Microscopy Facility at Appalachian State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ted Zerucha, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 430,900.00

An award is made to Appalachian State University (ASU) through the NSF-Major
Research Instrumentation program to acquire a new laser scanning confocal
microscope (LSM). A LSM is an essential tool for studying cell and gene function
in animals, plants, and microorganisms. The LSM also improves the quality and
expands the scope of the research, training and educational activities in many
scientific disciplines, including biology and chemistry. The new LSM will be
housed in the Dewel Microscopy Facility (DMF) (http://casmifa.appstate.edu/)
within the College of Arts and Sciences. The DMF serves as the core, multi-user
microscopy facility for all departments at ASU as well as surrounding
Appalachian communities, including high school students in western North
Carolina. Principle investigators that use the facility train undergraduate and
master?s level graduate students to utilize this imaging technique in coursework
as well as research environments. On a broader level, ASU and the DMF support
several programs that train college and high school students from
underrepresented groups pursuing degrees. These programs include Upward Bound
that provides academic support to high school students in the Appalachian
region, the Forensic Program in the Department of Chemistry, and the Duke TIP
for gifted middle and high school students. This instrument will also be used
for other outreach programs at ASU, such as the STEM education program and
annual NC Science Festival. This project will significantly enhance research
productivity and educational opportunities at ASU. It will also strengthen
ongoing services to communities and collaborations with other universities in
the region. Thus, the new LSM will become an essential tool for current and
future scientists as well as engineers in all of western North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The new instrumentation primarily serves users
from the Departments of Biology and Chemistry at ASU for individual research,
research training programs, and teaching. The five major research projects that
use the LSM are multidisciplinary including investigation of the roles of
microtubules in root development; study of the evolution of gene regulatory
mechanisms using zebrafish as a model system; research on the morphology and
function of sensory neurons in Drosophila melanogaster; exploration of the
biophysical processes behind the transport of negatively charged molecules
through major facilitator superfamily proteins overexpressed in mammalian cell
lines; and examination of the evolutionary transitions in the mechanisms of
ammonia excretion in vertebrates. The project award enhances these research
areas as the LSM is configured with a pulsed 405nm laser for examining nuclear
dyes, for photobleaching experiments and for laser ablation studies.
Furthermore, additional lasers include a 25mW Argon with lines 458/488/514nm for
many yellow or green dyes, a Diode Pumped Solid State Laser at 561nm for red
dyes, and a HeNe 633nm for near infrared dyes. Research projects benefit from
increased resolution, enhanced scanning speeds and the ability to conduct
fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments. The new LSM meets both the
current and future needs for research and education across multiple disciplines
at ASU and western North Carolina.