* 1625163
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Force-measuring treadmill for biomedical experimentation and assistive device development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Alan Asbeck, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 161,026.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will enable engineers, clinical
scientists, anthropologists, and other researchers to gain an understanding of
how people walk and run. Studies of human walking and running and the associated
forces that are placed on the body are central to solving critical problems in
anatomically based design, injury risk and prevention, robotics development, and
exoskeleton design. Yet coordinated and controlled studies of movement and
forces are difficult. The purchase of a force-sensing treadmill will make such
data collection possible at Virginia Tech and nearby schools such as the Edward
Via College of Osteopathic Medicine, the Virginia Tech Carilion School of
Medicine and Radford University. In conjunction with 3-D motion capture, the
force-sensing treadmill will allow researchers to study how people from many
populations produce force and power with their legs under multiple situations.
It will allow for new studies in the following areas: (1) understanding the
causes of lower-body musculoskeletal injury, (2) understanding changes in
walking and running that result from lower-body disability or injury, (3)
developing diagnostic and treatment algorithms to monitor and assess patient
function following lower body injury and/or surgery, and (4) understanding how
exoskeletons, feedback, and movement retraining can successfully rehabilitate
the injured and improve mobility in the disabled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research projects undertaken and interventions developed as a result of the
treadmill will improve the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of movement
disorders. The team aims to characterize movement and loading asymmetry as well
as energy exchange during various movement conditions in order to develop
interventions to restore normal locomotion. A major goal is to identify
compensatory movement patterns that are consistent across different populations,
and develop ways of identifying these compensations in settings without a force-
sensing treadmill. These insights will also be used to develop and evaluate
novel low-power, active soft orthotics as a means of improving gait mechanics
and minimizing pain. Exoskeletons will also be developed to provide increased
capability and promote physical activity. The treadmill will be used to collect
relevant biological signals during a wide range of activities, and combine the
result with both neuromuscular and dynamics models. Finally, the treadmill will
allow data collection on foot loading that will illuminate how foot shape and
mechanics influence loading patterns and ultimately stress fractures. This
project was supported by the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation and Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems in
the Directorate for Engineering.