* 1625552
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3-Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scanner for Cognitive and Systems Neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Chantal Stern, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,582,077.00

This NSF MRI grant provides funding for the purchase of a Siemens 3T MAGNETOM
Prisma Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner for human structural and
functional neuroimaging research. Boston University has made a major commitment
to expand and strengthen neuroscience research, including the construction of a
new Integrated Life Sciences and Engineering research building. A new Cognitive
Neuroimaging Center and Center for Systems Neuroscience will be located within
this new building. Acquisition of a MRI scanner will provide Boston University
neuroscience researchers and students with access to advanced neuroimaging
instrumentation. The instrumentation location within Boston University's new
multidisciplinary research building will facilitate close collaborations between
BU's neuroscience, engineering, and computational faculty and students. The
cognitive and systems neuroscience investigators at Boston University share a
commitment to training the next generation of scientists, and are focused on
increasing the representation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The
investigators are active in K-12 outreach programs, have developed courses in
cognitive neuroscience and brain mapping, actively train undergraduate
researchers, contribute to undergraduate and graduate training programs in
neuroscience, and work to increase minority representation in STEM areas. The
acquisition of a new MRI scanner will broaden resources for research and
training at Boston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the shared goals of
Boston University's new Cognitive Neuroimaging Center and the Center for Systems
Neuroscience is to increase our understanding of brain function by linking
across multiple systems levels. Development of these research facilities will
provide Boston University neuroscience researchers with state-of-the-art
facilities as a shared, core facility for research, with the goal of developing
an understanding of brain function that bridges across scales - from the
cellular level, to the systems level, to the level of human cognition and
behavior. The aim is to gain insight into cognition and behavior in terms of
understanding the underlying brain networks, the neural circuits within these
brain systems, and the cellular and molecular components of these circuits. To
reach this goal will require multidisciplinary interaction between scientists
developing and using cutting-edge research experimental methodologies with
advanced computational techniques, including advanced neuroimaging technology.
BU researchers have developed strong collaborations, which bridge the gap from
animal to human level research. The Boston University investigators have
publications and a proven track record of multidisciplinary collaborations that
cut across traditional boundaries and allow for integration of data across
levels. The acquisition of a Siemens 3T MAGNETOM Prisma MRI system and its
placement within a multidisciplinary center will foster neuroscience research
that does not adhere to the traditional human/animal divide, allowing the
development of models that link the understanding of neural circuits to
cognition and behavior.