* 1625364
* MRI: Development of a PhenoNet - an Integrated Robotic Network for Field-based Studies of Genotype x Environment Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Patrick Schnable, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 873,718.00

An award is made to Iowa State University to develop and deploy PhenoNet - an
integrated robotic network for field-based studies of genotype crossed with
environment (GxE) interactions. The core component of PhenoNet is a set of
PhenoBots; lightweight robots that are able to autonomously navigate between
crop rows using GPS and local range sensors while employing advanced sensing
technologies to phenotype crop plants. The PhenoBots can measure indicators such
as stalk size, plant height, leaf angle and tassel/inflorescence properties over
time. The robots will be optimized for maize research and can be easily adapted
for other row crops. The network (PhenoNet) is a universal platform which
enables comprehensive field-based research on genotype and environment
interactions. The broader impacts of this project are threefold. First, PhenoNet
will have an important impact on society as understanding genome X environment
interactions will help address the need for sufficient food, feed, and fiber for
the planet's growing population, which is vital in an ever-changing environment.
PhenoNet will bring "big data" more deeply into agriculture by cementing
connections between plant scientists and engineers in their efforts to reach
this goal. Second, this project is synergistic with the NSF-NRT project,
"Predictive Phenomics of Plants", recently awarded to Iowa State University. The
research and engineering outlined in this Major Research Instrumentation project
will provide an outstanding opportunity for students from engineering
disciplines, computer science, statistics, and agronomy to collaborate and
engage in state-of-the-art interdisciplinary research. This project will also
advance the training of current engineers and plant scientists who are
experienced with networking, robotics and agronomy. Third, this project will
reach out to underrepresented groups by targeting minority-serving institutions
for student recruitment and will work with the Society of Women Engineers and
other similar groups in seeking women participants to help meet the NSF-NRT
award's efforts to broaden participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PhenoBots
are an important and essential advancement in the fields of agriculture and
technology because they more efficiently characterize tall plants over time to
their maturity. Previous technology and platforms are either incapable of, or
are greatly hindered by various constraints. The design improvements of the
Phenobots enable the robots to be more robust, stable, lightweight, integrated
and economical. This creates a pathway for transformative research as it enables
in situ, non-invasive monitoring of the traits of tall crops, like maize, over
time. PhenoNet will consist of a network of four PhenoBots, which will be
deployed by plant scientists in Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Nebraska, and
Wisconsin. The data generated from high throughput phenotyping will address
whether it is possible to predict the phenotype of a given genotype in a
specified environment.