* 1625713
* Enhancing Statistics Teacher Education with E-Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2022
* William Finzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Most statistical concepts are taught within an already packed secondary
mathematics curriculum by mathematics teachers who are often underprepared to
teach statistics. To address this issue, the Enhancing Statistics Teacher
Education with E-Modules [ESTEEM] project will facilitate the infusion of
statistics content and pedagogy into undergraduate mathematics teacher
preparation by providing faculty with technological and curricular resources,
networking experiences, and ongoing support. The ESTEEM project will address
recent trends in secondary education and teacher preparation, including: 1) use
of dynamic statistics tools to analyze data; 2) a shift to mobile technology
which has caused schools to favor online software requiring no installation; and
3) the rapid expansion of online and hybrid courses in higher education. As a
result of the ESTEEM project, preservice secondary mathematics teachers [PSMTs]
will be better equipped to teach statistics with online tools. This will lead to
stronger preparation of grades 6-12 students in statistics and data literacy,
and feed the pipeline into data intensive STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESTEEM project will address three primary goals.
First, the project will create online resources to support preservice teachers'
learning of statistics content, pedagogy, and technology tools. Videos of
teachers and students engaged in statistics, and expert discussions will be
created. Second, the project will design modules and approaches for the
preparation of PSMTs. Newly created resources, videos, and materials will be
packaged into different online modules and courses. Modules and resources will
be disseminated through professional organizations, and ESTEEM will host faculty
professional learning seminars prior to national professional conferences.
Third, the ESTEEM project will examine how resources and modules are integrated
into undergraduate curriculum, examine how well prepared PSMTs are to teach
statistics content, and explore sustainable models for institutions using online
resources and modules. ESTEEM's solutions to packaging online resources and
e-modules will better equip mathematics teacher educators with curricular
resources. ESTEEM evaluation and research will provide greater insights into the
nature of PSMTs' understandings of content and pedagogy of specific statistical
topics; how PSMTs design Common Online Data Analysis Platform [CODAP] based
statistics activities; what activities and resources best support PSMTs'
learning to teach statistics; and determining effective and sustainable models
for packaging online resources for use in other STEM teacher education programs.