* 1625918
* Collaborative Research: Transitioning Learners to Calculus in Community Colleges (TLC3): Advancing Strategies for Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Helen Burn, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 320,742.00

Improving student outcomes in mathematics courses in community colleges is
important in meeting the nation's demand for college graduates in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics). Entitled "Transitioning Learners to
Calculus in Community Colleges" (TLC3), the project will gather a team of higher
education researchers, mathematicians, and mathematics educators to transform
institutional approaches to identifying and remedying barriers that impede
student progress to and through Calculus II in community colleges. A significant
impact of TLC3 will involve supporting instructional improvements aimed at
increasing the success of historically undeserved students, particularly
underrepresented racial minority (URM) students, thus contributing ultimately to
the diversity of the nation's STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
goal of TLC3 is to build and test theoretical models that predict STEM URM
student success in the Developmental to Pre-calculus to Calculus II (DPC2)
sequence, based on programs, structures, and instructional strategies in
successful programs. The project uses a mixed-methods approach, including a
census survey of 948 community colleges and case studies focused on minority-
serving institutions. The models will inform the development of a change tool
(i.e., the institutional self-assessment), that examines institutional readiness
to facilitate successful outcomes for URM students in the DPC2 sequence. Five
institutions selected from a TLC3 networked community (with a minimum of 50
institutions) will test the models and self-assessment tool. The institutional
self-assessment tool will help identify a professional development approach that
departments and institutions can use to remedy barriers that inhibit student
success in the DPC2 sequence. This project is supported by NSF's Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program (IUSE) and the EHR Core Research (ECR)
Program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field.