* 1625440
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Seeking Redress and Producing Justice in Diverse Forums
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Sonia Rupcic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 6,609.00

When new legal systems subordinate customary law to universalizing
constitutional authority during democratic transitions, justice seeking
nevertheless persists outside the criminal justice system. Those seeking redress
for wrongdoing often pursue remedies in non-court forums, with victims
appealing, for example, to chiefs, neighborhood groups, and family. These non-
court avenues for resolving disputes do not simply offer multiple routes to
remedy; they also may offer alternative modes of constructing wrongdoing and
producing justice. This research project studies how remedies are sought and
justice is produced in and between different forums of redress, examining the
ways practices of justice shape indeterminate grievances into recognized
categories of transgression. The study asks three sets of questions: 1) How do
victims of wrongdoing seek remedy? 2) What is the relationship between different
forums of redress? 3) How is wrongdoing constituted as transgression through
forums of redress? This project promises to shed light on how people seek
redress in various ways and contexts, and how interpersonal harm comes to be
classified in different ways. Claims to justice serve as the very foundation of
citizenship. For example, Title IX complaints in American universities, military
tribunals judging cases of officer misconduct, and vigilantism on behalf of
family, friends, and neighbors offer different modes of arbitrating and
adjudicating complaints outside criminal law and differing ideas about the
relationship between citizens and states. Thus the broader stakes of this
project concern experiences of wrongdoing and political exclusion, especially
among populations whose first recourse is not necessarily the criminal justice
system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To examine efforts to remedy wrongdoing, this
project focuses on sexual violence and undertakes a case study of justice-
seeking practices in the context of unwanted sex. Sonia Rupcic, a PhD candidate
in the Anthropology Department at the University of Michigan, will conduct a
12-month investigation in South Africa, employing a range of anthropological
methods, including interviews with those involved in seeking and offering
redress for wrongdoing, and observation in formal and informal forums of dispute
resolution (e.g., courtrooms, chief tribunals, and neighborhood watch meetings).
The research will follow the justice-seeking practices of victims and their
families through diverse sites of redress and track the parallel movement of
indeterminate grievances as they coalesce into distinct categories of wrongs.