* 1625733
* MRI: Acquisition of an Upright Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope to Advance Research and Education at the University of California, Merced
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sayantani Ghosh, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 311,815.00

With this award from the Division of Materials Research (DMR) Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the University of California, Merced will acquire
a state-of-the-art confocal laser-scanning microscope to serve as primary tool
for biomaterials-based research and teaching. In a confocal microscope, a
pinhole that rejects out-of-plane light allows imaging at a higher resolution
than achievable through conventional optical microscopy. This optical sectioning
allows reconstruction of three-dimensional images from optical slices. This
microscope will dramatically augment the materials research facilities existing
at UC Merced, specifically allowing research into: a) how do cells control the
size of lipid domains in their membranes, b) how do we engineer synthetic cells,
c) how do we design and characterize nano-assembled systems for energy and drug
delivery, d) what are the effects of mechanical forces on the differentiation of
stem cells, e) what are the effects of hydrophilic polymers on fluid transport
in the rhizosphere, f) what are the short- and long-term dynamics of biofilms,
and g) how do cooperation between fungi and bacteria occur in mixed biofilms.
Research activities and research training on the microscope, of a large number
of students from diverse backgrounds at UC Merced, a minority serving
institution, benefits from this award. Furthermore, teacher training on the
instrument will increase pre-college exposure to science and engineering in the
surrounding communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microscope will allow the PIs
and senior personnel to conduct research requiring multi-modal imaging
capabilities, such as a combination of high-resolution multichannel (up to six
simultaneous channels) fluorescence microscopy, laser reflectance microscopy,
bright-field microscopy, spectroscopic imaging, and high-signal-to-noise ratio
imaging. The detectors feature linear scanning and superior signal-to-noise
ratios thus allowing quantitative imaging of dim and lightly-labeled samples.
The upright configuration allows reflective imaging of semiconductor chips,
nanofilms, and nanoparticles on surfaces using long-working distance objectives.
The upright configuration will also allow studies of phenomena where
directionality is important, such as the formation of biofilm pellicles on air-
water interfaces, and gravity and capillarity driven transport of liquids
through the rhizosphere. This instrument will also allow students to receive
hands on-training on the use and application of state-of-the-art microscopy
techniques; particularly important for UC Merced, which has one of the nation's
highest enrollment of first generation college students in a research
university. The educational opportunities created by this instrument will
further the university's commitment to diversity by investing institutional
resources to recruit and retain students from underrepresented social and
economic groups.