* 1625354
* Integrating and Scaffolding Research into Undergraduate STEM Curricula: Probing Faculty, Student, Disciplinary, and Institutional Pathways to Transformational Change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Kerry Karukstis, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,805,663.00

Participation in undergraduate research provides well-documented benefits to
students, including high academic achievement, educational persistence, and
significant gains in knowledge and skills. Yet equity gaps in participating in
research persist. To address this shortcoming, this project will assist faculty
in departments of biology, chemistry, physics, and psychology in designing and
implementing coordinated four-year curricula to provide all students with
equitable access to the benefits of undergraduate research. Two departments at
each of twelve institutions will be competitively selected for their interest in
comprehensive research-infused curricular reform. Each department involved in
the project will be assisted by expert consultants who will maintain sustained
communication to oversee and guide the curricular transformation process.
Research will be conducted to characterize the factors that enable students to
participate and persist in an inquiry-driven curriculum and to identify the
strategies that support faculty, departments, and institutions in catalyzing and
sustaining the changes needed to support this participation. Findings from this
study will contribute to efforts to close undergraduate research participation
gaps and guide transformation efforts in undergraduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve a cohesive curriculum that initiates students
into a culture of inquiry and research in the discipline, departments will use a
backward design approach to develop scaffolded, research-rich courses and
assignments that build in deliberate ways to guide students to greater
independence and ownership of their learning. Two overarching research questions
will be examined: (1) What effect do student characteristics (e.g., pre-existing
academic preparation, current course performance) have on student-learning
experiences and outcomes in a scaffolded inquiry-driven curriculum? (2) How do
different departmental approaches and distinct disciplinary cultures impact the
integration of the components and outcomes of undergraduate research into the
curriculum? A mixed-methods approach will be used to address these questions,
including surveys, focus groups with students and faculty, observations and
interviews with faculty and team consultants, annual progress reports, and in-
depth site visits. A novel aspect of this project will be the development of
both standardized and experimental questions on the National Survey of Student
Engagement and the Faculty Survey of Student Engagement. These surveys will
allow for comparison of project institutions with national results. The theory
of change model that develops from this project will allow a broad and diverse
range of institutional types and departments/disciplines to assess their
readiness for research-scaffolded curricula and provide key insights into the
effects of such curricular transformation on student achievement and
organizational and cultural change.