* 1625212
* MRI: Acquisition of a direct write laser lithography system
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* John Meacham, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 361,100.00

Washington University in St. Louis proposes to acquire an instrument for
patterning of micro and nanoscale features on substrates surfaces. The proposed
instrument will be housed in the shared user cleanroom facility on campus. The
instrument is capable of patterning two dimensional designs and three
dimensional features with a spatial accuracy of 600 nanometers. This accuracy is
achieved using a fine computer-guided laser beam to 'write' on a substrate
covered with a light sensitive film. Once the pattern is imprinted, the light
sensitive film can be used as a 'mask' for removing underlying material. Thus,
the pattern is transferred from the computer generated file to the material
being engineered. The availability of this unique instrument will impact
nanoscale science and engineering research in the entire state of Missouri.
Advanced research directly impacted with this instrument includes, but is not
limited to, studying novel phenomena in nanomaterials, synthesizing unique
nanostructures for efficient energy harvesting and storage, fabricating bio-
inspired circuits for imaging and sensing and, engineering of devices for early
disease detection and diagnostics. This instrument will be intensively used in
the curricula and training program of undergraduate and graduate students at
Washington University in St. Louis through two semester long courses and
additional, staff-led one-on-one training. Students exposed to this instrument
will become well-versed and knowledgeable in the science and engineering of
micro- and nanotechnology, making them globally competitive in the high
technology jobs market.

The goal of this MRI proposal is to enable new micro- and nanoscale research in
numerous fields of science and engineering. This goal will be achieved through
the acquisition of the Heidelberg DWL 66+ laser direct write system, which
addresses significant limitations associated with available pattern transfer
techniques currently available at universities and research institutions in the
state of Missouri. The advanced lithographic capabilities, including gray scale
exposure mode and the ability to pattern chrome masks for printing features
using conventional contact lithography, will allow the fabrication of devices
with a range of dimensionally-dependent behaviors: 0D (e.g., quantum dots), 1D
(nanowires), 2D (Si transistor technology), and 3D (microfluidics, and micro-
electromechanical (MEMS) systems). The Heidelberg DWL 66+ incorporates the best
attributes of conventional patterning technologies on a single integrated
platform, including (1) design / redesign flexibility, (2) rapid and concurrent
patterning of large areas with sub-micron, micron and millimeter scale features,
and (3) a finer ultimate resolution than optical and UV photolithography. The
direct write system will impact research spanning broad length scales and
applications. Research objectives supported by this instrument include: (1)
property measurement of nanowires / nanosheets and devices, atomically thin
crystals, superconducting quantum circuits, and polymeric and composite micro-
and nanostructures, (2) bio-inspired nanoscale structures for enhanced optical
sensing, noninvasive chemical sensors, microresonators for nanoscale sensing,
and (3) microelectronic / microfluidic / MEMS devices featuring complex 3D
nozzle profiles for targeted mechanoporation-mediated drug delivery to
biological cells, microfluidic environments for cell motility studies and
plasmonic and photonic devices. The broad range of micro- and nanostructures
fundamental to these research projects are not accommodated by any other
available lithographic instrument.