* 1625401
* Stigmatization via Perceived Goal-Irrelevance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Teresa Treat, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,975.00

Stigmatization appears across human societies, yet our scientific understanding
of who is stigmatized, and why, is still incomplete. One reason people may
stigmatize is that they perceive others to threaten their freedoms, values,
health, safety, or resources. When people perceive a group to pose one of these
threats, they feel negative prejudices (e.g., anger and fear) and actively
discriminate (e.g., via expulsion and avoidance). Considerable evidence supports
this threat-based perspective. However, accumulating findings suggest that
stigmatization can also occur without negative prejudice and active
discrimination. Sometimes, people simply fail to attend to and remember members
of certain devalued social groups, and may feel indifferent toward them. This
"social invisibility" does not have the negative emotion and discriminatory
behavior of threat-based stigmatization, but may nonetheless be consequential,
as it could lead a stigmatized person to be passed over for promotions and
recognition; to not be seen as a viable friend, romantic partner, or teammate;
or to be passively excluded from social situations. It is thus important to
understand such social invisibility. The investigator, Rebecca Neel (University
of Iowa) introduces an innovative theoretical perspective that can account for
both invisibility and threat-based forms of stigmatization. The Affordance
Management approach suggests that people attend to aspects of their social
environment that offer them opportunities to act (affordances) in the course of
striving to reach particular goals. Thus social invisibility emerges when a
person is perceived as irrelevant, rather than as a threat, to important goals
like staying safe, finding a romantic partner, or finding a job. That is, people
focus their attention and emotion on others who may impact important goals, and
as a consequence fail to attend to those they perceive as irrelevant to current
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across nine studies, the proposed research
employs eye-tracking technology, memory tests, and an indirect measure of
emotion to examine novel hypotheses about when different forms of stigmatization
emerge. Some theoretical perspectives suggest that only certain groups will
experience social invisibility. In contrast, these studies test the hypothesis
that anyone may be socially invisible depending on the context. Sometimes
individuals of a certain gender, ethnicity or other group membership may be
subjected to social invisibility, whereas other times they may be stigmatized as
a threat. In addition, studies test whether indifference and inattention can
emerge from comparative processes: Whether a particular person is socially
invisible may depend on whether they seem more or less goal-relevant than nearby
others. As part of the research the investigator develops new face stimuli
varying in race, gender, and age. Relatively few face stimuli of Asian and Black
older adults are currently available to the scientific community. The stimuli
will be made publicly available to other researchers to support future work on
attention, emotion, and judgment of older adults. Furthermore, beyond building a
foundation for understanding these dual forms of stigmatization and when each
will emerge, the project may set groundwork for tailored interventions to
address and reduce these dual forms of stigmatization.