* 1625295
* University of Hawaii / Kilo Moana SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Alan Hilton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2020
* USD 269,065.00

A request is made by the University of Hawaii to fund additional and replacement
instrumentation for the R/V Kilo Moana, (KM), a 185? general purpose research
vessel. The vessel is owned by the Navy and operated by the University of Hawaii
as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS)
research fleet.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Because of the unique SWATH design, the
Kilo Moana is a very stable and comfortable platform from which to conduct
oceanographic research. The ship was designed as a multi-purpose oceanographic
research vessel with extensive equipment for geophysical (2 multibeam echo-
sounders, sub-bottom profiler, gravimeter and magnetometer), physical
oceanographic (Doppler current profilers, CTDs, pCO2); meteorological and
radioisotope research. Over 2500 sq. ft. of space is provided in 8 different
laboratories and over 4000 sq. ft. of exterior working space is available on the
aft main deck and the forward 01 deck. The Kilo Moana was built in 2001 and
commissioned in 2002. The vessel operates out of Honolulu, Hawaii, and works
throughout the Pacific. In 2015, the vessel completed 191 days. Of these, 131
days (69%) were for NSF. In 2016, she is currently scheduled to sail 186 days of
which 138 (74%) are funded by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic
Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design
and Engineering Services for A-Frame Stand-Alone Hydraulic Power Unit
$27,560&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of System Components
$37,899&lt;br/&gt;Installation/Commissioning Services $74,000&lt;br/&gt;Post-
install Noise Mitigation Analysis $17,000&lt;br/&gt;
$156,459&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.