* 1625784
* The Elementary Mathematics Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Suzanne Chapin, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Elementary Mathematics Project will improve the mathematics preparation of
future elementary teachers through the development of curricula and
corresponding educative instructor support materials. National reports and
policy recommendations highlight the importance of deepening pre-service
teachers' understanding of elementary content and focusing on mathematical
knowledge for teaching. Studies have shown that undergraduates' achievement is
higher in elementary content courses where instructors report less lecturing and
more student engagement and discussions. Furthermore, there is a tremendous need
for materials and guidance for STEM faculty members to help implement effective
research-based instructional strategies such as inquiry, active learning and
discourse. This project will use design principles focused on deepening
undergraduates' mathematical knowledge for teaching to create curriculum
materials that include problems focused on connecting mathematical concepts,
understanding why procedures work, using mathematical structure, identifying the
mathematics in elementary students' thinking, and engaging in mathematical
practices. Undergraduates will engage in recurring cycles of collaborative
problem solving, group discussions and presentation. The project will help
transform the field by providing mathematicians and teacher educators
responsible for preparing elementary teachers with web access to a wide array of
lessons, instructional tools and strategies. The research outcomes will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge about the mathematical preparation
of future teachers.

The goals of the Elementary Mathematics Project will be to: 1) develop and test
nationally four instructional units on whole number concepts, whole number
operations, geometry and decimals; 2) develop and test interactive, web-based PD
materials for instructors focused on instructional practices; 3) increase pre-
service teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching whole number, decimal and
geometry content; and 4) increase instructors' knowledge and enactment of
instructional practices as a result of using the developed units and
professional development supports. To address these goals, a 5-year project will
be undertaken. During the project, a curriculum will be written (30 lessons,
each with an educative instructor guide), piloted, revised, and field-tested
with 3,000-4,000 undergraduates and over 80 instructors. Data on the
effectiveness of the developed units will be collected using pre- and post-tests
and student surveys, and analyzed using a range of statistical methods including
hierarchical linear modeling. Professional development materials, including
videos of lesson enactments, a video library searchable by mathematical topic
and instructional strategy, webinars, interactive discussion boards and forums,
and face-to-face workshops, will also be developed. The effectiveness of these
materials and the accompanying professional development supports on instructors'
knowledge and teaching practices will be investigated using surveys, interviews,
and classroom observations, analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Dissemination of materials will occur through faculty workshops, webinars,
publication of materials, and an expanded interactive website that includes all
student and instructor materials. The project's research findings will be
disseminated through conference presentations and journal article submissions.