* 1625061
* MRI: Acquisition of a Flexible High-Performance Computing System for Data and Compute Driven Scientific Discovery
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Zoran Obradovic, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project, acquiring High-Performance Computing (HPC) resources for data and
compute-driven scientific discovery, aims to replace and extend outdated current
equipment at the core of the institution's HPC infrastructure. Since the
proposed configuration is designed to particularly address deficiencies of the
current infrastructure and thus adapt it to the needs of its widening user base,
acquiring this instrumentation should enhance current HPC facilities and enable
transformational research over a broad front. Central, shared, on-campus HPC
facilities reduce barriers to access computational resources, especially for
junior scientists, students, and faculty from disciplines that are not
traditional HPC users. This equipment complements existing and future
investments and helps drive related faculty and undergraduate research and
educational activities across the College of Science and Technology (CST) and
the entire Temple community. With an enrollment around 38,000 graduate and
undergraduate students, the institution boasts of a very diverse student body.
With its large shared memory pool, the requested machine will be the first of
its kind in the Greater Philadelphia region that has a high concentration of
high-tech and IT-related industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will obtain 1. A
large shared memory machine with 9TB addressable RAM, 2. An extensible, scalable
parallel storage appliance with 1.5PB capacity, and 3 A 60-node conventional
Linux cluster tuned for small to medium size parallel calculations.
Computational science, materials science, biophysics, data analytics, and
genomics are major themes running through the most active areas of CST research.
Various centers and institutes reflect these themes, such as the 1. Institute
for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, 2, Institute for Computational Molecular
Science, 3.Center for Data Analytics and Biomedical Informatics, 4. Center for
Biophysics and Computational Biology, and 5. Center for Computational Design of
Functional Layered Materials. CST's, in tandem with the Colleges of Engineering
and Liberal Arts, the Schools of Business and Pharmacy, the Fox Chase Cancer
Center, and the School of Medicine aim to broadly impact research in big data,
nano-scale science, imaging, neuroscience, as well as energy and health.