* 1625348
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography System for Nanofabrication at the UW-Madison and Regional Universities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 799,995.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project supports the acquisition of an
Electron Beam Lithography system at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and
regional universities. This tool will provide state-of-the-art nanofabrication
capabilities to a large population of students, faculty, researchers, and
scholars at several universities. This capability will enhance study and
research within fields ranging from physics, to electrical and computer
engineering, to materials science and biology. A key attribute of the instrument
to be acquired is the ability to pattern very small features across large areas
- a capability that is especially important, for example, for modern photonics
technology. Students (graduate and undergraduate) and other scholars around
Wisconsin will directly use the instrument to facilitate cutting-edge study and
research, honing their expertise in a key modern fabrication technology in the
process. Undergraduate education will be enhanced by new components relating to
electron beam lithography in courses in the Department of Physics and the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at UW-Madison. The new
facility will also be used in the recruitment of a diverse group of students to
UW-Madison, as well as for outreach and education activities for high school
students and the general public.

The instrument to be acquired will meet critical needs for students studying and
performing research in a wide range of areas varying from quantum devices to
water quality monitoring and from nanostructured optical metasurfaces to
aggressively scaled carbon nanotube field-effect transistors. The project seeks
an instrument that can provide sub-10 nm lithographic resolution, high-speed
beam deflection, high resolution over a 500 micrometer field without stitching,
and a stitching accuracy of 15 nm. In addition to these high-end features that
will enable a broad spectrum of research, the modern electron beam lithography
tool that will be acquired in this project will provide far greater throughput
while also facilitating use by less experienced users and lowering the barrier
to entry for new users. These advantages will increase the range of users who
will benefit from the instrument's capabilities. The tool will be integrated
within the University of Wisconsin-Madison cleanroom in order to maximize the
instrument's impact. This cleanroom user facility contains a broad array of
auxiliary tools that will enhance the use of the electron-beam instrument. This
facility will also manage and enable broad access to the instrument.