* 1625792
* MRI: Acquisition of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Discovering New Phenomena with In Situ Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 699,300.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Professor L. Robert
Baker from Ohio State University (OSU) and colleagues Umit Ozkan, Gerald
Frankel, Anne Co and David Cole have acquired an X-ray photoelectron
spectrometer (XPS) which operates at near ambient pressures instead of the more
usual high-vacuum operation of standard XPS. These instruments use X-rays to
eject electrons from surfaces. The electrons are detected and analyzed to
identify the elemental and chemical composition of such surfaces. This surface-
sensitive probe is used to study electronic devices, batteries, fuel cells,
sensors, corrosion, materials degradation, catalytic reactions and geochemistry.
It serves the need in academia and industry to probe chemical details of solid
and liquid surfaces under chemically-relevant conditions. The instrument is used
by researchers at OSU and about a dozen regional institutions including
industries and institutions serving underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.
This participation generates a significant regional impact. Undergraduate and
graduate students are trained to use the instrument in research projects,
laboratory coursework and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels at OSU, especially in areas such
as: (a) studying solid electrolyte interphase and interfacial ion solvation, (b)
probing catalysis, electrocatalysis, and solid oxide fuel cells, (c) analyzing
materials degradation and corrosion, and (d) studying earth science and
geochemistry.