* 1625867
* Support For The University Of Arizona Laboratory Of Tree-Ring Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 245,289.00

The Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) at the University of Arizona is the
only source of archaeological tree-ring dates in western North America. With
National Science Foundation (NSF) support, the LTRR operates an analysis program
for tree-ring samples collected by LTRR and other archaeologists from Alaska to
Argentina and from the Pacific Ocean to the Mississippi River. NSF support
allows the program to keep pace with the ever growing demand for archaeological
tree-ring dating, and to maintain high production levels and short turnaround
times. On average, more than 1,000 dates from 4,000+ archaeological tree-ring
samples are produced annually. These data are integrated into relevant
archaeological contexts to construct refined cultural sequences and examine
important issues of past human behavior that cannot be addressed without
accurate, high resolution temporal control. Among these topics are absolute
site, locality, and regional chronologies, social organization structure,
intergroup interaction, and cultural adaptation to physical and social
environments. The program actively promotes the expansion of archaeological
tree-ring dating into new regions such as the Southwestern deserts, Great Basin,
Great Plains, Rocky Mountains, Alaska, Mexico, and South
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has additional intellectual merits.
Exact dating and chronology building are crucial to understanding human
behavior, human-environment interactions, and processes of sociocultural
stability, variation, change, and social evolution. Either directly or
indirectly (through tree-ring dated ceramics), tree-ring dating underlies the
chronology of Southwestern prehistory and many aspects of the documented history
of the region. The project also generates dendroclimatic reconstructions that
are combined with reconstructions produced by other paleoenvironmental
disciplines such as geology, pollen analysis, volcanology, and trace element
studies. In addition to illuminating past environmental processes, these
integrated reconstructions provide a solid empirical foundation for examining
the interrelationships between human behavior and environmental variability.
Finally, the project's efforts to expand research into areas previously thought
to be unsuitable for archaeological tree-ring provide absolutely dated "hinge
points" for archaeological chronologies in the Sonoran Desert, the Great Basin,
the western Great Plains, northern Mexico, and South
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a wide range of broader impacts.
Its findings are almost immediately integrated into undergraduate and graduate
classes in anthropology, geosciences, and other disciplines at the University of
Arizona and other academic institutions. In addition, the project interacts with
K-12 programs and provides public tours of the facility; it provides instruction
for visiting scholars from around the world and facilitates field and laboratory
training for non-profit, governmental, private sector, and Native American
programs. Students accrue particular benefits from the reduced cost of analysis,
thus allowing them to conduct extensive research at lower costs. The LTRR tree-
ring sample collections and data archives are unparalleled, easily accessed
resources for archaeological research, and an under-construction digital
database will enhance the research value of these resources. Increased
understanding of long-term human adaptation to cultural and environmental
variability and enhanced knowledge of past environmental processes help develop
and implement environmental and social policy. Project personnel have
contributed directly to formulating policy for managing cultural and natural
resources by federal, local, and tribal land management agencies.