* 1625586
* Forecasting with Dynamic Panel Data Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Hyungsik Moon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,675.00

Out-of-sample prediction or forecasting is one of the fundamental subjects of
data science. The conventional forecasting methods require long time series
economic data for implementation, and cannot handle economic data with short
time span such as predicting, for example, start-up companies' performances and
bank performances after the recent financial crises. This project aims at
developing a new method to generate forecasts for short time series economic
data using cross sectional information in panel data. In such forecasting,
"good" forecasts require not only "good" estimates of the common components in
the panel data but also the individual specific components in the panel model,
which is the main challenge of the project. The investigator will develop the
optimal forecast based on statistical decision theory and investigate how to
implement it. Ultimately, this project will provide better forecasting tools to
help individual decision makers and policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
develop new methods to generate forecasts for short time series economic data,
the investigator will consider a linear dynamic panel model with unobserved
individual heterogeneity. Because "good" forecasts for panel data require not
only "good" estimates of the common parameters but also the individual specific
parameters in the panel model, they cannot be estimated consistently with short
time span panel in general. The existing literature mostly focuses on
establishing good estimates of the common parameters in the presence of the
large dimensional individual specific parameters, but not necessarily on
establishing good estimates of the individual specific parameters. The key
departure of this project from the previous literature is to relate the
conditional mean of the unobserved individual effect variable to the posterior
mean of the individual effect variable in the Bayesian framework. Building on
Bayesian posterior inference, the investigator will derive an optimal forecast
formula and develop several estimation methods to implement the optimal
forecast. This project will further investigate interesting empirical
applications, including forecasting the performances of US banks after 2008
financial crisis.