* 1625141
* Collaborative Research: Infusing Authentic Research in the Introductory Biology Curriculum-A Multi-Institutional Study
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sue Ellen DeChenne, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 255,150.00

Authentic research experiences in research laboratories run by professors do a
far better job of developing students' research skills and improving student
retention in science than traditional laboratory experiences associated with a
course. This is particularly true with groups who traditionally have not entered
science fields. Authentic research experiences provide motivation to learn the
research skills and demonstrate rewards in solving research problems. CUREs
(Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences) have been created to provide
all science students with a real research experience. However, little is known
about the impacts of CUREs on student research skills and retention in science.
The University of Northern Colorado has developed an introductory biology CURE
based on Tigriopus californicus, a small marine organism, and initial results
indicate the CURE increases students' content knowledge and improves their
motivation towards learning biology, both of which have been shown to increase
retention. This project will expand the CURE to three different institutions: a
Liberal Arts University; a large, Hispanic-Serving Research University; and a
small, Women's Minority-Serving College. Using these diverse student
populations, this project will determine if the CURE improves students' content
knowledge, research skills, motivation towards learning biology, and retention
in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research conducted on CURE student
outcomes relies heavily on student self-reported learning gains, has been
completed with self-selected student populations, and has not been conducted
with student populations who are underrepresented in the STEM disciplines. The
proposed project will enhance and expand current knowledge by adding to the
existing CURE research including: (1) testing aspects of a recently developed
CURE impacts model; (2) the exploration of CURE impacts on students'
experimental design skills, motivation, science identity, and persistence in
science; and (3) the examination of the impacts of CUREs on diverse student
groups, including minorities and first-generation students. This project will
also greatly expand our understanding of Tigriopus californicus, about which
very little is currently known despite its important place at the base of the
marine food chain. Finally, this project will potentially broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in the biological sciences.