* 1625073
* Workshop:   Work Climate in Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Alicia Grandey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 12/31/2017
* USD 45,407.00

Organizational scientists want to optimize the methods for creating innovative
and quality products, often focusing on rational decision-making and
mathematical models of costs and benefits of different outcomes. Yet, this focus
overlooks the fact that working in organizations is a social experience that can
be rewarding and inspiring, or even frustrating and exhausting, and
organizational members experience of such work climates can hinder or override
rational processes. These product-focused (e.g., mechanical engineering) and
person-focused (e.g., organizational psychology) approaches to organizational
effectiveness tend to be studied independently, to the detriment of complete
understanding productive and innovative workplaces. Each discipline has their
own theoretical assumptions and research paradigms, e.g., engineering scholars
focus on computational models and algorithms, and organizational psychologists
obtain subjective reports and observational data. Theoretical advances require
awareness and integration across these disciplines. Methodological advances have
also emerged that may permit better integration of these approaches, such as
technology that records dynamic audio or video of team interactions and mapped
in real time to the team processes and outcomes. Although scholars are becoming
more aware that both the people-oriented and product-oriented approaches matter
to organizational effectiveness, this does not mean that they understand how
these should be integrated. Moving forward in the science of organizations
requires cross-disciplinary discussions from scholars across academic silos. As
such, this workshop seeks to foster communication between leaders in the fields
of engineering design, business, and organizational psychology, in order to
advance the science of organizations through novel interactions between these
disciplines.

An interdisciplinary two-day workshop will be held at Penn State University in
University Park, PA. The goal is to advance the science of organizations -
specifically modeling organizational productivity and innovation - through
communication about advances in theory and research. We will use three
strategies to obtain this goal. First, there will be papers and presentations
shared from leaders in several disciplines who share a common interest in
modeling the productivity and innovation of organizations and openness to
multidisciplinary perspectives. These leaders in the field include named
professors and department chairs, editors of top journals, and active scholars
with grant funding, from organizational psychology, business, computer science,
and engineering. Second, scholars will discuss new methodological advances for
studying how organizational members work together toward shared goals, including
ways to integrate the rational decision making models and the subjective
multilevel and dynamic human experience. Finally, there will be informal
breakout sessions to encourage cross-disciplinary conversations about the
presentations, and permit collaborative opportunities to emerge. Junior scholars
and graduate students with related interests will be invited to attend to
advance the next wave of organizational scholarship. This workshop will provide
unique opportunities to build novel theories and research approaches that more
truly and comprehensively capture the complexity of productive and innovative
processes in today's workplace.