* 1625273
* Collective Efficacy and Norm Violation:  An Experimental Test
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ross Matsueda, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 231,491.00

SES- 1625273 Ross Matsueda University of Washington

This project examines an important question for social science theory and
criminal justice policy: Does disorder in a community foster criminal and
deviant behavior. Or is community efficacy responsible for both disorder and
crime. The researchers approach this question by embedding field experiments
with neighborhoods that vary by social capital and community efficacy. The
answers to these questions have important intellectual payoffs and policy
implications. Intellectually, the project will provide an important test of the
broken windows hypothesis in criminology disorder is a cause of crime and norm
violations versus the collective efficacy hypothesis disorder and crime are each
caused by community efficacy, and therefore, disorder is spuriously related to
crime. The project will yield stronger causal statements than previous research
because it uses experimental methods. The project has important policy
implications. If disorder causes crime directly, then zero-tolerance policing in
which police focus on cleaning up streets of panhandlers, broken windows,
graffiti, and other signs of disorder is called for. If disorder and crime are
not causally related but are instead each caused by community efficacy, then
policies of community empowerment increasing community resources, social ties,
and civic participation are called for. The researchers are incorporating
diverse and underrepresented students in the research process and working with
the city of Seattle to disseminate their results.

To test broken windows theory against collective efficacy, the investigators
will conduct experiments in multiple neighborhoods, capitalizing on their survey
measures of collective efficacy and disadvantage. Five experiments will examine
whether the presence of disorder (graffiti and litter on the ground)affects norm
violating behavior. (1) A Letter Drop, in which 24 stamped addressed letters are
dropped in each of 123 census tracts. Half will be dropped within sight of
graffiti. The mail back rate provides a measure of collective efficacy, as well
as a test of whether physical disorder (graffiti) impedes prosocial activity.
(2) A Lost Envelope Experiment, in which an envelope with a visible $5 bill
enclosed is placed near a mailbox, and passersby can either ignore, mail or
steal the envelope. The treatment condition, graffiti and litter nearby, tests
whether disorder promotes theft and impedes prosocial behavior. (3) A "Litter
Cam," in which a time-elapse camera will record time-to-cleanup in a setting
filled with litter. The hypothesis tested is that time to clean up will be
shorter in collectively efficacious neighborhoods. The treatment condition
"graffiti in the vicinity" tests whether additional disorder impedes acts of
collective efficacy. (4) Intervening During an Act of Littering, in which a
confederate (varied by race and gender) is observed littering in front of local
passersby. The outcome is whether passersby interrupt the confederate. We test
the hypothesis that the race/gender of the litterer interacts with the
race/gender of the intervener. (5) Littering a Flyer on a Car, in which a flyer
placed on windshields of parked cars is either littered or not. The treatment,
disorder (graffiti), tests the broken windows hypothesis.