* 1625599
* MRI: Acquisition of a quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer for research and teaching on marine organisms and biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 219,265.00

The elements of the periodic table provide the building blocks for the earth and
the organisms that inhabit it. Determining the elemental composition of
organisms, along with other co-occurring environmental materials, provides
valuable information for understanding basic molecular and ecological processes,
determining controls on biological processes in the environment, and unraveling
past environmental conditions on earth. Additionally, the elemental composition
of biological and environmental samples is important information for resource
managers and commercial producers. This award will fund (along with non-federal
matching funds) the acquisition of a quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer to be used by researchers at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
and faculty and students at nearby undergraduate colleges. The instrumentation
will enable elemental measurements that will inform understanding of
biogeochemical element cycling in the oceans and estuaries, as well as our
knowledge of past environmental conditions and the potential response of marine
species to future climate change. The instrumentation will used for both
research projects and course-associated instruction for students at Bowdoin
College and Colby College. Additionally, the instrumentation will provide
enhanced, cutting-edge research opportunities for undergraduate students
participating in Bigelow Laboratory?s on-site summer REU program and fall
Changing Oceans semester program. The instrumentation will also improve research
opportunities for postdoctoral researchers at the Laboratory and will enable
Bigelow Laboratory to assist the local aquaculture industry with measurements of
elemental composition of bivalves and macroalgae. This service will both support
costs of maintaining instrumentation and enable growth of commercial output in
Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will fund purchase of a quadrupole
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer equipped with a collision cell to
reduce interferences via kinetic energy discrimination. An instrument such as
the Thermo iCap Qc provides an extremely stable plasma and is capable of
resolving relevant analytes such as Ti-48, Cr-52 and Fe-56. The instrument is
equipped with highly efficient software, self-aligning injector, cone and lens
assemblies, and fits on a benchtop. The award will also fund the purchase of an
ESI seaFAST automated online sample introduction system that utilizes a resin
chelation column to preconcentrate trace metal analytes of interest from
seawater matrix prior to analysis.