* 1625380
* EAGER:  Development of a Novel Double-resonance Fiber-laser-induced Fluorescence Instrument for Long-term, High-sensitivity, Interference-free Measurements of Hydroxyl Radical (OH)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Frank Keutsch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 43,026.00

This project focuses on the development of a novel method for measuring ambient
hydroxyl radicals (OH) in the atmosphere, based on the use of infra-red, ultra-
violet, laser-induced fluorescence (IR-UV LIF). The project is a collaborate
effort with scientists in the laboratory of Professor Dr. Andreas Wahner,
Director of the Institute for Energy and Climate Research at Forschungszentrum
JÃ¼lich (FZJ) in Germany. Previous fundamental studies on this method have found
that it is highly sensitive and free from chemical interferences, but its use
has been restricted to physical-chemistry laboratories due to limitations
associated with maintaining the stability of the laser in the field. The
scientists will explore the coupling of a highly selective spectroscopic method
to the latest advances in fiber laser technology for the development of a novel
OH LIF instrument.

The hydroxyl radical is the most important oxidizing species in the atmosphere.
It reacts with many chemical species in air, oxidizing them and serving as a
cleansing mechanism for the ultimate removal of important trace gases such as
air pollutants and greenhouse gases. The novel method being developed is
expected eventually to be adapted worldwide for field use, enabling long-term
measurements of the hydroxyl radical. The resulting data will be critical for
improving models of air quality and climate change.