* 1625083
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the modulatory effect of expectations on memory retrieval during sentence comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Klara Marton, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 12,021.00

Understanding the nature and the source of processing difficulty in human
language comprehension has been a central goal in psychology and linguistics for
its theoretical and practical implications. Memory retrieval and probabilistic
expectations are recognized factors in sentence comprehension that capture two
different critical aspects of processing difficulty: the cost of retrieving and
integrating previously processed elements with the new input words and the cost
of incorrect predictions about upcoming words or structures in a sentence.
Although these two factors have independently received substantial support from
the extant literature, their relationship remains poorly understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study investigates memory retrieval and
expectation in two experiments, pitting these factors against each other to
observe how they interact. The two experiments are direct extensions of the
reading dual-task paradigm developed by Van Dyke &amp; McElree (2006) and
examine the interplay of semantic expectation and memory retrieval. The present
experimental work is supplemented by a computational modeling study. The model
will include both memory retrieval and expectation constraints and will be
implemented in the ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson, 1976, 2005).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to test a novel hypothesis
according to which expectations modulate memory retrieval: retrieving and
integrating a word previously processed is easier in a highly predictable
context (sharp expectation) as compared to a weakly predictable context. Such an
integrative model affords the possibility of reconciling the sometimes
contrasting predictions that arise from these two approaches, and constitutes a
theoretical and methodological advance in psychology and linguistics research.
In addition, a better understanding of the links between expectations and memory
retrieval in language comprehension has the potential of helping professionals
to improve their education and intervention methods.