* 1625499
* MRI: Development of ASIC's Suite for Analog Processing of Signals from Large Arrays of Silicon-Strip Detectors and PSD-Capable Scintillators
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2021
* George Engel, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2021
* USD 204,565.00

This award supports the ASIC (Application Specific Integrated Circuit) chip
fabrication that will expand the capabilities of two low energy nuclear physics
experiments aimed at understanding the complex structure of exotic nuclei. The
first experiment will take place at the NSCL (National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory) and will compare oxygen and lithium isotopes, which have mirror-like
structure and can lead to the nucleosynthesis of heavier isotopes such as argon
and chlorine. The second experiment will take place at Florida State University
and investigate reactions that play a major role in understanding the products
of explosive astrophysical events such as novae and x-ray bursts. The
undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project will receive
excellent preparation for professional careers in forefront physics and
engineering and in the growing overlap areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this award supports the development, design and fabrication of
ASIC chips that extend the scientific reach of (at least) two programs. One of
these programs, led by the Washington University reactions group, uses the
invariant mass technique to study the continuum structure of proton-rich nuclei.
This program will use the upgraded HINP (Heavy Ion Nuclear Physics) chip at NSCL
to search for the ground state in O-11, which is the mirror of Li-11, the
prototype exotic nucleus (huge n/p asymmetry). These measurements, and others
planned by this and other groups, require electronics with both large dynamic
range and excellent resolution, features included in the new ASIC design. A
second empowered experimental program will use (d,n) reactions as a surrogate
for astrophysically relevant (p,gamma) reactions. Such experiments have to
contend with physical neutron cross talk (in the neutron detectors themselves)
and gamma background. The technology of the PSD (Pulse Shape Discrimination)
chip enables large arrays of neutron-sensitive detectors that can reduce these
problems. These experiments will be led by a Florida State University group,
initially at their local facility and later at both Argonne National Laboratory
and the future Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB).