* 1625737
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Chemical Crystallography Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* William Connick, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 395,090.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
William Connick from the University of Cincinnati and colleagues Anna
Gudmundsdottir, Jeanette Krause, James Mack II and Hairong Guan have acquired a
dual source, microfocus single crystal X-ray diffractometer equipped with a
photon detector and a cryogenic device. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles. It also provides accurate
information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring
molecules. The studies described here impact a number of areas, including
organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at
this institution and regional collaborators. Additionally, the instrument
exposes high school and undergraduate students to crystallography and research.
Participation of underrepresented groups is enhanced through the principal
investigator's involvement with ACS-Project SEED, Dreyfus, NSF-REU and Women in
Science and Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
identifying efficient photoprocesses for storing energy via metal-complex
photochemistry that releases two electrons per photon absorbed, (b) studying
sensor materials to determine the mechanisms of colorimetric and luminescence-
based responses of materials to chemical vapors and aqueous ions, (c) preparing
and characterizing potential catalysts for chemical transformations and green
technologies and (d) characterizing the underlying chemistry of agents that
release reactive species that target specific substrates or are themselves
components in metabolic pathways or nanostructured materials.