* 1625780
* MRI: Development of X-ray Diffraction in High Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Alexey Suslov, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,233,597.00

A magnetic field, measured in Tesla, is a fundamental physical variable, similar
to pressure. As a reference, the Earth's magnetic field is of the order of 0.5mT
(milli Tesla). Although X-ray diffraction at high pressures is now a common
technique, X-ray diffraction and scattering techniques at steady state magnetic
fields above 15 Tesla are unavailable. The new 25 Tesla Florida Split Coil
Magnet provides the opportunity to change this, increasing the accessible
steady-state magnetic field for X-ray studies by nearly 66%. Adding a
diffraction setup to the Florida Split Coil Magnet that is located at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee, will provide unique
capabilities to probe the magnetic responses in crystalline materials. The
instrument will facilitate structural studies in high magnetic fields for the
broader research community. Examples of materials to be studied include
superconductors, ferro- and antiferromagnetic materials, as well as engineering
materials. An example of the latter is rolled steel, where a martensitic phase
transition can be induced at low temperatures by magnetic fields in excess of 12
Tesla. The diffractometer will consist of an X-ray source, a beam delivery
system, a sample holder, and an area detector. Due to the large fringe fields
emanating from the magnet, it is imperative to include magnetic field mitigation
in the design of the diffractometer. Electronic and mechanical components
susceptible to magnetic fields need to be removed from the space where strong
fringe fields are present, requiring custom built and custom modified devices
and parts. To enhance the X-ray flux delivered to the sample, additional optical
elements reflecting and focusing the X-ray beam, will be included. The
diffractometer will become part of the user capabilities at the NHMFL, and will
be available to the user community at large via the NHMFL proposal system. The
instrument will be the only one of its kind, leveraging the investment of NSF in
the NHMFL and the Florida Split Coil Magnet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) is at the forefront of resistive magnet
technology, and holds the world record in DC magnetic field strength. The recent
addition of the world's strongest split coil magnet, with 25T field strength and
visual access to the sample allows the development of a novel X-ray
diffractometer to study the spin-lattice coupling of materials at high fields.
Spin-lattice interactions in crystalline materials where spin order or orbital
order elicits an elastic response of the lattice that can be studied.
Diffraction techniques are well suited to detect this elastic response via unit
cell changes, with high accuracy. Additionally, a magnetic field can also induce
magnetic phase transitions and magnetic order, and order temperatures can be
shifted. Magnetostrictive effects are observed in a number of ferro-,
antiferro-, and helimagnetic materials, as well as multiferroic materials that
couple ferroelectric and ferromagnetic order via the magneto-electric effect.
The diffractometer will consist of an X-ray source, a beam delivery system, a
sample holder, and an area detector. Due to the large fringe fields, in excess
of 0.2T, emanating from the magnet, it is imperative to include magnetic field
mitigation in the design of the diffractometer. Electronic and mechanical
components susceptible to magnetic fields need to be removed from the space
where strong fringe fields are present, requiring custom built and custom
modified devices and parts, together with passive and active magnetic field
shielding. The diffractometer includes a high power rotating anode X-ray source,
optical elements such as X-ray mirrors, evacuated beam paths, beryllium windows,
a custom sample holder, and a modified X-ray area detector adapted to perform in
the strong fringe fields at the X-ray exit port. The diffractometer will become
part of the measurement capabilities at the NHMFL for the 25T split coil magnet,
and will be available to the user community at large. The instrument will be the
only one of its kind, leveraging the investment of NSF in the NHMFL and the
Florida Split Coil Magnet. This system will complement the pulsed magnets at
national synchrotron light sources, and it increases the available DC field
strength for diffraction experiments. Development of the instrument is an
excellent opportunity to train a student and postdoc in the construction and
integration of components, building an instrument with unique capabilities.