* 1625107
* Elementary Science Simulations to Advance Undergraduate Elementary Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sharon Dotger, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,697.00

Future elementary teachers, known as elementary teacher candidates, are taught
how to teach science through college coursework. Yet, due to a strong emphasis
on reading and mathematics in elementary school classrooms, teacher candidates
across the nation experience few opportunities to actually practice teaching
science. Since 1963, future doctors have been practicing their medical knowledge
and skills through clinical simulations, where they interact one-to-one with
carefully trained standardized patients who portray distinct health concerns.
This project utilizes the concept of clinical simulations in support of future
elementary teachers. Researchers will situate future elementary teachers in six
different elementary science simulations, challenging them to guide standardized
students (actors who are carefully trained to present content errors, questions,
and/or concerns consistent with elementary school students) toward better
understanding of elementary science concepts. Through this project, the
researchers will investigate how future teachers translate what they know about
teaching elementary science--from college coursework--into how they actually
teach elementary science concepts--in simulations. The benefit to the education
community is generation of the elementary science simulations, their potential
to help bridge the gap between teacher preparation and teacher practice, and
what the project will learn from investigating and generating evidence-based
findings. Financial support for this project comes from NSF's Improving
Undergraduate Education (IUSE) program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program. The project contributes to the improvement of undergraduate education
by improving the teaching and learning of science by elementary teacher
candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)
outline clear expectations for K-12 science content and eight instructional
practices--such as the practice of constructing scientific explanations--to
support content exploration (NGSS Lead States, 2013). While the NGSS call for
knowledge of science content and scientific practices, elementary teacher
candidates experience very few opportunities to engage in the practices
associated with teaching science in elementary classrooms (Olson et al., 2015).
This project will adapt the long-standing medical education pedagogy of clinical
simulations to (1) provide elementary teacher candidates multiple opportunities
to engage in the teaching of elementary science phenomena, and (2) explore if
elementary teacher candidates develop in their capacity to guide students in the
specific NGSS practice of constructing scientific explanations of elementary
science concepts. Assessing elementary teacher candidates in their collegiate
Elementary Science Methods coursework, and through their subsequent interactions
in six elementary science simulations, the researchers will investigate
candidates' potential advances in science teaching efficacy and their ability to
construct--and guide students toward constructing--scientific explanations of
elementary science concepts. This study contributes to the broader scientific
community by carefully examining if and how science teacher preparation
coursework is shaping the daily practices of teachers as they teach science to
students. This study seeks to identify how elementary science simulations may
serve as one of the "new functions of the undergraduate learning and teaching
enterprise" consistent with the IUSE program intent.