* 1625735
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Enhance NMR Capabilities at a Major Urban Research Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Graham Moran, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 392,690.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Peter Geissinger from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and colleagues
Graham Moran, Arsenio Pacheco, Deyang Qu and Nicholas Silvaggi have acquired a
500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as the study of biologically
relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. The results from these NMR studies
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is located a general user facility managed by
highly qualified scientists is an integral part of research, research training
and teaching in the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry. The spectrometer
helps in the overall mission by providing students with NMR knowledge and enable
their success in the chemical/engineering workforce for many industries
(chemical, pharmaceutical, biotechnological, engineering, environmental and
others), government agencies and laboratories, educational and research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) enzyme mechanisms; (b)
non-proteinogenic amino acid L-enduracididine; (c) multi-heme respiratory
enzymes involved in the interconversion of ammonia and nitrite; (d) enantio- and
stereospecific methods to synthesize antimalarial and antileishmanial bisindole
alkaloids; (e) asymmetric catalysts for organic synthesis; (f) vitamin D
receptor modulators; (g) reactivity and function of DNA and its application for
DNA sequence detection and drug discovery; (h) energy technologies and (i)
reagents, media, and processes for the separation of metal ions.