* 1625824
* Collaborative Research: Integrating conceptual reasoning with mathematical formalism:  Teaching and assessing mathematical sense-making in quantum mechanics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 214,638.00

This project addresses a key area of significance in physics learning: linking
mathematical understanding and conceptual mastery of physics. Prior research on
the teaching and learning of quantum mechanics has focused either on conceptual
understanding or on competency with the mathematical formalism and problem-
solving techniques, but only rarely linked these two critical elements of
understanding. In quantum mechanics, integrating these two elements is
essential. We will refine existing tools and provide associated instructional
guides that support enhanced student learning both in the middle division
(roughly sophomore) and upper division (junior and senior) quantum mechanics
courses. The instructional targets for the sophomore-level materials will be
determined in part by the skills and habits of mind that our upper-division
students most need, as revealed by research on upper-division students'
strengths and weaknesses with mathematical sense-making.

The goal of this project is to take a research-based and research-validated
approach to modifying suites of materials that explicitly link students
conceptual mastery and mathematical understanding of quantum mechanics.
Development of assessment tools and of resources for instructors will happen in
tandem with the refinement of the curricular modules, all informed by research
designed to advance understanding of the mechanisms that disrupt or support
mathematical sense-making in quantum mechanics. This research will combine
large-N surveys with fine-grained video analysis of students to investigate the
effectiveness of the designed/modified materials in both classroom and clinical
settings. The refined curricular materials will be implemented at 5 institutions
varying in size and diversity, directly impacting around 400 students. The team
will encourage and facilitate informed adaptation of the materials by other
instructors and institutions to meet the needs of their own instructional
contexts. By bringing mathematical sense-making and other elements of the
quantum mechanics "hidden curriculum" out into the open, this project will
contribute to making upper-division physics more accessible to a wider range of
students who do not start out enculturated into physics. Improving students'
understanding of quantum mechanics, which can be a barrier to advancement in
physics (e.g, on Ph.D. qualifying exams), will increase retention of
underrepresented populations. Finally, physics majors exposed to reformed
curricula who later become instructors might be more inclined to seek out
physics education research-based materials and methods, benefiting the next
generation of students in physics courses. This second-order broader impact of
the project might be large in the long term due to the multiplier effect.