* 1625015
* Authentic Scientific Practices in the Classroom: A Model-Based-Inquiry Curriculum for the Introductory Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Katcher, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 598,690.00

A key challenge facing undergraduate science education is how best to integrate
scientific practice into classrooms. It is not enough for students to know the
information that scientists have learned. They should also learn the skills that
are needed to conduct scientific inquiries. In particular, traditional
laboratory courses are frequently misaligned with the ways of thinking that take
place in an authentic research setting. Participation in authentic scientific
inquiry has been shown to enhance the undergraduate science experience in
several ways, but these opportunities are not available to all students. For
students at two-year colleges these opportunities are even less common. Instead
many students, particularly at the introductory level, are presented with an
incomplete or even skewed view of the nature of science - often focused on
memorization of facts and completion of procedures rather than the practices
that scientists use to develop and refine new knowledge. By contrast, a
pedagogical method termed 'Model-Based-Inquiry" (MBI) has been successfully used
to engage students in authentic scientific practices. The effectiveness of MBI
has been demonstrated in K-12 classrooms and in undergraduate physics and
chemistry classrooms, but not in undergraduate biology classrooms. The primary
goal of this project is to develop and test a Model-Based-Inquiry curriculum for
an introductory biology laboratory course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will take place as a collaboration between a large, public, research university,
the University of Arizona (UA), and a two-year college, Pima Community College.
Students will engage in laboratory activities that directly relate to ongoing
research at UA. Project impacts will include: 1) reform of a key introductory
course at two institutions which serve large numbers of students from
underrepresented groups; 2) national dissemination of a novel curriculum that
addresses current needs in biology education; 3) training of postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate researchers in biology education, including members
of groups underrepresented in science; 4) synergistic collaboration between
biologists at a two-year college and a research university. In addition to
development and implementation of a novel curriculum, the project will include
educational research to uncover new information about undergraduate model-based-
reasoning through detailed assessment of classroom learning. Project assessment
will determine how well the MBI curriculum contributes to students': 1) agency
and identity as a scientists, 2) understanding of the nature of scientific
inquiry, and 3) cognitive and technical skills for science. Project
dissemination will include publication of research results as well as sharing of
the curricular approach through distribution of curricular materials and through
workshops to engage faculty in MBI-based pedagogy.