* 1625917
* Collaborative Research: Communication, Cartels and Collusion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Yu Awaya, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2019
* USD 197,207.00

Maintaining healthy competition among firms is key to the well-being of the
economy. Cartels stifle such competition, leading to higher prices and
restricted choices for consumers. Indeed, the purpose of antitrust law is to
ensure that this does not happen. Case documents from recent cartel prosecutions
in the US and Europe point to the important role that regular and frequent---
sometimes even weekly---communication plays in sustaining high prices. Economic
theory, on the other hand, is more or less silent on whether or not
communication facilitates collusion. In this project, the PIs propose to study
both the kinds of environments and the kinds of communication which are harmful
to consumers. For instance, firms frequently exchange sales figures claiming
that this is actually beneficial to the economy---it allows firms to ascertain
market conditions and improve investment decisions. The PIs' preliminary
research indicates that the exchange of sales figures can also be detrimental---
it allows firms to monitor each other to see if cartel members are complying
with the agreement. This suggests that society would benefit if limits were
placed on such communication---say, if sales figures were exchanged only yearly
rather than quarterly. This project will seek to develop a better theoretical
understanding of when and how such a policy would improve
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examining the role of communication in cartels
would represent both a significant intellectual advance in our understanding of
collusion, and a practical advance in guiding government and business
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project is driven by two major
questions. First, how does inter-firm communication affect competition? What
forms of communication are detrimental to society and what forms are not?
Second, how does communication facilitate cooperation in long-term relationships
in general? Work by Awaya and Krishna has addressed the first question in
situations in which market demand is rather variable. They showed that in this
environment, absent any communication, firms are not able to successfully
collude because detecting departures from any cartel agreement is difficult. But
if firms can communicate, by exchanging even unverifiable sales data, then they
can sustain high prices and profits. The fact that even unverifiable data can be
used to foster collusion is surprising. The main objective of the first part of
the project is to explore the extent to which this finding extends to other
kinds of communication---in particular, the exchange of aggregate data via trade
associations which the courts deem to be legal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
part of the project concerns the extension of these ideas to other contexts. It
asks whether communication facilitates cooperation in general long-term
relationships, specifically, general repeated games with private monitoring.
Preliminary research indicates that this is not always the case. The project
will seek to identify and classify situations in which communication has a
positive benefit to the participants. It will develop methods for bounding the
set of equilibrium payoffs in repeated games without communication. It will then
seek to identify what forms of communication can overcome the bounds and
further, what forms are most beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions
addressed have direct implications for antitrust policy. For instance, it is an
important policy as to what kinds of inter-firm communication are potentially
detrimental to society.