* 1625064
* Process Matters:  Legislative Procedure in the United Nations General Assembly
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Courtenay Conrad, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 118,553.00

This project proposes that thinking of the assembly as a legislature-
specifically by focusing on its process and procedure-can significantly expand
our understanding of state behavior and influence in international
organizations. The United States spends tens of millions of dollars on United
Nations related activities each year. This project provides a potential avenue
of new understanding that could alter the outcome of national security and other
diplomatic situations in the future. By better explaining the logic and motives
behind state behavior, it could provide US decision makers with a more informed
means of strategically navigating UN pathways to successful
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wealth of international relations literature
focuses on roll call voting outcomes in the United Nations General Assembly. The
United Nations General Assembly facilitates cooperation between states in the
international system and provides a forum for states to send important signals.
The institution helps states manage collective resources, lowers the transaction
costs of joint decision-making, and increases the transparency with which
decisions are made regarding war and peace. In order to understand how state
preferences are aggregated within the United Nations, scholars have focused much
attention on adoption votes at the end of the process. But final adoption is
only one?arguably small?part of the story; much of the conflict and negotiation
that occurs in the UNGA happens before agenda items and resolutions ever reach
the plenary floor. This project will thus help better understand the uncover
sources of power and dimensions of conflict that have gone undetected.