* 1625573
* MRI-ACQUISITION OF A SHARED MULTI-COLLECTOR INDUCTIVELY COUPLED MASS SPECTROMETER (MC-ICP-MS) TO BENEFIT TEACHING, FEDERAL, STATE, AND NATIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS IN THE ARCTIC
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Lee Ann Munk, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 581,702.00

An award is made to the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) to establish the
first multi-collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS)
facility in Alaska. This new instrument will be part of the Alaska Isotope
Facility (AIF) and will provide support to recruit a new full-time, expert
research faculty member at UAF, trained in using MC-ICP-MS. These new resources
will be available to train students and researchers from across the UAF campus,
as well as other academic institutions both in and outside of Alaska. The
facility will serve researchers from state and federal agencies, including those
from the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Army Corp of Engineers and U.S. Fish &amp;
Wildlife Service. AIF, the University of Alaska Museum of the North and the
Center of Alaska Native Health Research, will provide high quality education and
outreach opportunities involving the public, K-12 students, rural high school
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students. The new facility will allow
chemical analyses of samples, supporting research projects to better understand
the migration of salmon and other commercially important fish species, to reveal
the migration patterns of ancient and modern animals in the Arctic and to
advance our ability to identify sources of heavy metal contamination to the
subsistence food web in Alaska, which is critical to the culture and health of
Alaska Native people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new research facility will
provide cutting-edge research techniques to those studying environmental changes
in the Arctic and will enhance existing federal investments in the Arctic.
Research areas to be immediately enabled include research into migration
patterns of economically and culturally important animals in both Arctic aquatic
and terrestrial realms, such as salmon, bison and caribou, in response to
environmental changes. This new instrument will also support hydrologic studies
in the Arctic, which in turn are linked to understanding permafrost dynamics and
the release of important greenhouse gases, such and methane and carbon dioxide,
to the atmosphere. In the marine realm, the new instrumentation will enable
research to study elements that are biologically necessary and can limit or co-
limit productivity in parts of the ocean and others that are toxic and can
negatively affect higher trophic levels when biomagnified through food webs,
such as mercury. This area has particular cultural relevance for Alaska Native
communities that rely on subsistence resources.