* 1625340
* MRI:   Acquisition of an upgraded radio frequency console, a broadband nitrogen-cooled probe and an autosampler for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Geneive Henry, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 223,890.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
William Dougherty from Susquehanna University and colleagues Geneive Henry and
Elizabeth Valentin have upgraded a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectrometer by equipping it with a new radio frequency console, a broadband
probe capable of operating between -100 and +150 degrees Centigrade and a
24-position autosampler. The upgraded electronics for the spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as those that allow study of
biologically relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. The results
from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. The acquired probe acts both as a
broadband and high-field probe which increases sensitivity. This instrument is
an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate
students via independent student research and traditional academic coursework.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in areas such as (a) understanding the influence chemical structure has on the
redox properties of transition metal complexes; (b) studying the redox
properties of first row transition metal complexes bearing sterically bulky
trispyrazolylborate ligands and (c) isolating and spectroscopically
characterizing natural products from Carex (grassy plants or sedge) and
Hypericum species (herbaceous shrubs) growing in Pennsylvania.