* 1625044
* MRI: Acquisition of a Smart Sensor Web for understanding freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Kathleen Ruiz, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 917,033.00

An award is made to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to acquire a single, highly
integrated network of lake sensors that form a "Smart Sensor Web", which will
monitor chemical, physical, and biological parameters of Lake George, NY and its
major tributaries over more than a decade. Fresh water is a critical global
resource for agriculture, electricity generation, industry, human health, and
ecosystem health. As a result, there is a tremendous need to understand the
functioning of freshwater ecosystems and how human activities affect these
functions. The Jefferson Project is a large, interdisciplinary effort to address
this need by incorporating research and technology from multiple fields of
science. To monitor changes in the lake over space and time, the Smart Sensor
Web includes weather stations, tributary stations, vertical profilers, and
acoustic Doppler current profilers (ADCPs) equipped with IBM Smart Technology.
These sensors can communicate with researchers and each other to make real-time
sampling decisions over space and time. These data will be combined with
historic data (35 yrs of non-automated weather, tributary, and lake chemistry
data), ongoing food-web surveys, and experimental data that examine the
underlying causes of how human activities can alter overall water quality. These
monitoring and experimental data will then be brought together to develop
integrated models of weather, run-off, lake circulation, and food webs.
Assembling these components will serve as a global example of how researchers
can use advanced technology for environmental monitoring, serve as a basis for
real-time and responsible conservation tactics, and to attain a scientifically
deep understanding of freshwater ecosystems, which are critical for global
security and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and models that are
facilitated by the Smart Sensor Web will allow us to address a wide range of
transformative questions. These questions include tracking changes in
phytoplankton, micro-benthos, and microbial assemblages with respect to spatial
and temporal changes in physical and chemical parameters, understanding the
effect of species diversity on lake ecosystem processes, and quantifying the
effect of spatial and temporal food chain coupling on lake ecosystem processes.
We will also be able to monitor and track anthropogenic disturbances (e.g.,
nutrient inputs, turbidity, and road salt), understand how climate variation is
associated with shifts in lake hydrology and temperature profiles, and how water
currents affect the dispersal of invasive species. Moreover, the Smart Sensor
Web will allow researchers to establish modern proxies for reconstructing the
lake?s history via lake coring research. The data produced by the Smart Sensor
Web will be combined with many other types of data including non-automated
monitoring of other lake parameters, experimental manipulations, and a diverse
set of models (i.e. weather, hydrology, lake circulation, and food web models).
Together, these efforts will offer the ability to conduct an integrated
ecosystem assessment and a lake web observatory that will serve as a global
blueprint for a revolutionary approach to understanding freshwater ecosystems.
Data provided by the instrument will be used by a diverse group of faculty
spanning eight departments and multiple centers at RPI. In addition to the
traditional benefits of training students and disseminating results to the
public through seminars and web sites, the broader impacts of the Jefferson
Project extend much farther. The data, semantic data, and data derivatives will
be available to scientists around the world. In addition, the &gt;45 faculty,
post-docs, and graduate students involved in the Jefferson Project will
collectively conduct a massive amount of K-12 STEM education and communication
to the public. Faculty and students are already involved in ongoing outreach,
and we are proposing several new activities designed to visualize complex
ecosystems, including a 3D online educational game simulation for middle and
high school students, a visiting artist program, and a virtual artwork
installation, "The World of Plankton". This latter installation is an
interactive 3D immersive environment world to be shown in museums, art
galleries, and online. These efforts will extend our outreach to diverse
communities throughout art, science, education, and cultural venues.