* 1625158
* EAR-PF: Current and future glacial controls on the rate of active microbial biogeochemical cycling in Arctic fjords
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Alexander Michaud, Michaud                 Alexander      B
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 184,000.00

Dr. Alexander B. Michaud has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the Center for Geomicrobiology at
Aarhus University in Denmark and Stony Brook University in New York. Dr. Michaud
will investigate the role of Arctic fjords as a source or sink of iron and
manganese to the Arctic shelf environment under current and future climatic
conditions. Sediment cores from the fjords of Svalbard (an archipelago in the
Arctic Ocean, between Norway and the North Pole) will be used to measure rates
of metal and sulfate reduction and to analyze aqueous and solid-phase
geochemistry. The investigation will link data on active microbial populations
with biogeochemical rates in Arctic fjord sediments, integrating multiple
disciplines (geomicrobiology, geochemistry, glaciology, oceanography and
geology). In addition to research, Dr. Michaud will develop interactive,
standards-based Earth and life science lesson plans based on Arctic
biogeochemistry and glaciology. This lesson plans will be used at Hardin High
School, a rural school in southwestern Montana with high enrollment of Native
American students. Dr. Michaud will interact with the students via Skype.

The fjords of Western Svalbard are a biogeochemically active interface between
the subglacial and shelf environments. The rates and interactions between
microbially mediated Fe, Mn and S cycles within the fjord sediments ultimately
influence the concentrations of metals exported to the shelf environment. The
impact of increased organic carbon input to the sediments on biogeochemical
cycles will be assessed by RNA stable isotope probing which labels the active
microorganisms. These experiments will allow the rates of Fe, Mn and S
transformations in fjord sediments to be linked with the active microbial
populations. The investigation will integrate geobiological and geochemical
methods to understand how terrestrial subglacial processes influence microbial
communities in permanently cold (<5°C) marine sediments.

This award was supported with funding from the Office of International Science &
Engineering.