* 1625181
* MRI: Development of a femtosecond angle-resolved electron spectroscopy system for mapping the 3D electronic structures and responses of functional materials and nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Phillip Duxbury, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 971,941.00

The ability to control and engineer complex materials and nanostructures is
essential for enabling an array of technologies including: solar-energy
harvesting, solar to fuel conversion, heat recovery, and the development of
novel photoactive nanostructured materials and nanoelectronics devices used in
computing and internet infrastructure. This project will overcome widely
recognized major bottlenecks to progress by addressing the scarcity of
experimental data on the changes of local properties in these functional
materials or devices. This is enabled by using innovative accelerator-based
approaches to manipulate the probe's dynamical properties to significantly
enhance the intensity and time-resolution of an ultrafast electron probe system.
The high-throughput of the present system is the ideal probe for unveiling
transient photochemical processes due to its high sensitivity to charge states
and its more direct accesses to local electronic structures and electron
dynamics for pinpointing the origins of these local, transient electronic
processes. Furthermore, the present system advantageously provides three-
dimensional spectroscopy by high-energy beams that penetrate the bulk of samples
and the ability to sample large energy dispersion and momentum distributions.
These new capabilities are also relevant to understanding an array of complex
materials issues of broad interest, including studies of high-temperature
superconductors, phase transitions, and novel electronic switching devices.
Scientific and technological progress will be enabled by a unique team of
experts in accelerator and beam physics, radiofrequency cavity design and
construction, femtosecond (one quadrillionth, or one millionth of one billionth,
of a second) laser and electron beam technologies, and theoretical modeling for
the development of this unique ultrahigh speed electron beam system. The outcome
of this MRI will be potentially transformative for addressing Grand Challenge
Problems in nanoscience and nanotechnology that are critical to the industrial
and applied sector, in areas ranging from catalysis to photovoltaics and
material synthesis. We envision that the successful development of such a
technology will lead to a new generation of electron-based ultrafast
spectroscopy systems that are economical enough to be widely replicated in
individual industry or university-based laboratories .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
novel ultrafast high-brightness electron spectrometer system will be designed
and implemented to achieve high sensitivity and combined high momentum-energy
resolution through innovative active energy compression technology to preserve
the throughput of the femtosecond photo-activated electron beam. The new system,
a prototype ultrafast angle-resolved electron spectroscopy system, will be the
first of its kind to provide element-sensitive spectroscopic imaging of three-
dimensional electronic structures in complex and nanostructured materials at
ultrafast timescales. The new capabilities will provide needed high throughput,
and access to bulk crystalline materials. Significantly broader reach in energy
scales will be available, covering the entire Brillouin Zone of quantum and
complex materials with three-dimensional electronic structures, thus providing a
more universal method than existing approaches. It is also targeted to
substantially enhance the temporal-momentum resolution and throughput of
electron-based spectroscopy systems to ultimately allow studies of individual
nanostructures and motifs. The resulting spectrometer will be well-suited for
characterizing; radiation effects in materials, defects, and photo-responses in
plasmonic and photovoltaic nanostructures; phase transitions of superconductors
and complex, strongly correlated electron materials; and exploring novel phases
of matter in extreme environments. Scientific and technological progress will be
enabled by a unique team of experts in accelerator and beam physics,
radiofrequency cavity design and construction, femtosecond laser and electron
beam technologies, and theoretical modeling for the development of this unique
femtosecond electron beam system. The outcome of this MRI will be potentially
transformative for investigating ultrafast physical, chemical and materials
electronic processes to understand and identify the emerging and functional
properties of complex, nanostructured materials and devices for addressing Grand
Challenge Problems in condensed matter physics, materials and chemistry. Such a
capability is also of interest to the industrial and applied sector, in areas
ranging from catalysis to photovoltaics and material synthesis. It is envisioned
that the successful development of such a technology will lead to a new
generation of electron-based ultrafast spectroscopy systems that are economical
enough to be widely replicated in individual industrial or university-based
laboratories for ultrafast materials research.