* 1625397
* Addressing Ubiquitous STEM Gender Performance Differences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Timothy McKay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,932,221.00

This is a wide reaching project that combines strands of a number of NSF
priorities and earlier NSF-supported projects, including "Writing to Learn,"
WIDER (institutional transformation), INCLUDES (broadening participation), Cyber
learning, and Big Data Analytics. Using big data analytics, it has been
quantitatively established that female students taking introductory STEM lecture
courses at 10 major public research universities show evidence of stereotype
threat, which lowers their course performance by 5% to 10% and discourages some
from continuing as STEM majors. The goal of the project is to continue to refine
and employ a digital mentoring/ treatment tool that has undergone pilot stage
testing to deliver up to three types of treatments to countervail the presence
of stereotype threat. This tool has the potential to be customized for each
student. It was developed with early stage support from an earlier NSF/ DUE
grant. This tool will use a writing-to-learn tool being developed under an
NSF/IUSE grant. The writing tool is building a comprehensive writing system,
combining peer review tools with a natural language processing toolkit designed
to provide actionable information about student responses to the digital
mentoring tool. This project is expected to have a substantial direct impact on
female STEM students and has good prospects for encouraging more of them to
remain in STEM as their primary college major. If the tool proves to be
effective in eliminating gender performance differences in STEM courses, it is
likely to be employed in a growing number of other research universities,
thereby multiplying its impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project itself will
work with 5,000 distinct undergraduate women in a randomized treatment design to
test the efficacy of basic treatment and to test the improved efficacy of
individualizing the treatment for each student. Because all of the interactions
with students will take place through the digital mentoring/ treatment tool
framework, the project will have complete control over what each student
experiences, along with a comprehensive "treatment record" of what each student
encountered and did within the system, including the writing they did in
response to the intervention prompts. The ability to control and record
personalized treatment for every individual allows the treatment to be assessed
through randomized trials. This approach has been the key to the development of
sequential multiple assignment randomized trials in digital health coaching, for
example.