* 1625050
* MRI: Acquisition of a Modern Secondary Ion Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary Research and Training of Next Generation Scientists
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Ishrat Khan, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 693,854.00

Clark Atlanta University (CAU) proposes to the National Science Foundation's MRI
program to acquire a modern secondary ion mass spectrometer for
multidisciplinary research and training of next generation scientists, i. e.,
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students in physics, materials
science, and chemistry. The new instrument will replace a single investigator,
custom built system that is over 30 years old. The tool will significantly
enhance the research infrastructure of CAU and it will provide a high level of
research and training opportunities for local materials research community. This
will augment a suite of existing characterization tools that are oriented to
impact research lines in various areas of materials research. This multi-user
tool will be configured to serve the multidisciplinary needs of a diverse
faculty representing 6 STEM departments, 3 Historically Black College or
Universities, and 2 Minority Serving Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
acquisition will provide depth profile, chemical species identification,
stoichiometry, and expanded imaging analysis capability. This will augment a
suite of existing characterization tools that are oriented to impact research
lines in solid state lighting, polymer synthesis and functionalization,
semiconductors, two-dimensional topological materials and device processing. The
shared access of this tool will broadly impact and foster interdisciplinary
collaborations across departments and institutions and provide a major training
resource for the next generation of materials scientists. This community effort
has already had a significant impact on the number of under-represented
minorities and women in the STEM disciplines. The tool will enhance students
with readily marketable skills in materials analysis and characterization to
compete globally. This acquisition in conjunction with the existing
instrumentation will establish a suite of state-of-the art materials
characterization tools that are unique to the geographical area.