* 1625127
* WORKSHOP: The CSCW 2016 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This is funding to support this year's CSCW doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 12-14 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with 4-6 distinguished research faculty. The event will
take place in conjunction with the ACM 2016 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work and Social Computing, to be held in San Francisco, CA, on
February 27-March 2, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's
Special Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The CSCW
conferences are a premier venue for the presentation of research relating to the
research, design and practice of technologies that affect groups, organizations,
communities and networks (including collaborative systems and social computing),
and are attended by approximately 500 professionals from around the world, top
researchers and practitioners from academia and industry who are interested in
both the technical and social aspects of collaboration. The development and
application of new technologies continues to enable new ways of working together
and coordinating activities. Although work is an important area of focus for the
conference, technology is increasingly supporting a wide range of social
activities. CSCW has also embraced an increasing range of devices, as we
collaborate from different contexts and situations. CSCW 2016 will be the 19th
conference in the series. Research reports published in the CSCW Conference
Proceedings are heavily refereed and widely cited. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://cscw.acm.org/2016/index.php. The CSCW
doctoral consortia, which began in 1992, have been highly successful in
providing a forum for the initial socialization into the field of young doctoral
scholars, and many of today's leading CSCW researchers participated as students
in earlier consortia. These doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the
best of the next generation of CSCW researchers, allowing them both to sharpen
the research skills and to create a social network among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Maintaining and fostering research dialog among the diverse disciplines that are
present in the CSCW community results in synergistic and transformative research
collaborations. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group
across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Colloquium at CSCW 2016 will be a full-
day event taking place on Sunday, February 29, preceded by an opening dinner and
welcome activities the evening before. Follow-up activities (including poster
sessions) will take place during the conference's main technical program. Goals
of the doctoral consortium include building a cohort group of new researchers
who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding
the work of new researchers by having experts in the research field mentor them
and provide constructive advice, and making it possible for promising new
entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student participants,
who are chosen by a review committee based on materials submitted by applicants
in response to the CSCW Call for Participation, will make formal presentations
of their work during the workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty
panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how
their work is positioned relative to other CSCW research, whether their topics
are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. The students' presentations will be published in the
CSCW Extended Abstracts, which are available to all conference attendees. The
organizing committee will take proactive steps to ensure and increase
participation from institutions and ethnic groups that have been traditionally
underrepresented at CSCW.