* 1625993
* MRI:   Acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, time-of-flight (MALDI TOF) mass spectrometer at Xavier University of Louisiana
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Terry Watt, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,119.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) and the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) as well as the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Terry
Watt from Xavier University of Louisiana and collaborators have acquired a
matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer
(MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer). In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the
key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex matrices. In a MALDI instrument, a laser
striking on the unreactive supporting material embedded with the sample,
vaporizes the sample and causes it to form charged particles (ions). The ions
pass into the mass spectrometer where the masses of the parent ion and its
fragment ions are measured. In a time-of-flight instrument the ions are
accelerated by an electric field to allow further characterization. MALDI TOF
combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides,
proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly
sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between
sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range. The collision-induced
dissociation enables the molecular ions to break into pieces in the gas phase.
This highly sensitive technique allows identification and determination of the
structure of molecules in a complex mixture. This acquisition strengthens the
research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse students in research and research
training with this modern analytical technique. The instrument is shared with
students at Tulane University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels at this HBCU, especially in areas
such as (a) characterizing enzyme-substrate interactions of lysine deacetylases;
(b) developing aptamers for small molecule detection coupled to glucose oxidase
as a biosensor; (c) developing hydrogels using modified nucleobases; (d) using
modified nucleobase hydrogels and dendrimers with precisely defined ligand
content for targeted and controlled drug release; and (e) identifying
transcription factor binding sites and binding partners.