* 1625704
* MRI:   Acquisition of a high-resolution ultrasound imaging instrument for research and education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sanku Mallik, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 251,750.00

Detecting the reflection of sound to identify the shape and structure of an
object led to the discovery of ultrasound imaging systems, frequently used for
medical monitoring and diagnosis. However, the use of this transformative
technology in materials and engineering remains less explored. The new
ultrasound imaging system acquired through the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) program will enable NDSU and UND researchers to investigate the cross-talk
between sound and object which, in turn, can reveal novel phenomena and
interactions between biological and non-biological materials within their
environment. The approach will significantly expand the multidisciplinary
research conducted by the current faculty members, graduate students, and
postdoctoral trainees. Above and beyond the conventional diagnostic monitoring,
this NSF-supported procurement of the imaging system will be used to discover
the symbiosis of biomaterials with their encapsulating structure, interactions
of cells with their biological niche, and for the development of 3D-printed
scaffolds for cell culture. In addition, the high-resolution ultrasound imaging
instrument will be used to explore the small changes in the shape and size of
nano- and micromaterials in response to biological and physical stimuli. The
instrument will be used as a training and teaching platform to existing and
prospective users across NDSU and UND campuses. Furthermore, the imaging system
will be an essential addition to the outreach infrastructures of these
universities, and will contribute to the dissemination of STEM education among
Native American students of the region and high school and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) program provides support to North Dakota State University (NDSU) and the
University of North Dakota (UND) to purchase a high-frequency, high-resolution,
ultrasound imaging system for materials, macromolecular, and cell biology
research and education. As a non-invasive modality to obtain high-resolution
images of a variety of materials and microstructures, ultrasound outperforms
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Computed Tomography (CT) regarding cost,
affordability, and safety. The proposed imaging system functions by calculating
the difference of ultrasound impedance between the region of interest (e.g.,
polymer materials, cell spheroids, tumors, etc.) and the surrounding
microenvironment (e.g., the scaffold for growing the cell spheroids, tissue
matrix, tumor mass, etc.). The new instrument will strengthen synergy and
initiate multidisciplinary collaborative research both at NDSU and UND in
pharmaceutical sciences, chemistry, and engineering. The initial users of 13
faculty members, 31 graduate, and 31 undergraduate students represent a diverse
ensemble of researchers with the common interest of exploring the cross-cutting
capability of ultrasound imaging in materials and biological systems. We are
expecting an increased participation of other researchers through the
utilization of cyberinfrastructure for instrument scheduling and data transfer.
Aside from advancing fundamental knowledge and understanding, the project will
serve as a robust teaching modality by incorporating the results obtained via
the use of this instrument into three graduate and two undergraduate courses. In
addition, the project will reinforce NDSU and UND's outreach efforts that
include recruiting meritorious Native-American students from North Dakota
reservations to the graduate and undergraduate programs, as well as training
aspiring high school and K-12 students in STEM education.