* 1625422
* MRI: Acquisition of a next-generation electron microprobe at the University of Minnesota
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Jake Bailey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,192,105.00

The project is for the University of Minnesota to acquire a next-generation
electron microprobe to replace a well-used but aging 23-year-old instrument.
This investment provides the newest capabilities in high-resolution mapping of
elements in rocks, organic material, and high-technology materials. This support
is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and
advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare, given the importance of
expanding the frontiers of knowledge in the earth and environmental sciences,
engineering, archeology, biotechnology and dentistry. The new instrument serves
a national research community as well as universities in Minnesota, western
Wisconsin, the Dakotas, and Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Minnesota will acquire a next-generation electron microprobe, which houses
multiple energy-dispersive spectrometers, including a Soft X-ray Emission
Spectrometer (SXES). The instrument means that elements can be mapped at a high-
spatial resolution of 200 nanometers. The SXES provides for a new capability in
the analysis of light elements and organic matter, phosphates, carbonates, and
polymers. Research programs at Minnesota that depend on electron microprobe
analyses include experimental petrology, mineral and rock physics, geobiology,
geomicrobiology, and bioremediation, tectonics and metamorphic petrology,
mineral and rock magnetism, aqueous geochemistry, paleoclimate, and economic
geology.&lt;br/&gt;