* 1625040
* EAR-PF Ancient DNA meets modern genomes: An exploration of diatom evolution, ecology, and environmental change in the Yellowstone Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Trisha Spanbauer, Spanbauer               Trisha         L
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Trisha L Spanbauer has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Texas at Austin.
This project seeks to assess the evolution and differentiation of microorganisms
by using modern and fossil genetic material. While doing so, this study will
also investigate hidden phytoplankton diversity with ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis
and test the preservation of aDNA in large freshwater lakes. This
interdisciplinary project combines paleontological methodology to investigate
morphological changes with next-generation molecular genetics tools to explore
past evolutionary changes in a recently diverged species of diatom. To engage
the public in the outcomes of this project, outreach will be provided through
the University of Texas at Austin's Texas Memorial Museum at special events
throughout the year. The projects educational goals include free workshops for
middle school teachers, learning modules for undergraduate classes, engaging
undergraduates in the research, and lectures on paleoecology and
paleoclimatology for upper-level undergraduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of "Stephanodiscus yellowstonensis" from a "Stephanodiscus niagarae"
predecessor in Yellowstone Lake is an excellent documented case of diatom
speciation. This project will investigate the evolution of "Stephanodiscus
yellowstonensis" through maximum likelihood modeling of the valve morphology
through time, and exploring the genetic evolution through aDNA. In tandem, these
analyses will elaborate on the mode and pace of both morphological and molecular
evolution in diatoms. In addition, this project will use aDNA to explore hidden
phytoplankton diversity in Yellowstone Lake and to determine any issues with the
preservation and degradation of aDNA. The former will allow for expanded
understanding of the paleoecological freshwater community during the Holocene
and the latter will help to delineate the benefits and limitations of aDNA as an
emergent proxy of environmental change. This transformational combination of
approaches allows for the linking of microevolutionary changes to
macroevolutionary outcomes. The historical framework provided by the
morphological evolution will enrich the ability to interpret the aDNA of a
recently diverged microorganism. Additionally, the proposed project has the
potential further develop aDNA as a paleolimnological proxy and molecular
evolutionary tool.