* 1625843
* MRI: Acquisition of mobile robots to support indoor navigation and online 3D object detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 112,450.00

Mobile intelligent robots are used today in the domain of assisted living and
health care, as they can accompany people, assist them, and be used to
effectively support various applications, such as navigation. This project
called SemaFORR, uses two robots equipped with multiple real-world sensors to
provide cognitively plausible solution when traditional navigation assumptions
cannot be used. The robots are equipped to provide an autonomous navigation and
real time classification from 3D range data. The project highlights the role of
cognition in navigation, enhancing the image-understanding capabilities of
mobile robots by pushing the state of the art in classification algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing fundamental issues in multi-method search,
inference learning, representation, online quickest detection and classification
that contribute in solving challenging problems, the project involves increasing
the image-understanding capabilities of mobile robots. This goal is to be
accomplished by developing real time classification and object detection to help
computers and people solve challenging problems. Operating under the open-source
standard ROS (Robot Operating System) serves as the base on which to build and
test algorithms to: 1. Enhance navigation with cognitive plausible decision
making by integrating a novel architectural method that enables the robot to
learn a dynamic spatial model that diagrams special affordances; 2. Enhance
online real-time object detection and classification by performing a stage-based
3D classification; and 3. Optimize algorithms by balancing the tradeoff between
accuracy and speed of object classification.