* 1625782
* MRI: Acquisition of Environmental Flows Water Tunnel
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Thomas Weber, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 618,000.00

Scientists and engineers interested in ocean and environmental fluid mechanics
are involved in an array of fundamental research with interests ranging from the
deep ocean to shallow streams. The dynamics of these flows are generally
complex, as they involve fluid, geological, chemical, and biological processes
occurring in a wide range of temporal and spatial scales. These flows may have
either fixed or dynamic boundary conditions (i.e., seabeds) and may contained
fixed engineered structures (e.g., hydrokinetic devices). While many fluid flow
problems are well suited to small-scale laboratory studies, significant scaling
concerns arise with complex unsteady multi-phase flows interacting with fixed or
dynamic boundaries and structures. A unique feature of the concentration of the
regional faculty, post-docs and graduate students working on these complex flows
is the synergy that results from researchers with different backgrounds
addressing a variety of problems with the commonalities provided by fluid
physics. Individually, research efforts will evaluate fundamental hypotheses
necessary for advancing the respective fields. Collectively, the synergies
realized through transdisciplinary interactions between contributing scientists
have an extremely high potential to transform understanding of the complex fluid
flows that are ubiquitous in engineering and nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a
goal towards significantly advancing the simulation of flow physics and
biogeochemical processes involved in aquatic marine and riverine environments,
this effort will support the acquisition of an Environmental Flows Water Tunnel
(EFWT) and instrumentation required for resolving the flow and sediment fields.
The EFWT will accommodate both oscillatory and steady flow for the simulation of
horizontal wave velocities, tidal flows, or steady currents with both high- and
low-velocity magnitudes. The EFWT will operate as a rigid-lid (non-free surface)
tunnel or as a flume/channel with a reduced-depth free surface while allowing
for either rigid bottom boundaries or movable sediment beds with or without
aquatic vegetation. It will also allow for the evaluation of engineered systems,
high frequency acoustic characterization of the seafloor, and scale model marine
hydrokinetic energy conversion devices or small arrays. The EFWT will provide
the instrumentation necessary for addressing fundamental questions involving
ocean and environmental fluid mechanics and will serve as a valuable local,
regional, and national resource for academic, governmental, and industrial
partners. The EFWT will allow for scientific advancement in a range of
geophysical and engineered topics that require the resolution of fluid-sediment-
structure interactions in riverine and ocean environments. Observations will be
used to contribute to open-source community modeling efforts (e.g., benchmark
data sets), develop a novel understanding of processes that impact ecosystem
health, improve undersea technology, evaluate ocean renewable energy devices,
and provide a vehicle for public outreach and education. The EFWT will be used
for hands-on laboratory and demonstration purposes both within University of New
Hampshire through courses in earth sciences, civil engineering, mechanical
engineering and ocean engineering (with its new undergraduate major program) and
also, through a multitude of continuous outreach efforts.