* 1625804
* Engaging the Next Generation of Biochemists
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Karin van Dijk, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 11/30/2021
* USD 599,096.00

The field of biochemistry provides a critical foundation for students as they
pursue careers in diverse fields, such as health care, and basic and applied
research. To master core biochemical concepts, students must integrate
background knowledge in biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics as they
learn about the dynamic structures and processes that constitute biochemical
systems. Students often struggle with mechanistic reasoning, as evidenced by
their inability to connect structures to functions and to properly attribute
causality within decentralized systems. Hence, the ability to properly visualize
and model biochemical systems represents an important means to advance student
learning. Unfortunately, the traditional biochemistry classroom provides limited
opportunities for students to engage with concepts in realistic and interactive
ways, as primarily static, two-dimensional images and diagrams are used as
teaching tools within passive, lecture-based environments. This project will
transform biochemistry instruction by developing a series of easily-incorporated
modules that make use of dynamic physical and computational models. These
modules will focus on helping students develop their understandings of the
direct relationships between macromolecular structure and function as well as
the dynamic coordination of metabolic systems. At a larger level, this project
will help establish new paradigms in biochemistry teaching and learning, and
significantly enhance the training of the next generation of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: (i) to
develop dynamic, structural three-dimensional (3D) models and implement these
into modules for biochemistry courses to improve understanding about the complex
3D structures critical to life; (ii) to develop computational models of
metabolic networks and implement these into modules for biochemistry courses to
improve understanding of biochemical systems concepts; and (iii) to determine
the impact of the physical and computational modules on student learning of key
learning objectives. The 3D models will be developed using the cost-accessible
3D printing technology and the computational models will be built on an open-
source software platform called Cell Collective, developed by one of the
project's co-PIs. This platform provides a unique interactive environment for
students to explore the relationships and dynamics of complex systems in ways
that are not available in other simulations, and resembling authentic science
practice as articulated by Vision and Change. These modules and their associated
materials will be made available on-line, and dissemination efforts, including a
workshop, will help propagate their use at many institutions.