* 1625215
* Professional Resources &amp; Inquiry in Mathematics Education for K-8 Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Shandy Hauk, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

The U.S. has ambitious goals for preparing K-8 teachers to excel in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This project seeks to enhance
the knowledge and expertise of college faculty who prepare elementary school
teachers to teach mathematics. The project will develop and investigate a series
of five professional learning modules for college mathematics faculty. Modules
are grounded in the types of mathematical knowledge for teaching that future
teachers need to provide successful learning experiences in mathematics for the
diversity of students with whom they work. Twenty instructors from 2- and 4-year
colleges who teach mathematics courses designed for pre-service elementary
teachers will participate. These faculty, working in small teams, will meet
regularly online throughout a semester to review readings and video focused on
K-8 interactions during mathematics learning time and to share their own efforts
to incorporate recommendations from the modules into the college courses they
teach. Anchored in materials from Sybilla Beckmann's well-respected text for the
mathematical preparation of K-8 teachers, the faculty modules will include (1)
the different types of knowledge required of teachers in K-8 classrooms, (2)
research-based information on learning environments conducive for pre-service
teacher learning (which also serve as models for effective mathematics
instruction in the K-8 setting), and (3) effective methods for assessing pre-
service teachers to capture both what they know and what they are ready to learn
next. The overarching goal of the project is to produce informed and effective
college instructors whose students become informed and effective K-8 teachers.
This project contributes to the improvement of undergraduate education as it
attends to the NSF-IUSE framework which "promotes new and exciting approaches to
using research on STEM learning and education to address STEM education
challenges across and within institutions."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
significance lies in its promise to strengthen the preparation of future
teachers while also adding to the limited existing research on the design and
implementation of online professional development for college mathematics
faculty. Researchers will examine the construct of mathematical knowledge for
teaching future teachers (MKT-FT) during the course of the project. Sandwiched
between a facilitated online launch (module 1) and an online wrap-up (module 5),
three self-paced modules will be designed for use by teams of at least two
instructors and include multi-media resources such as video-based segments
demonstrating pre-service teacher and K-8 student mathematical thinking. The
project will investigate four research questions: (1) Are module materials
accessible and useful to mathematics faculty? (2) Does the use of the materials
foster knowledge growth for teaching among instructors and among their
undergraduate pre-service elementary teacher students? (3) Are the materials
used by faculty in a manner consistent with developer intent and aligned with
recommendations from research on the professional growth of college instructors?
(4) What does the project's pilot survey of faculty allow us to identify
regarding needs and challenges to feasibility and fidelity of implementation
across institution types? Data collection includes observations and interviews
of participating faculty at several 2- and 4- year colleges in addition to
measures of their students' knowledge growth using reliable and validated
Learning Mathematics for Teaching tools. The knowledge gained from project
research will provide a foundation for future research-based development efforts
to increase tools and resources available for content area experts who are
novice teacher educators.