* 1625146
* DEVELOPING A PROCESS-BASED UNDERSTANDING OF THE FACTORS CONTROLLING THE SEASONAL FORMATION OF PEDOGENIC CARBONATE
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Timothy Gallagher, Gallagher               Timothy        M
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Timothy M. Gallagher has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Texas at Austin. The
investigation will focus on understanding the seasonal formation of carbonate
minerals in soils. The project will consist of three components: laboratory
experiments, computer modeling, and application of experimental and modeling
results to a geological problem. The anticipated results will be of interest to
a wide range of disciplines including those within the earth, biological, and
soil sciences. Throughout this fellowship period Dr. Gallagher will actively
convey the importance of environmental change to the general public through
participation in events such as the University of Texas K-12 oriented Forty
Acres Fest. In addition, he will mentor graduate students and develop and
supervise independent research projects for undergraduates. Dr. Gallagher will
co-teach an undergraduate environmental isotope geochemistry course, developing
new assignments designed to expose students to the power and utility of computer
modeling.

The research project will take the novel approach of pairing experimental soil
manipulations with cutting-edge reactive transport modeling in order to gain a
thorough understanding of processes driving pedogenic carbonate formation. The
research plan will include (1) experimental manipulation of soil columns where
different seasonal patterns of precipitation are simulated, (2) use of reactive
transport models to place the experimental results of the research into a
quantitative and predictive framework, and (3) application of the experimental
and modeling results to a geologic case study centered on pedogenic carbonate
derived paleoelevation histories of Andean uplift. Carbonate minerals in soils
are an important archive of past environmental conditions, that is widely used
by the scientific community for reconstructing past climatological, ecological
and tectonic changes. The accuracy of these paleo-reconstructions is hindered,
in large part because the processes controlling the seasonal timing of pedogenic
carbonate formation have not been fully characterized. It is expected that this
investigation will contribute to this knowledge gap.