* 1625879
* CI-P: Planning a Community Benchmarking Infrastructure for Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Functions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Pieter Peers, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This project will support the planning and building of an initial testbed
application for evaluating material models that describe how light is reflected
from surfaces in computer graphics research. After talking with interested
researchers in the community, the lead investigator will build an application
that allows anyone to submit and download three important types of data for
doing this research: (1) reference implementations of material models, (2)
measures of how well the predicted light reflections of a model match real
examples, and (3) examples of measured reflections from physical materials to
compare against. When people submit new material model implementations, the
application will automatically run all of the models it contains using all of
the measures and measured examples available. This is an important advance
because currently there is no good way for researchers to compare their work
against others', which slows down progress in both research and graphics
applications; the testbed will make it much easier to compare new ideas to old
ones, as well as to understand which models work best in which situations. This
will advance research in a number of areas related to computer graphics, as well
as directly benefiting society through improving graphics in real applications
including virtual reality, animation, and data visualization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do this, the lead investigator will create a repository
with an initial set of reference algorithms, datasets, fitting functions, and
evaluation metrics based on existing research around bidirectional reflectance
distribution functions (BRDFs). Other researchers will be able to contribute to
the repository through an Application Programming Interface (API) that allows
for easy addition of new items; it will then dynamically report on run all-
against-all comparisons with existing items in the repository. During this
planning grant the lead investigator will develop the initial infrastructure
both to demonstrate a proof-of-concept and to present a concrete artifact that
can jump start the discussion of how to make the repository more useful to the
broader research community. Although starting with researchers most directly
involved with BRDFs, the community will eventually include people from a number
of related research areas, including non-linear optimization, human perception,
rendering, photorealistic visualization, and computer vision.