* 1625120
* Student Travel Support for Electron Backscatter Diffraction 2016 Topical Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Luke Brewer, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2017
* USD 22,000.00

This award will partially support a conference focused on Electron Backscatter
Diffraction (EBSD) planned for May 24-26, 2016, at the University of Alabama,
under the sponsorship of the Microanalysis Society (MAS). EBSD is a core
microanalytical technique that utilizes the diffraction of high-energy electrons
to determine the orientations of crystals in natural and engineered materials.
This approach has major applications in both material science and geology
related to understanding everything from crystallization processes to
microstructures that record geostructural deformation and affect material
properties (such as strength, fracture toughness and thermal conductivity).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EBSD topical conference series has become the de facto
meeting in North America for the development and application of this core
microanalytical technique. This meeting?s importance is reflected in part by
invited speakers from three continents (North America, Europe, and Australia)
who are all at the absolute edge of development in new directions for this
diffraction approach. This conference will provide a venue for ideas to be
shared between the primary disciplines utilizing the technique: geoscience and
materials science and engineering. The exchange of cutting-edge knowledge from
these communities will facilitate dissemination of knowledge and further
research developments throughout the community. Students will particularly
benefit from these interactions while also having the opportunity to present
their research via oral or poster presentations.