* 1625205
* Linking elastic and electrical properties to investigate partial melting in the deep mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Alisha Clark, Clark                   Alisha         N
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Alisha Clark has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Northwestern University and Scripps
Institute of Oceanography at University of California, San Diego. The project
will focus on conducting laboratory experiments to determine velocity and
electrical properties of silicate melts of basaltic composition at high pressure
and temperature conditions. Silicate melts are the most efficient means of
transporting heat and mass and have played a critical role in planetary
differentiation. Experimental data at pressure and temperatures corresponding to
the observed geophysical anomalies are required to interpret the physical state
of the Earth's interior. This interdisciplinary research project spans topics in
mineral physics, petrology, solid-Earth geophysics, materials science, and
condensed matter physics. Dr. Clark will be engaged in Project Excite at
Northwestern University that aims increasing enrollment of underrepresented
minority students in Evanston Township High School's honors science and
mathematics courses. In addition, she will mentor undergraduate students in
research related to this project.

This investigation will provide information on both elastic and electrical
properties of basaltic melts at high pressures and temperatures to produce an
equation of state for silicate melts at pressures up to the Earth's transition
zone, 410-660 km. To accomplish these goals, Dr. Clark will use the latest
generation Gigahertz-ultrasonic interferometer at Northwestern University to
constrain the acoustic velocities and elastic moduli at high pressure and
temperatures. In addition, the principal investigator will use the new multi-
anvil system at Scripps to perform electrical conductivity measurements on the
same silicate melts at high pressures and temperatures and correlate these
trends with velocity, as well as to determine the effect of melt fraction of
electrical conductivity. The last component of the investigation will consist of
determining the influence of volatiles on basaltic melt velocity and
conductivity. The results from this investigation will be important when
interpreting geophysical observations and will provide constrains on the
physical properties of silicate melts at depths greater tan 410 km.