* 1625176
* Collaborative Research: The Next Generation of STEM Teacher Preparation in Washington State
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Dechaine, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 298,289.00

The Next Generation of STEM Teacher Preparation project is led by five
institutions of higher education in Washington State. This collaborative effort
will engage institutions involved in the preparation of teachers of STEM
disciplines, Washington State's Office of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction, P-12 educators, and other key stakeholders from business,
government, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), in bringing about
statewide sustainable change in the preparation of STEM teachers at all levels.
The project moves away from isolated, single institutional program improvement
efforts, to colleges and universities in Washington State working
collaboratively to improve STEM teacher preparation in partnership with two-year
colleges, P-12 schools, community groups, and businesses. The project will
result in the production of more, highly qualified, P-12 science and mathematics
teachers, including a new cadre of teachers prepared to teach computer science
and engineering. In addition, the project seeks to increase the diversity of the
STEM teacher workforce by actively recruiting and incentivizing underrepresented
students from STEM majors at 2- and 4-year colleges to become P-12 middle and
high school STEM teachers. Financial support for this project comes from NSF's
Improving Undergraduate Education program and the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's primary goals are:
&lt;br/&gt;1. To improve STEM teacher preparation programs in Washington State
(impacting greater than 90% of the state's future STEM teacher
graduates,&lt;br/&gt;2. Increase recruitment of qualified and diverse STEM
students into teaching, and&lt;br/&gt;3. Create an adaptive, research-based
model for improving STEM teacher preparation through collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the project will: (a) create a common vision
for STEM teacher preparation in Washington State, (b) share, develop, adapt,
implement, and evaluate resources and models to achieve this vision, and (c)
build and assess a model of continuous, collaborative program improvement. The
critical components of teacher preparation this project will address include:
improving pre-service teachers' clinical practice and new teachers' induction
experiences, improving the disciplinary and STEM pedagogical content knowledge
of pre-service teachers, and integrating computer science, engineering, and
sustainability into teacher preparation. Cross-institutional Working Groups
dedicated to improving each component will research, create, and produce a set
of materials and professional development workshops. Regional Teams of faculty
and administrators from institutions of higher education, P-12 educators, and
representatives from STEM businesses, NGOs, and government agencies, will in
turn adapt these materials and professional development experiences to support
and sustain STEM teacher preparation program improvements at their institutions.
Three capacity-building components: organizational change, increasing the
diversity of the STEM teaching workforce, and collaboration building, will
underlie the efforts of every Working Group and Regional Team.