* 1625349
* MRI: Development of a Broadband 330 GHz Variable Temperature Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award funds the development of a broadband
high frequency magnetic resonance system with frequencies up to 330 gigahertz
(GHz) at temperatures between liquid helium and room temperature. Magnetic
resonance is one of the most important phenomena in materials and medical
research, which have led to a broad range of applications in wireless
communication, radar, navigation, remote sensing, wireless power transmission,
and imaging diagnostics. Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) and electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) have been major characterization techniques for understanding
the magnetic excitations and spin dynamics in fundamentally important and
technologically relevant materials. Probing and understanding magnetic resonance
properties of new materials and heterostructures are essential for developing
transformative technologies, such as next generation information technology,
telecommunication, and data storage, which have dramatically affected our
everyday life. Currently, the vast majority of the magnetic resonance
spectrometers are limited to a frequency range of 1-40 GHz. The instrument to be
developed will enable broadband, variable frequency magnetic resonance
measurements up to 330 GHz, bridging the gap between traditionally important GHz
applications, e.g. cell phones and radar, and the new frontier of terahertz
(THz) technologies. This will be the first magnetic resonance spectrometer
within this frequency range at a shared user facility in the Midwest region, and
will significantly strengthen and expand the investigation of novel fundamental
phenomena and the development of paradigm-changing technologies for researchers
at The Ohio State University and from across the Midwest region. In addition,
the development of this instrument will offer a rare opportunity to train a
large number of postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students to
become experts in high frequency magnetic resonance technologies and microwave
instrumentation, filling a vital national need. This instrument will play an
important role in a number of outreach programs at Ohio State to attract and
nurture women and underrepresented minority students in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by this MRI award, a research team at The Ohio
State University will develop a broadband, high sensitivity magnetic resonance
spectrometer system which will provide an indispensable in-house tool for
studying magnetic excitations, dynamic spin transport and microwave device
applications. It will enable investigations of a wide array of novel materials
and structures for a large number of research groups at The Ohio State
University and other institutions in the region. The MRI team will design and
build a series of magnetic resonance cavities with resonant frequencies between
10 and 320 GHz for operation in a cryogenic 14 tesla superconducting magnet,
which offers access to a previously unexplored regime for revealing the
underlying mechanisms responsible for the magnonic behavior and dynamically
generated spin currents in heterostructures of ferromagnets, antiferromagnets,
topological insulators, skyrmions, and nonmagnetic materials. This instrument
will be located in the NanoSystems Laboratory (NSL), a well-run user facility at
Ohio State that is open to all academic and industrial users. The instrument
will enable transformative research in novel regimes of spintronics utilizing
high speed, high efficiency, coherent spin transport and extraordinary dynamic
spin manipulation in spin-textured materials such as topological insulators and
skyrmions. These insights will provide the foundation for developing next
generation spin-electronic devices