* 1625738
* Enhancing shared facilities for archaeological science at the University of Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Teresa Moreno, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 200,107.00

This award will fund the purchase of a scanning micro X-Ray Fluorescence (Micro-
XRF) spectrometer for dendrochemical and other research. The research it enables
is significant because it permits scientists to reconstruct multiple aspects of
past environments and environmental change over time. Many species of trees add
a visibly distinct ring of wood each year. The width of the annual ring may vary
substantially from year to year, and these patterns of variation may be
sufficiently distinctive to allow wood from a given site to be dated by
comparison to a master chronology for the region. Dendrochronology was first
developed at the University of Arizona in the 1930's. Once dated, the rings may
be used to reconstruct variation in the factors controlling ring width. These
include annual rainfall, annual temperature (at high altitude), the frequency of
forest fires, and in which region the tree grew. A relatively new science is
dendrochemistry - the study of variation in chemical composition from ring to
ring within a tree. This award will allow researchers at the University of
Arizona to undertake novel dendrochemical research on the enormous archive of
cores from modern and ancient wood in the University of Arizona's Laboratory of
Tree Ring Research (LTRR). The instrument will also be a valuable tool for
LTRR'S outreach work with visiting high school science
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be installed in LTRR. A
priority will be the search for evidence in dated tree rings of former volcanic
eruptions and major forest fires, both of which result in spikes of certain
chemical elements that are then taken up by growing trees. Since volcanic
eruptions often spread ash (microtephra) over a very large area, they offer a
potentially valuable means of correlating archaeological and paleoenvironmental
sequences across a large region. Dendrochemical analysis by micro-XRF
potentially offers a quick and efficient means of detecting and dating these
past eruptions. An estimated 30-40,000 wood samples in LTRR cannot currently be
assigned a cutting date because the outer ring is indistinct. Pilot research has
however shown distinctive chemical changes at the heartwood/sapwood junction in
several species, and also in the penultimate ring. Micro-XRF will be used to
scan currently undated cores to look for these signals, from which cutting dates
can be derived. This research can potentially make available many more dated
samples for archaeological and paleoenvironmental interpretation.