* 1625965
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research on Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 800,687.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to acquire a transmission
electron microscope (TEM) and necessary accessories for use in a wide array of
research projects and educational activities. Scientific advances in micro and
nanometer regimes in last few decades have heavily relied on critical
visualization and miniaturization tools in the respective areas. Due to its
ultrahigh surface and cross-sectional imaging resolutions, A TEM is essential in
many fundamental research areas. Researchers at multiple departments at Oakland
University have keen needs of a TEM in their researches in microelectronics,
materials, physics, chemistry and other multidisciplinary areas. Acquisition of
this proposed TEM will have immediate significant impact in advancing our
understanding of many fundamental phenomena at the bottom of physics and
chemistry in a number of application areas. The requested instrument will be
shared by involved research groups across the Oakland campus and made accessible
to other institutes and local industrial companies. It will make measurable
contributions to the diversification of economy in the Metro Detroit area and
Southeastern Michigan. Additionally, the use of the TEM in multiple existing and
enabled new graduate and undergraduate courses will greatly enhance our science
and engineering curricula at Oakland. It will also have direct impacts on other
educational and outreach programs the PIs have been actively participating in.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested TEM from JEOL USA is a multiple imaging and
analytical tool capable of transmission and diffraction electron beam imaging
and x-ray energy spectroscopy with sub-nanometer morphological and cross-
sectional resolutions. The easy adjustable electron energy levels of the TEM
allow for imaging and analysis of a broad range of materials including
biological, organics and inorganics materials such as metals, semiconductors,
and ceramics, etc. Critical sample preparation tools for a variety of specimens
are also included in the request. With its particular ultrahigh resolution and
compositional analyses capability, the system has immediate impacts on multiple
federal and state funded research programs investigating fundamental phenomena
in microelectronics, new multiferroic magneto-electric nanocomposite materials
and structures, nano-tribology, bio-chemical interface and sensors, new energy
storage materials, etc. It also benefits multiple NSF funded educational
projects across campus. The instrument will be housed in the 1400-sqft Advanced
Analytical Instrumentation Center in the state-of-the-art Engineering Center
(EC) that was recently completed in 2014. It will be made accessible by involved
PIs and users from other institutes on a usage fee basis.