* 1625813
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Goniometer-Based Light Scattering System for Research and Training at the University of Mississippi
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Seongbong Jo, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 110,314.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the
University of Mississippi (UM) will acquire a goniometer-based light scattering
instrument. Light scattering is a versatile tool for the non-destructive
characterization of a wide variety of systems including synthetic polymers,
biopolymers such as proteins and nucleic acids, and suspensions of colloidal
particles. The instrument utilizes a laser to interact with particles in a
sample. As the particles scatter light from the laser, they impart information
about their motion in solution. The analysis of this information allows
researchers to determine a wealth of information including the size, shape, and
interactions of the particles in solution without requiring a substantial
investment in sample preparation or method development. A multidisciplinary team
of UM researchers from chemical engineering, chemistry, and pharmaceutics will
oversee the acquisition and operation of the light scattering instrument. The
acquisition will enhance the training of both undergraduate and graduate
researchers in the use of modern analytical techniques for materials
characterization and will be incorporated in courses taken by undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Mississippi.

The acquisition of a light scattering instrument capable of simultaneous static
and dynamic light scattering measurements will enhance research in the areas of
(a) self-assembly of stimuli- responsive block copolymers in solution, (b)
development of cellulose nanocrystals for underground CO2 sequestration, (c) the
examination of microenvironmental factors that influence cell adhesion by
transmembrane proteins, (d) the development of redox-responsive polymer
nanoparticles for triggered drug release, (e) the development of stimuli-
responsive nucleic acid delivery vehicles, (f) an investigation on
multifunctional graphene-polymer nanocomposites, and (g) the study of structure-
property models of Janus dendrimers for sustained release