* 1625732
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Single-Crystal Diffractometer for Chemistry and Materials Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* John Anthony, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 268,193.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program as well as the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Sean Parkin from
the University of Kentucky and colleagues John Anthony, Susan Odom, Edith Glazer
and Oleg Tsodikov have acquired a microsource single crystal X-ray
diffractometer equipped with a complementary metal oxide sensor (CMOS). X-ray
diffraction is a powerful tool to investigate the atomic structure of solid
materials. This tool is able to probe beneath the surface of compounds and
materials. The knowledge of the underlying atomic structure of materials is
fundamental to understanding their properties and developing improvements.
Consequently, modern developments in the development of X-ray sources, detectors
and computer technology have made X-ray diffractometers important for chemical
and materials research. The applications of microscopic structural knowledge
ranges across fields from chemistry to biology, materials and medicine, to
applications such as developing better agrochemicals, electronic devices or
pharmaceuticals and many others. This state-of-the-art system is used for
teaching in a laboratory-based crystallography course, for class assignments in
undergraduate inorganic chemistry teaching laboratories, as well as in ad-hoc
training of Faculty, post-docs, students, visiting scholars, summer students,
high-school senior interns, and students from UK's high-school STEAM
academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this diffractometer will
advance research, especially in areas at the University of Kentucky such as (a)
studies of organic electronic materials, (b) investigations of light-activated
agents for gene regulation and cancer treatment, (c) design of energy storage
materials and (d) analysis of biologically relevant natural products. It will
also be used broadly in other varied research groups in departments of
Chemistry, Physics, Biochemistry, Pharmacy, the Center for Advanced Materials
(CAM), and the Center for Applied Energy Research (CAER) at the University as
well as at other institutions in the region and out-of-state.