* 1625473
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nikon SIM &amp; STORM capable super-resolution fluorescent microscope as a shared instrument for the Penn State research community
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Claire Thomas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 649,261.00

An award is made to The Pennsylvania State University, University Park campus to
purchase a super-resolution microscope that will enable the capture of images of
plant and animal cells, as well as complex chemical samples, at the scale of
single molecules. This microscope will reveal new insights into how living and
chemical systems are organized and work. The project will also generate new
image analysis tools for the scientific community. The microscope will enable
interdisciplinary research training and enhance education through coursework and
outreach to other Penn State campuses and other institutions. Integration of
this microscope into a core microscopy facility will make it available to
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees, and regular imaging workshops
will be offered by Penn State. New teaching modules for K-12 and undergraduate
educators demonstrating the science of size and the potential of super-
resolution microscopy will be developed. Access and training will be assured for
underrepresented students through programs including the Summer Experience in
the Eberly College of Science, McNair Scholars, Women in Science and Engineering
Research, and Minority Undergraduate Research Experience. Public understanding
of super-resolution microscopy and its advantages will be catalyzed by multiple
outreach activities and venues, including The Franklin Institute (science
museum) and Penn State's Ag Progress Days, which together will expose this
cutting-edge imaging technology to tens of thousands of people. The discoveries
enabled by this microscope will advance the study of plant and animal
development, sustainable agriculture and energy production, and the chemical
interactions that define our physical environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Super-
resolution microscopy is leading to dramatic new research opportunities in the
life sciences, and has emerging capabilities in chemistry and materials
research. Penn State will advance our optical imaging-based research through the
purchase of a super-resolution microscope with both Structured Illumination
Microscopy (SIM) and Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM)
capabilities. Both imaging modules are combined on a single microscope platform,
and use high-magnification total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF)
objectives, an automated focus retention system, and an integrated multi-channel
solid state laser launch. The ease of use of this commercial super-resolution
microscope is a particularly appealing feature for equipment residing within
Penn State's Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences Microscopy &amp; Cytometry
Facility, a multi-user core facility. Research and training with this microscope
will focus on four main areas: (a) plant cell biology; (b) animal cell biology;
(c) chemistry; and (d) advanced image processing and pattern recognition.
Researchers in groups (a)-(c) will leverage the increased resolution offered by
this system to push their research into hitherto unreachable areas of fine-scale
biological processes and molecular interactions. In parallel, group (d) will
collaborate with those generating super-resolution imaging data to advance our
ability to recognize structures and patterns from molecular localization data.
The combined SIM/STORM microscope will maximally benefit the largest number of
researchers in the life and chemical sciences at Penn State by offering a high
degree of flexibility for sample labeling and imaging. As an integral component
of this project, faculty with research interests in advanced image analysis and
pattern recognition will generate new algorithms for analyzing SIM and STORM
imaging data that will be widely applicable to super-resolution microscopy and
will be freely disseminated to the global scientific community.