* 1625904
* MRI: Development of a Modern Polar Climate and Weather Automated Observing System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Matthew Lazzara, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2022
* USD 603,427.00

Our knowledge of Antarctic weather and climate relies on only a handful of
direct observing stations located on this harsh and remote continent. This
observing system reports meteorological measurements from an existing network of
automatic weather stations (AWS) spread across a vast area. This MRI project
will enable the development, testing and eventual deployment of a next
generation of polar automatic climate and weather observing stations for
unattended use in the Antarctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new
Automatic Weather Station (AWS) system will enhance the capabilities and
accuracy of the meteorological observations, enabling climate quality
measurements. This project will involve development of a more capable
instrumentation core, with two major goals. The first goal is to lower the cost
for an AWS electronic core to 3 times less than currently employed systems. The
second is to enable an onboard temperature calibration capability, an innovative
development for the Antarctic AWS. The capability for onboard calibration will
add confidence in the critical climate measure of ambient temperature, along
with other standard meteorological parameters. Observations made by a modernized
AWS network will inform and extend future numerical climate modeling efforts,
improve operational weather forecasts, capture weather phenomena, and support
environmental science research in other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
theme of the project is the inclusion of community college students in all
aspects of the effort. With an eye on training the next generation of research
instrumentation expertise, while involving other science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields, undergraduate students will be
involved in the development, testing and deployment of new AWS systems. As well
as reporting, data analysis and publication of scientific knowledge, students
intending to transfer to a 4-year university, as well as those pursuing
electronics or electrical engineering associate degrees will be introduced to
weather and climate topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI award was supported
with funds from the Division of Polar Programs and the Division of Atmospheric
and Geospace Sciences, both of the Directorate of Geosciences.