* 1625636
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Environment for Advancement of Computational Science Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Chunguang Du, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,057.00

This project, acquiring a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster covering
areas in computational science, aims to support a wide range of current and
emerging investigations and educational activities that include: 1. Development
and testing of novel approaches for spectral image processing; 2. Realistic
simulation of magnetic fluid flows to model magnetic drug targeting and other
biomedical applications; 3. Functional genomics analysis of DNA sequence data;
4. Computational identification of ligands bind to proteins; 5. Simulation of
chemical reaction pathways important in the chemistry of air pollution; 6.
Development of simulated censorship systems as a test bed for censorship
circumvention; 7. Automatic machine recognition of idiomatic and deceptive
language; 8. Inference of subsurface ocean waves from seismic data; 9. Modeling
and simulation shoreline evolution; and 10. Modeling, simulation and control of
stochastic dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As shown by the extent and diversity
of the projects, the use of HPC is an integral part of the overall research
activity at the institution. The instrumentation is specified to meet the
critical computing needs of the participating investigators? research programs
and the number and diversity of projects included is expected to ensure full and
efficient use of the system to be acquired which includes a set of identical
nodes with infiniband connectivity for low-latency, highly parallel computing,
as well as a large-memory with a shared file server all organized as a single,
integrated system that will serve as a resource and focal point for HPC
computational science for faculty, their research students, and collaborators at
other institutions. Thus, the HPC capacity acquired will leverage and magnify
the merit in each of these respective research programs. The acquisition of
computing capacity, not otherwise available, that matches current and future
challenges, is expected to be transformative in moving each line of research to
the leading-edge of its respective field. Moreover, these advances have
applications to partner disciplines and related technological developments. By
providing a common focus, the HPC equipment stimulates the coalescence of a
cross-cutting, multidisciplinary, and integrated Computational Research Group,
composed of researchers from various disciplines (including computer science,
mathematical sciences, biological sciences, chemistry, earth and environmental
sciences, linguistics, and social sciences) as well as the creation of a
computational science learning environment that includes undergraduate and
graduate students.