* 1625846
* Collaborative Research: Accessible STEM Instruction with Deaf Students: Supporting Faculty in Pedagogical Exploration and Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stephanie Cawthon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 156,755.00

This project, developed by Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT),
collaborating with the University of Texas at Austin, will explore existing
strategies for effective access and inclusion in their courses with mixed groups
of hearing and deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) students, and develop new
strategies of effective, accessible and inclusive instruction. A significant
aspect of this project is the development of an Accessibility ToolKit, a set of
inclusive instructional materials, strategies, and discussions. Such tools and
strategies will be beneficial to diverse groups of learners, not only for DHH
students. This project will serve the national interest of effective and
inclusive education of DHH students in STEM fields, leading to successful degree
attainment, and an increase in the diversity of STEM
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are: (1) to increase access,
engagement and academic success of DHH students taking postsecondary courses at
RIT via the creation, implementation, and evaluation of an Accessibility ToolKit
for evidence-based educational approaches in STEM disciplines; (2) to create
training environments where faculty experiment with and innovate new resources
and strategies for accessible and inclusive pedagogy, through collaborative
professional development and assessment of evidence-based strategies; and (3) to
document and disseminate the ToolKit and processes so that they may be applied
to other populations of postsecondary students with disabilities. Results will
examine best practices that promote faculty adoption of these instructional
strategies to maximize learning for students with other diverse learning needs,
and the impact of such adaptations on inclusive teaching and student engagement.
This project will broaden the scope and use of accessible and inclusive
strategies to increase DHH student engagement and to address communication and
learning needs in STEM classrooms.