* 1625025
* MRI Acquisition of: Heavy-lift UAV Sensor Platform for Research and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Timothy Hare, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 172,573.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Timothy Hare will use and make
available to other researchers and engineers a heavy-lift unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV or drone) with multiple cameras and scanning sensors for a wide
variety of uses in research and development. This combined UAV/remote sensing
system makes possible rapid and accurate capture of environmental data for the
creation of 3D models of vegetation, land surfaces, and constructed features. It
also provides a platform for testing new robotic and remote sensing
technologies. For instance, researchers in fields such as agricultural sciences
and engineering technology can use the instrument for precision farming, farm
and pasture mapping, and robotics development. Earth and space scientists can
use the instrument for testing new sensors and environmental research. Dr. Hare
will employ the vehicle to introduce new capabilities to Mesoamerican
archaeology. Students will benefit from hands-on experience and development with
cutting-edge technologies. This instrument will be the first one of its kind
available to the researchers and students at Morehead State University, in
Appalachian eastern Kentucky, and in Mesoamerican archaeological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combined heavy-lift UAV/remote sensing system
will enhance research and development by leveraging several new technologies.
First, the heavy-lift UAV allows for carrying multiple sensors simultaneously at
low elevations and slow speeds to capture high-resolution and overlapping image
data through most climatic and surface conditions. Second, the global navigation
satellite system and inertial measurement unit provide centimeter-level control
and georeferencing of data. Third, the high-resolution cameras capture a variety
of wavelengths including visible, near infrared, and infrared. Fourth, the Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) device can scan through vegetation with better
than 10 cm accuracy. One example of the instrument's use is Dr. Hare's mapping
of archaeological ruins and associated environmental features through the forest
canopy for his ongoing archaeological investigations at the ancient city of
Mayapán in the northern Yucatan of Mexico. The purpose of archaeological survey
in Mexico's northern Yucatán Peninsula is to map the regional context of the
ancient political and economic capital of Mayapán. Hence, the instrument will be
used for archaeological field survey, mapping ancient settlements, and mapping
excavations for spatial data analysis. The resulting data will make possible the
creation of 3D models of ancient Mayan ruins at the scale of entire regions.
Capturing material remains of past people in context is the foundation of all
archaeological research, but these activities are hampered by difficult field
conditions and the limitations and high costs of traditional mapping
technologies. The combined heavy-lift UAV/remote sensing system will overcome
these obstacles, making possible the creation of 3D maps of the ancient Mayan
world at a detail level never before possible.