* 1625670
* Guided by Evidence: Changing the disciplinary culture of teaching and learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Todd Cooke, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 649,296.00

Evidence is mounting that students who are actively engaged in constructing
knowledge achieve deeper conceptual understanding and more durable learning.
Gateway Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses that
utilize active learning have higher pass rates, which could ultimately lead to
greater persistence of students on STEM career trajectories. Thus, the wider
adoption of these active learning approaches is key to maintaining our
scientific research enterprise and cultivating a diverse, scientifically
literate workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use the Characteristics
of Dissemination Success (CODS) model as a theoretical framework for changing
the culture of teaching and learning in the biological sciences at the
University of Maryland. Through engagement in a faculty learning community,
instructors within the first four courses in the biological sciences curriculum
will (1) develop progressive learning activities that employ evidence-based
teaching approaches, then implement these in a coordinated fashion; (2) gather
evidence for the effectiveness of their use of these approaches via an iterative
process of monitoring student learning, then using this feedback to refine
instructional activities; and (3) implement strategies that help students
recognize evidence of their learning, to gain student buy-in for approaches that
require greater effort and engagement. The success of the CODS model in
fostering broader changes to the culture of teaching will be evaluated using a
combination of quantitative and qualitative
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to shift the culture of STEM
course redesign from a solitary endeavor to a communal (and therefore
sustainable) effort. It will foster new opportunities for interaction between
like-minded colleagues in different STEM departments, creating a cadre of
faculty dedicated to education reform. The project will also help a very diverse
UMD student population, many of whom will become STEM professionals or K-12
science teachers, to develop metacognitive skills that enhance learning.