* 1625545
* MRI:   Acquisition of a BioSpectrum Advanced Imaging System for Interdisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Jani Lewis, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 38,125.00

An award is made to the State University of New York at Geneseo to acquire a UVP
BioSpectrum 815 imaging system. This advanced imaging system will accelerate
research in the areas of Biology, Biochemistry and Chemistry through its
increased sensitivity for data collection and will allow for expanded data
acquisition in the areas of immunology and cytochrome biology, the biologics of
iron-containing compounds bonded to a protein. It will capture and analyze high
resolution images of protein and DNA gels that are labeled with UV fluorescent,
or color reagent tags. In addition it will allow for examination of tagged
nucleic acid and protein targets on the same gel and will also image laboratory-
grown bacterial and eukaryotic colonies. More than 30 undergraduates per year
will use the imager in faculty-led research projects and more than 200
undergraduates per year will utilize the imager in their laboratory classwork in
the areas of ecology, genetics, molecular and cellular biology, immunology,
chemistry, biochemistry, neurobiology and environmental sciences. The UVP
BioSpectrum 815 Imaging System will be immediately incorporated into a number of
ongoing projects including: (1) studies of the effects of ultrapotent steroid
use on vulvar carcinogenesis that will shed light on the mechanisms involved in
altering key transcription factors; (2) investigations into nucleic acid
methylation in Trypanosoma brucei that will address a lack of knowledge on the
full repertoire of DNA bases in organisms; (3) investigation into the molecular
and genetic mechanisms controlling the growth and development of the retina,
which is leading to an understanding of gene mutations associated with
developmental defects of the retina; (4) investigation of the transcriptional
and translational regulation of a major meiotic transcription factor as applied
to growth of filamentous fungi; (5) investigations into the biogenesis and
function of c-type cytochromes, furthering knowledge on the synthesis of iron-,
or heme-containing proteins; and (6) studies into the interaction of
therapeutically small molecules with their nucleic acid targets, which will lead
to an improved understanding of molecular interactions. It is expected that
additional investigators in the Biology and Chemistry Departments as well as at
least one in the Psychology Department at SUNY Geneseo will utilize the
instrument. The instrument will be immediately incorporated into several
laboratory courses that are taught by both the Biology and Chemistry
Departments.