* 1625069
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Borehole Geodetic and Seismic Sensor
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Berger, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 840,000.00

The Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California San
Diego will prototype a new generation of sensitive motion detector of the earth.
The fiber-optic-based sensors are deployed in deep boreholes and record
movements as small as the width of a human hair over times that range from a
fraction of a second to years. The new instrument package will record behavior
from sudden earthquakes to slow movements that do not generate seismic waves.
The instrument can be located where dangerous faults or volcanic hazards exist
near human populations, as well as where induced earthquakes associated with
fluid extraction or injection might occur. This project is aligned with NSF's
mission of promoting the progress of science to advance the nation's health,
prosperity, and welfare. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Scripps Institution of
Oceanography will develop a geodetic/seismometer package that can detect a range
of earthquake-related phenomena from sudden slip to continuous slow slip and
episodic tremor. The package will provide key data for understanding the physics
of fault movement. The robust fiber-optic-based sensors will have a long
instrument lifetime and be resistant to high downhole temperatures. The
comprehensive instrument will measure vertical and horizontal ground velocities,
gravity, tilt, and strain. The prototype instrument will be installed in an
existing borehole at the Pinon Flat Observatory for testing and comparison with
existing seismic and strain systems. The new package is expected to
significantly expand the network of geodetic/seismic observations both on land
and beneath the sea floor.