* 1625998
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Reactive-Ion Etching System for Research and Education in Nanophotonics, Nanoelectronics and Nano-Bio Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Karl Hirschman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) funding will support the acquisition
of an inductively coupled plasma reactive-ion etching (ICP-RIE) system to enable
fundamental research and education in nanophotonics, nanoelectronics and nano-
bio devices. The objective of this MRI acquisition is to facilitate new and
existing multidisciplinary research in science and engineering, enable
educational curriculum development, and promote outreach activities at Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT). The ICP-RIE system will enable photonic,
electronic and bio device fabrication capability that does not exist presently
at RIT and Rochester region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested ICP-RIE system
will provide dry etching capability for various material systems such as
compound semiconductors, dielectric materials, and metals with fast etching
rate, well-controlled selectivity, and promising uniformity. The instrument is
essential to enable fundamental research and education on III-Nitride based
light emitting diodes (LEDs) and lasers, seamless integration of robust and low-
powered III-V quantum dot (QD) lasers with silicon photonics, III-V tunneling
field effect transistor, memory devices for computing, QD and nanowire
photovoltaics, III-Nitride photodetectors for inertial confinement fusion
research, nanoplasmonic devices, and nan-bio devices for efficient biomolecule
transfer. The requested instrument will be the first ICP dry etcher tool at RIT,
which will be shared by research groups across all disciplines in science and
engineering with students trained from Microsystems Engineering Ph.D. program
and Ph.D. in Engineering program. The tool will also be shared by external
research groups in Rochester region to enhance research and collaborations
between RIT and other colleges, national labs, and small businesses in the
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-RIE system will be designated as a shared
user facility, available to new curriculum and lab section development on device
fabrications for both undergraduate and graduate students at RIT, whom can be
trained for next-generation scientists and engineers. The fabrication capability
provided by the proposed instrument would benefit curriculum development at RIT
for several fundamental courses and lab sections focused on nanofabrication and
semiconductor devices. Demonstration experiments on photonic and electronic
devices can also be designed to K-12 students and teachers through RIT outreach
activities by the use of the dry etcher, which can stimulate K-12 students'
interest to pursue science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines in the future. Connectivity with such demonstration experiments will
also be promoted to train existing women and underrepresented minority students
at RIT.