* 1625808
* Perceptions of Trust and Procedural Justice as Sources of Receptivity and Resistance to Video Surveillance
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Joel Lieberman, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 12/31/2018
* USD 276,041.00

Unprecedented video coverage of negative police-citizen encounters has fueled
civil unrest and questions about the public trust in police and the criminal
justice system. When the police are viewed positively (e.g., fair, impartial,
trustworthy), previous research reveals strong public support for them. Over the
last decade, however, the convergence of major social changes in the U.S. (e.g.,
the wider availability of video technology to capture images of police violence
and abuse of power, the growing racial divide, and declining confidence in
social institutions) challenge this notion that fairness and trust are enough to
produce positive police-citizen relations. The proposed study will conduct a
large national survey and citywide interviews to test these ideas about the
impact of public perceptions of officer conduct, institutional anomie,
procedural justice, and police legitimacy on police-citizen relations and
support for "video policing" activities through the use of body-worn cameras and
aerial drones. In this post-Ferguson period of racial animus and strained
police-citizen relations, the obtained survey results will provide direct
evidence of the "best practices" for improving public support for various police
practices and developing a more nuanced approach to community policing that is
more effective in crime control and fosters better police-citizen relations,
especially in minority neighborhoods where basic trust in police may be most
problematic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring the impact of public perceptions
about procedural justice and police legitimacy on their support for video
policing activities in contemporary American society, the proposed study departs
from extant research by its (1) focus on public support for police use of
evolving video technology (e.g., body-worn cameras, aerial drones), (2)
empirical evaluation of whether the influence of perceptions of police fairness
and legitimacy are highly contextual, mediated or moderated by one's race,
direct experiences with police and negative video images of them, the type of
police activity (e.g., proactive versus reactive policing) and feelings of
institutional anomie, and (3) analytic methods (i.e., the use conjunctive
analysis to study this causal complexity). The results of this study will
provide direct social benefits by identifying particular conditions under which
police can use mobile video technology (i.e., body cameras and aerial drones) to
increase community safety and support with lower public resistance. It will also
identify conditions under which video technology is viewed as invasive,
ineffective and/or selectively (mis)used, thereby eroding this public safety and
support.