* 1625789
* Investigating Human Coastal Migration Through Exploration of a Paleolithic Site
* SBE,BCS
* 09/30/2015,01/31/2020
* Amanuel Beyin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 33,194.00

The fundamental goal of this project is to gain insight into how humans spread
from an originally limited region within Africa to a worldwide distribution
which includes all continents. Understanding how this process - especially in
its earliest stages - took place has the potential to shed light on basic human
adaptations.

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Amanuel Beyin and an international
team of colleagues from the US and the Sudan will conduct one season of high-
risk archaeological exploration along the Sudanese Red Sea coast (northeast
Africa) to locate prehistoric sites associated with early human use of coastal
resources and dispersal events out of Africa. There is an emerging
anthropological consensus on the first appearance of early modern humans in
Africa around 200,000 years ago, and their subsequent dispersals to Europe and
Asia. However, there is disagreement about the specific routes along which early
humans dispersed out of Africa (e.g. the Sinai Peninsula vs the Bab al Mandab
strait). The possibility of early humans using coastal landscapes as potential
dispersal conduits during their migration out of Africa and beyond is receiving
increasing support among researchers in recent years. As a region featuring a
long and heterogeneous coastal strip, the proposed study area in the Sudanese
Red Sea zone represents a vital region for assessing current hypotheses
concerning early human coastal migration out of Africa. The proposed high-risk
archaeological exploration will test the hypothesis that the Red Sea basin
served as a viable refugium and dispersal corridor for early humans.

The nature of the research at this stage requires finding paleoanthropological
sites, and describing their geological settings and archaeological contents
(such as types of artifacts and fossils and their distribution patterns). To
achieve these goals, the proposed research will employ vehicle-assisted
pedestrian surveys (field team walking along established transects), recording
artifact and fossil concentrations with a GPS, and test excavations at selected
stratified sites. Field data compiled during this pilot survey will be entered
into a Geographic Information System database specifically designed to
accommodate site proveniences, artifact/fossil density, locations of important
environmental features (river channels, shorelines and stable plateau) and
lithic raw material locations. The results of this pilot work will enable us to
pursue a long-term, interdisciplinary fieldwork in this important region.

The intellectual merits of this high-risk exploration are that, by documenting
new prehistoric coastal sites from a less explored part of the Red Sea basin,
the research will generate fresh archaeological data with which to clarify: a)
the role that the African side of the Red Sea basin played in human adaptations,
survival and dispersals out of Africa, b) possible demographic and cultural
connections among hominid groups who occupied northeastern Africa, the Arabian
Peninsula and Southwest Asia and, c) compare the nature of prehistoric human
adaption there with neighboring regions. In a wider geographic context, this
research will contribute to global theoretical debates surrounding the
geographic contexts of early human dispersals out of Africa and the role of
coastal habitats in stimulating hominid evolution, adaptations and dispersals.

The broader impact of the project is that, it will contribute to advancing
greater international paleoanthropological research collaboration among
researchers - including two ethnic minorities in the discipline - from two US
institutions and two Sudanese universities. In the future, it will provide
diverse research opportunities for students from both American and African
institutions.