* 1625736
* MRI: Development of an Advanced Materials Additive Manufacturing (AM2) System for Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joseph Newkirk, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2021
* USD 961,018.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will develop a unique additive
manufacturing (AM) system to fabricate freeform parts with advanced materials.
AM, the process of directly depositing a 3D solid object from a digital model,
makes it possible to produce virtually any geometric complexity with very little
impact on cost but current AM technologies have not achieved their full
potential. This project will develop the research infrastructure to advance AM
technologies, with the focus on capacities that differ from conventional
manufacturing processes, such as the ability to create materials with properties
not generally observed in nature and structures with multiple materials. These
capabilities will lead to breakthrough manufacturing technologies, such as
producing much stronger and lighter products that cannot be currently made and
repairing parts so that they have enhanced strength. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be directly involved in the instrumentation design and
integration, thereby training the next generation of instrumentalists. AM2
design concepts will be used for team design projects in senior and graduate
courses and the instrumentation will be integrated with research projects for
the NSF REU Additive Manufacturing site and GAAN Doctoral Research and Training
in Direct Digital Manufacturing. The instrumentation will also be available for
use by industry and other institutions through the Center for Aerospace
Manufacturing Technology.

This project will establish the critical research infrastructure to effectively
fabricate novel materials through a high performance deposition system, real-
time monitoring and control, and the knowledge required to control the process.
Development efforts will focus on advances in the high speed deposition
mechanism, substrate liquid cooling design, chamber cooling strategy, elemental
material delivery system and sensor integration. The developed system will
enable researchers to 1) investigate freeform fabrication of materials that are
several times harder and stronger than stainless steels; 2) investigate freeform
fabrication of materials that can potentially integrate multiple materials with
traditionally incompatible properties into one unified part; and to repair
structures to be stronger than their original condition which will revolutionize
remanufacturing products; 3) fabricate parts using elemental powders so that
real-time material customizability can be achieved; 4) enhance and validate
critical multi-scale and multi-physics modeling and analysis for AM processes;
5) develop novel advanced manufacturing applications; and 6) greatly enhance
several existing research and education AM projects. The instrumentation will be
available to industry through the Center for Aerospace Manufacturing Technology
to facilitate collaboration and technology transfer.