* 1625544
* MRI: Development of an Instrument for Single Cell Electrical  Stimulation and Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 260,930.00

Understanding how the smallest organism unit, a single cell, responds to
electrical stimulations is vital for developing precision electrical stimulation
treatments for tissue repair, inventing novel conductive biomaterials for tissue
regeneration, and identifying new sensitive biomarkers for cancer therapy.
Researchers at University of Akron through the Major Research Instrument (MRI)
program are working on developing a new instrument to discover and interpret
specific responses of single cells to defined electrical stimulations. By
integrating the advances in microfluidics and bio-nanotechnology, the instrument
will have the following unique capabilities and significances: a) precise
delivery of controlled electrical stimulation to single cells, b) collection and
analysis of multiple types of molecules secreted by cells, c) direct assessment
of resultant single cell responses without the interfering signals from
surrounding cells, tissues or substances, and d) "touch free" cell manipulation
during the stimulation procedure, avoiding enzymatic, physical treatment of
cells. With these unique capabilities, this instrument will advance basic
understanding of how cells sense, function, proliferate, and communicate in
response to electrical stimulations, which will undoubtedly have transformative
impacts on tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, cancer biology,
biomaterials and biomimetic devices. The instrument will serve as a major
research facility that will build new research and training capacities for
faculty members and students at University of Akron, especially for the
university's newly created Biomimicry Research and Innovation Center and
Integrated Bioscience Ph.D. Program, and benefit bioscience researchers from
other research institutes, industry and government laboratories in Akron-
Cleveland area. The design concept and the instrument will also provide
excellent training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students
via course development, University of Akron's "Increasing Diversity in
Engineering Academics", and "Women in Engineering" programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering and manipulation of specific responses of
single cells to definable electrical stimulations is urgently needed to advance
current cell research. However, to date a universal instrument is unavailable
than can precisely deliver various electrical stimulation to individual cells,
collect and analyze secreted molecules by cells. This NSF project aims to
develop a new instrument that will enable cracking the bioelectrical code of
single cells of any type, building new research capacities for single cell level
manipulation and characterization. To achieve the desired functions and
specifications, the instrument will consist of 1) a standing surface acoustic
wave (SSAW) cell focuser in which single cells will be focused in the centerline
of microchannels, 2) an array of microelectrodes in a serpentine microchannel to
apply controlled electrical stimulations to single cells in a continuous flow,
3) an array of cell culture chambers to culture the stimulated cells, and form
target molecule-microparticle aggregates, and 4) a resistive pulse sensor array
to measure the aggregates and determine multiple type of molecule concentrations
in cell secretome. Ultimately, the above four major parts will be integrated
into a compact yet powerful new instrument for cell research. The new instrument
will directly impact the advanced researches on 1) Cardiac repair and
regeneration, 2) Neural tissue engineering, 3) Electrical stimulation assisted
wound healing and 4) Conductive biomaterials for nerve regeneration.