* 1625944
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF-TOF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,034.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Professor Amanda Hummon
from the University of Notre Dame and colleagues Bradley Smith, Marya Lieberman
and Michelle Joyce have acquired a matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-TOF MS) with collision-induced
dissociation (CID) capabilities. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of
the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex mixture. A laser striking the inert mixture
embedded with the sample, vaporizes and makes charged particles (ions) from the
sample. The ions pass into the mass spectrometer where the masses of the parent
ion and its fragment ions are measured. In a time-of-flight instrument the ions
are accelerated by an electric field to allow further characterization. MALDI
TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides,
proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly
sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between
sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range. The collision-induced
dissociation breaks up the molecular ions in the gas phase. This highly
sensitive technique allows identification and determination of the structure of
molecules in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University and region. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students in research and research training
with this modern analytical technique. Because the principal investigator is
heavily involved in mentoring students from underrepresented groups and the
local Girl Scouts, this instrumentation exposes those students to mass
spectrometry techniques and STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;such The award
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in: (a)
screening of paper substrates and milk; (b) screening for drugs in dried urine
spots; (c) characterizing self-assembled supramolecular organic dyes; (d)
developing imaging mass spectrometry of platinum compounds; (e) correlating mass
spectrometry imaging and confocal Raman microscopy; (f) using plasmon-assisted
laser-desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (LDI-MS) with gold nanoparticles
for the detection of saccharides; (g) studying xenopus laevis developmental
biology and (h) using MALDI for metabolomics.