* 1625776
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free, State-of-the-Art, Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQuID) Magnetometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Alexander Spokoyny, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 282,697.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Sarah Tolbert from the University of California Los Angeles and colleagues Louis
Bouchard, Greg Carman, Jane Chang and Alexander Spokoyny have acquired a
cryogen-free, state-of-the-art, superconducting quantum interference device
(SQuID) magnetometer. This instrument consists of two superconductors separated
by very thin insulating layers. Such a magnetometer is capable of detecting very
small magnetic fields including those produced in living organisms. The magnetic
flux is controlled by voltage variations using either direct (DC) or alternating
voltages (AC). To be able to measure such small variations in magnetic fields,
the instrument operates at very low temperatures achieved with the use of liquid
helium, a limited resource. To avoid waste of such a valuable element, this
instrument recycles the helium making it cryogen (coolant) free. This
magnetometer is placed in a user facility and plays a role in the development of
human resources in scientific research. It enriches the research experience of
many graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and undergraduate researchers. It
serves as a resource for users across the California State University System
which is heavily populated by underrepresented students. In general,
magnetometers have very diverse applications, ranging from locating submerged
metal-containing ship wrecks and submarines to measuring Earth's magnetic fields
to measuring tiny magnetic fields in the brain or
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) understanding
thermogravimetric materials for thermal energy harvesting; (b) studying magnetic
states in condensed matter systems; (c) studying boron-rich clusters as building
blocks for molecular and organic magnets; (d) exploring the use of multiferroic
materials for spintronic devices; (e) studying single molecule magnets; (f)
studying quantum anomalous half effect and topological superconductors, and (g)
applying multiferroics as new materials.