* 1625004
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer: A Hub for Fundamental Interdisciplinary Chemical Research, Applications, and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dulasiri Amarasiriwardena, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 196,283.00

An award is made to Hampshire College (Amherst, MA) to acquire and install an
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). The new generation ICP-MS
will make possible a wide range of research projects, particularly focused on
pollution and nutrition, while training a diverse group of undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary research. Some of the advances that will benefit
the general public include the identification and quantification of toxic trace
metal pollutants such as arsenic, antimony, cadmium, and lead in present and
past environments and analysis of the tissue-level uptake and incorporation of
nutritionally important elements such as zinc and iron in human teeth and hair.
ICP-MS will also be used to develop novel methods to track the fate, transport,
and translocation of toxic metal contaminants and metal nano particles in the
environment and in biological tissues. These analytical chemical advances will
facilitate better environmental monitoring methods for water and food systems
that will improve public health and will support food security. The ICP-MS will
allow the researchers to engage and support new and existing research
partnerships across the Five College Consortium, as well as to enhance
collaborations with broader regional and international academic institutions to
address larger environmental health research questions of national and global
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is driven by a team of core
faculty, who seek to achieve three planned undergraduate research and curricula
advances: (1) incorporation of the ICP-MS, with accompanying advances in atomic
spectrometry techniques [laser ablation (LA)-ICP-MS, ion chromatography
(IC)-ICP-MS], as part of the proposed interdisciplinary research projects; (2)
expansion of the scope of undergraduate interdisciplinary research projects
based on the ability of ICP-MS to investigate possible toxic metalloid
adsorption properties of clay supported nano zero valent ion particles, the fate
and transport properties of engineered nano particles (ENP), tissue level
distributions of toxic metals in archived tissues of teeth and hair to unravel
past exposure events, elemental bioimaging of staple food grains to gain insight
on nutritional benefits and health risks at tissue level, the geo-microbiology
of rock varnishes; and (3) incorporation of state-of-the-art atomic spectrometry
methods across the undergraduate curriculum, including within courses and
independent projects. Proposed projects center on analytical atomic
spectrometry, analytical method development, and validation. The developed
methods will be applied in a variety of innovative interdisciplinary research
projects conducted by student-faculty research teams that will advance the
environmental health monitoring efforts. Major findings and data from research
will be presented by students and faculty at national and international meetings
and published in peer-reviewed journals. As well, the results will be
disseminated to the public via local outreach efforts and popular media forums.