* 1625656
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3T MRI for Integrative Brain-Body Imaging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Thompson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,647,968.00

This award provides support to George Mason University for the acquisition of a
high performance 3 Tesla (3T), whole body Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
scanner to support innovative, transformative research into brain and body. The
new 3T MRI system, along with sophisticated coils and software, will be the
centerpiece of an Interdisciplinary Multimodal Imaging Center (IMIC). MRI allows
detailed, noninvasive imaging of brain and body anatomy and connectivity;
function via blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) responses; and metabolism via
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. GMU scientists, representing more than eight
disciplines across five colleges, will benefit from this award by collaborating
to conduct cross-cutting interdisciplinary research on groundbreaking
associations between brain and body. The 3T MRI scanner will also enable
researchers at GMU to conduct innovative training of undergraduates, graduate
students, and junior scientists in brain-body science approaches. This group of
researchers all take advantage of our location in the Northern VA/Washington DC
region to study sample diverse in age, disability status, ethnicity, and
socioeconomic status.

One central theme to the research of GMU investigators is to understand the
interrelations of brain and body functions from a biological, psychological, and
social perspective, and the alterations of those relationships in the presence
of acute and chronic stress, trauma, and pain. Examples of the interdisciplinary
research programs that will significantly benefit from this instrumentation
include: those examining interactions between brain and peripheral nervous
systems following stress and trauma; central and peripheral pain perception;
neural, gene, and protein networks and social ties; neurodevelopment and head
impacts; and sensorimotor integration and control. These and the other MRI
research programs at GMU will be greatly advanced by the acquisition of a
Siemens MAGNETOM Prisma 3T scanner, which offers industry-leading gradient
performance, parallel imaging capabilities, and a supportive and innovative
sequence development community. To address the big data challenges posed by the
research outlined in this proposal, a data analytics core will be established,
comprised of computer scientists, engineers, and biostaticians, to facilitate
data handling and storage, and to develop new techniques for the analysis and
integration of MRI and related biological, physiological, and behavioral data.

This MRI award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE) Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), The
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the ENG Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET).