* 1625816
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Robert Krchnavek, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2018
* USD 451,500.00

1625816 - Xue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
will be used for the acquisition of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) for
interdisciplinary research, education, and training at Rowan University, a
nearby institution, Rutgers University-Camden, and other academic and industrial
users in the southern New Jersey region. Rowan University, a primarily
undergraduate institution serving 15,000 students, was re-designated as a
"comprehensive research university" by the State of New Jersey in 2013. This new
expanded role substantially broadens the mission to include cutting-edge
research and to serve as an economic driving force for the region. This state-
of-the-art SEM will have broad and significant impact on researchers from
different backgrounds with diverse research interests. It will enhance current
research projects in the areas of energy, nanotechnology, biomedical devices,
and several other areas of materials research. An important secondary impact is
that the SEM will facilitate inter- and intra-institutional research
collaborations, allowing projects that would not have been practical otherwise.
This award will enable the integration of materials science and health care
through the development of biomedical monitors, bactericidal coatings, and
therapies based on nanotechnology. In addition, the SEM will help grow graduate
programs by allowing more comprehensive projects for graduate students to
develop the expertise needed for the nation's technical workforce. Undergraduate
students will have access to the system through research projects and related
courses, thereby preparing them for the workforce or graduate programs, not only
at Rowan, but at institutions across the country. It is anticipated that the SEM
will be used by many researchers including those from groups typically
underrepresented in STEM areas. These researchers will mentor underrepresented
students recruited through established university and college programs. All
these young researchers will have the opportunities to participate in advanced
research in the exciting growth and innovation directions to which the
university has committed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested SEM will bring
nanoscale imaging, nanofabrication, material analysis, and biological imaging
capabilities to the southern New Jersey region. As a universal tool widely used
in engineering, sciences, and medicine, the SEM will have significant impact on
a broad range of research areas including nanofluidics and nanoelectronics,
tissue engineering, energy materials, biomedical materials and devices, and
neurodegenerative disease research. This award will enable the integration of
nanomaterials with novel device designs for sensors and electronics with
enhanced performance. New organic and inorganic coatings will be created and
studied for biomedical, electronic, and energy-related applications. Polymeric
and natural biomaterials with unique micro/nano scale structures will be
fabricated for tissue engineering and medical research. Furthermore, this award
will help establish core research facilities supporting high-level materials and
biomedical research, which have been identified as focused areas of growth by
Rowan University. It will also help advance the statewide biomedical initiatives
in New Jersey. In addition, this MRI project will allow Rowan researchers to
establish high-performance imaging, fabrication, and analysis capabilities as a
central feature for new research collaborations.