* 1625680
* Automated Large-Scale Phonetic Analysis: DASS Pilot
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Margaret Renwick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 03/31/2021
* USD 377,295.00

Generalizations about language contained in dictionaries and grammars hide the
extensive variation in the way that speakers actually use language. However,
modern technology now makes it possible to use automated means to extract
variation in pronunciation from spoken interviews. This research project uses
available software to process sixty-four interviews with speakers from Florida,
Georgia, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas
recorded from 1968-1983. These interviews constitute a geographic and social
sample of speakers across the Gulf States. All of the transcriptions of the
interviews, the vowel pronunciation data, and the visualizations will be
presented on the website of the Linguistic Atlas Project. Detailed data on
actual speaker variation addresses the industrial methods currently used for
speech recognition and speech synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
be the first large-scale test of the complex systems model against acoustic
phonetic data. The legacy interviews consist of over 200 Gb of files containing
372 hours of digital audio interviews. In the first stage of the research, vowel
pronunciations will be extracted from a list of seventy-eight different words
that were elicitation targets in the interviews, plus additional words found to
occur frequently in the interviews such as color terms, up to a total of three
hundred words. The resulting data set will have approximately 22,500 vowel
tokens per interview, nearly 1,500,000 tokens across the data set, a very large
corpus of data on Southern American English. The second stage of the project
will create visualizations of these tokens to determine the dimensions of
variation in the realization of vowels per speaker, social category, and
geographic area. The science of complex systems will be employed as a model in
the analysis, which predicts that the wide range of realizations that occurs in
the groups under analysis will be self-organized into nonlinear distributional
patterns. The extraction and display of the full range of vowel variation has
the potential to improve industrial methods used for both speech recognition and
speech synthesis, as it offers a detailed view of actual variation for speakers
and groups rather than assuming a consistent or ?average? realization of vowels.