* 1625441
* OP: MRI: Development of a Visible Wavelength Extreme Adaptive Optics Coronagraphic Imager for the 6.5 meter Magellan Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Laird Close, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,422,670.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will allow a team of astronomers at
the University of Arizona to construct a state-of-the-art instrument for use at
the 6.5 meter Magellan telescope in Chile. This instrument will permit direct
imaging of faint planets and debris disks around bright stars. Several
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students will play key roles in the design and
testing phases. The instrument will enable a wide range of science for a large
number of astronomers at member institutions as well as their collaborators from
outside the consortium. It will push the envelope of adaptive optics capability,
which will have a major positive impact for a wide range of scientific and
commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University of Arizona team
will develop world-leading capabilities in high-contrast coronagraphic adaptive
optics imaging and spectroscopy through a new instrument to be developed for the
6.5 meter Magellan telescope in Chile. The instrument will extend adaptive
optics capabilities into the visual band, enabling unique science capabilities,
especially for imaging exoplanets and proto-planetary disks. The MagAO-X
instrument will build incrementally on the current MagAO system and through
three carefully-considered stages, ultimately leading to a new comprehensive
instrument. This MRI development effort will enhance infrastructure and provide
sorely-needed training opportunities for future instrumentalists.