* 1625677
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Establish Big Data Analytics Infrastructure for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Kazem Taghva, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 198,752.00

This project, acquiring an integrated high performance computing instrument for
big data research and education, aims to fill the gap for big data analytics at
a minority-serving institution in an EPSCoR state. The ability to perform
network big data research and education adds assets to various basic research
activities within the institution. The instrument will also become a critical
asset for research groups currently involved in big data analysis and
management. It strengthens educational training activities by enabling
innovative cross disciplinary courses and promoting our education outreach
activity with K-12 teachers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation would initially support the following projects addressing issues
of national priority critical for training graduate students in big data
analytics: 1. Data-Bridge system development and deployment; 2. Community
detection framework in large networks; and 3. Deep learning framework for big
data analytics. These investigators are among the first few to systematically
study sociometric systems for long tail science data collection to develop
DataBridge indexing mechanism for scientific datasets. As scientific datasets by
themselves provide very sparse information content for searching and discovery,
the DataBridge will provide a rich set of tools for mining information and
context. The research on community detection in large networks is expected to
lead to new insights into community detection of large social and information
networks, and new theoretical models for understanding such a community and
algorithms to harness them. The research on deep learning library for big data
analytics lays out a basic research program for tracking one of the fundamental
challenges of developing the Actionable Intelligence Discovery and Exploitation
(AIDE).