* 1625429
* Better Preparing STEM Undergraduates for Employment: An Interdisciplinary, Problem-based Approach for Teaching and Assessing Teamwork and Interpersonal Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Justin Fair, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2022
* USD 663,835.00

Ninety percent of employers identify teamwork and communications skills of new
STEM hires as equally or more important than the technical skills science majors
bring to their first job. Few STEM majors have room in their technically heavy
course load to introduce these skills. To fill this gap, this project creates
and assesses a new academic model that spans across a student's four-year
education, introducing the concepts in general education courses and allowing
for an enriched application, practice and evaluation of these skills in their
science courses. Psychology, social science and communication courses introduce
the theory, practice and self-assessment of skills required for good teamwork.
Students enhance and reflect on their skills through team-based
interdisciplinary research projects, both in science courses required for their
majors and through independent research. The project further explores how this
model can be transferred to other institutions through collaboration with
external universities, national workshops and publication in peer-reviewed
journals. With the integration of this new academic model, STEM students are
more competitive and better prepared for the interdisciplinary collaborations in
high demand in the workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds a university-wide model that provides comprehensive training, practice
and evaluation of lifelong interprofessional skills to address this gap in the
STEM workforce. To meet this need, the project team transforms STEM education by
creating a new four-year university-wide curricular model, including an
Effective Teamwork and Communications minor, allowing students to learn, apply,
and reflect on their interprofessional skills. These critical skills, and the
theories behind them, are taught and assessed throughout students' education, in
multiple courses, both in and out of their majors. The model avoids adding
coursework by utilizing liberal studies courses, taught by appropriate faculty
experts, which explicitly link the discipline specific theories of
interprofessional skills to their use in a student's scientific discipline.
Through interdisciplinary research problems, embedded in in-major courses, STEM
students engage in genuine teamwork, learning how to continually assess their
individual contributions and the quality of team interactions, preparing them to
transfer these skills to the STEM workforce.