* 1625923
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Multinuclear Broadband Cryogenically Cooled Probe for NMR Spectroscopy at KU-Lawrence
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 277,166.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF) as well as
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor
Justin Douglas from the University of Kansas and colleagues Bala Subramaniam,
Mikhail Barybin, Jon Tunge and Ryan Altman have acquired a cryogenically-cooled
probe for a nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer (NMR). In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for determining the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from
these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. To be able to obtain data NMR
spectrometers require a probe where the sample to be analyzed is placed. In a
cryogenically cooled probe, a very cold liquid or gas is used to chill the
environment. This chilling results in a significant increase in sensitivity and
speeds up data collection while using smaller samples. This instrument to be
located in a general user facility managed by highly qualified scientists. It is
an integral part of research, research training and teaching at the University.
The improved research infrastructure further enriches and facilitates the
innovative efforts presently underway at this institution to broaden
participation in science and engineering, especially by individuals from
underrepresented groups (e. g., gender, ethnicity, disability, geography, etc.)
through its integration into outreach at the pre-college level. Coursework at
the undergraduate and postgraduate level is enriched. Both KU students and
students from other colleges and universities participating in undergraduate and
graduate research training programs are able to access the new facilities.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially
in: (a) exploring strategies for fluorination of common functional groups; (b)
preparing azulene-bridged organometallics as a platform fo charge delocalization
and transport at the nanoscale; (c) focusing on catalysis and reaction
engineering for resource-efficient chemical and fuel production from biomass and
(d) synthesizing catalyts via carbon-carbon bond cleavage.