* 1625683
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Dry Etching System for Highly Controlled Etching of Chalcogenides and Related Compounds
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Wounjhang Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 332,961.00

The objective of this project is to acquire a tool that enables fabrication of
high quality electronic and photonic devices. Examples include light sources,
high performance sensors, state-of-the-art precision clocks, information
processing and communication components, and solar energy harvesting devices.
The new tool will provide the critical capability of precisely etching materials
in a prescribed geometry, currently not available on our campus and other
institutions in the region. This new capability will enable explorations of new
research frontiers. A diverse set of fields will be impacted including
computing, communications, frequency metrology, sensing, energy, and medicine.
The new tool will naturally provide research and training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them for tomorrow?s high tech
industry. Furthermore, the new tool will be housed in the Colorado
Nanofabrication Laboratory (CNL) serving the local industry as well as the
research community. It will also be used in a newly revamped course, the Micro-
and Nano-Structures Laboratory, providing hands-on experience to both
undergraduate and graduate students. Additionally, the tool will be utilized in
outreach activities that include under-represented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching
system can handle a variety of gases, including chlorine-based compounds. The
system will provide new etching capability for a variety of materials, including
compound semiconductors, oxides and metals. It will also significantly expand
the processing capability for silicon. The ability to fabricate high quality
electronic and photonic devices has been instrumental in a number of key
technology advancements including integrated circuits, solid-state light sources
and detectors, energy harvesting, and flexible electronics. In the future,
further advancements will lead to miniature optical clocks using chip-scale
optical frequency combs, ultra high-speed microprocessors with photonic I/O,
high efficiency solar cells with nanopatterned metamaterials, and flexible
electronic-photonic devices for biosensing applications. The key capability that
the etcher will provide is the ability for dry etching with high anisotropy,
precisely controlled etch rate and high quality etch surface. The ICP etcher
represents a significant expansion of our capabilities in both material types
and etch quality. The etcher will spark a wide array of inorganic, organic and
hybrid functional materials and devices research, potentially transforming the
materials research on campus as well as impacting many research activities in
the region and beyond.