* 1625411
* MRI - Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) at Lamar University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Ramesh Kumar Guduru, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 525,000.00

The Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award for Lamar University (LU)
supports acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) with
capabilities that include high resolution imaging, electron diffraction,
spectroscopic and compositional analysis. The TEM will promote fundamental and
applied scholarly research activities in the areas of nanomaterials, energy
storage, energy harvesting, water and air quality, catalysis, functional
materials, biomaterials, and materials and bio sciences; as well as broaden the
research and collaborative opportunities for faculty. More importantly, it will
enhance an in-depth understanding of the structure-property-performance
correlations of material systems from the micro to nano level while providing
insights to the fundamental science through experimental observations. In
addition, the undergraduate and graduate students from the College of Arts &amp;
Sciences and College of Engineering at LU will receive TEM-specific education
encompassing advanced microscopy, electron diffraction, electron-material
interactions, materials physics and chemistry, bio imaging, X-ray based chemical
composition analysis of material systems, and nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Undergraduates will receive TEM operational training through course curricula
and research projects; whereas graduate students will undertake a full course
(long semester) with applied learning through hands-on training. The TEM will
benefit several courses offered across the campus for science and engineering
students at the undergraduate and graduate levels. It will also enrich the
research and educational training of all the students expanding their
contemporary skills and increasing opportunities in education, research and
industry careers. The TEM at LU will also improve faculty inter- and multi-
disciplinary collaborative opportunities within the University as well as other
Universities and the industries. It will very well serve the research and
educational needs of many nearby Colleges and Universities, and also the local
chemical, materials, and oil and refinery industries. It will enhance the
visibility of LU for scholarly activity in the local/global research and
educational communities, and industries and help in recruiting and retaining
high quality students and faculty. The TEM will play a highly stimulating role
in K-12 outreach programs and expand the role of LU in the Southeast Texas
through STEM activities by providing exposure of a TEM as a nanoscience/advanced
microscopy tool to the middle and high school students, and underrepresented
minority students, and teachers augmenting their interest and participation in
STEM related education and projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this MRI award,
LU will procure a TEM with a resolution capability of 0.2 nm (for lattice) and
0.38 nm (for point image). This acquisition enables interdisciplinary research
across engineering and science disciplines to study the structure-property-
performance correlations from micro to nano level in the fields of energy
storage, catalysis, air and water quality, polymers, ferroelectric materials,
nanocomposites and biomaterials research. These research investigations will
help in overcoming some of the important bottlenecks in catalysis, energy
storage materials performance, green synthesis, chemical, bio and natural
sciences through structural and compositional analysis. Most importantly, it
will provide an edge over tailoring the structures and thereby the functional
properties of materials at different length scales accordingly. It is also
anticipated to boost the opportunities for design of new material systems
ranging from micro to nano size with a close controllability over their size,
structure, porosity, composition and physio-chemical properties. High resolution
capability of the TEM is also very critical to gain insights into the
arrangements of atoms, planar and porous structures in catalysts, supercapacitor
and battery electrodes, hydrogen storage materials, and ferroelectrics. The
energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDX) detector with a capability of elemental
mapping in conjunction with a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
will provide chemical composition and dispersion of phases at the atomic level
and enhance the understanding of their role in effective functionality in
catalysis, electrochemical and biological/biomedical performances etc. This high
end research capability will also bridge the research between engineering and
basic sciences, and open up the opportunities for faculty/students to work on
complex projects that are broader in scope. Currently, several on-going projects
that will benefit with this TEM include -(i) Processing and characterization of
nanomaterials for battery and supercapacitor electrode applications, (ii)
Synthesis and characterization of nano catalysts for CO2 sequestration and
biofuel production, (iii) Processing and analysis of biogenic nanocomposites and
fibers for drug delivery, biosensor and optoelectronic applications, (iv) Green
synthesis of nanoparticles within phototrophic organisms, (v) Chemistry-
Microstructure-Mechanism studies of Polymer/Carbon Nanocomposites for
environmental and biological applications, (vi) Structural characterization of
H-bonded Nano ferroelectrics, (vii) Nano-textured dustophobic coatings for solar
cell applications, and (viii) Development and characterization of biologically
active nano engineered particles.