* 1625186
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nanoscribe nano3d Printer/Optical Lithography System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Sibani Biswal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2018
* USD 402,440.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Growing research needs across many
disciplines demand new patterning and fabrication techniques that extend into
the third dimension. The Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT system meets those
needs, acting as a 3d printer with resolution down to features 500 times smaller
than the diameter of a human hair. This tool will be the first of its kind in
Texas, and will enable transformative research in diverse science and
engineering areas including optoelectronics, energy storage materials,
neuroscience, lab-on-a-chip applications, tissue engineering, and cancer
biology. The Nanoscribe will be included in the Rice Excellence in Secondary
Science Teaching (RESST) program that impacts teachers and students in the
largest school district in Texas and the 7th largest in the nation, which has an
enrollment of 88% Hispanic and African American students. In addition, this tool
will impact separately funded Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and
Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) projects on campus. Lastly, this
nanofabrication tool will also be available for hands-on instruction in 20
nanotechnology-related courses already being offered at Rice. The Nanoscribe
will be a regional hub for nanofabrication in the third dimension, and a
component of training the next generation of a diverse technological
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoscribe
Photonic Professional GT system acquired through the MRI program is able to
function as either a 3d additive manufacturing system or as a direct-write,
maskless, 2-photon photopatterning tool with 150 nm feature sizes and 3d
positioning. This tool will be the first of its kind in Texas, and will enable
transformative research in diverse science and engineering areas including
optoelectronics, energy storage materials, neuroscience, lab-on-a-chip
applications, tissue engineering, and cancer biology. The Nanoscribe will be
overseen through Rice's faculty-centric approach to shared research
infrastructure that currently manages several facilities. This stewardship
ensures best user training practices, accessibility for external academic and
industrial users, and a stable financial basis for ongoing operations, including
staff support. The Nanoscribe will be a regional hub for the growth of
nanofabrication into the third dimension.