* 1625311
* Evaluating the controls of hillslope morphology on nonlocal sediment transport: analytical and experimental approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Danica Roth, Roth                    Danica
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Danica Roth has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research and education plans at the University of Oregon and Vanderbilt
University. The primary objective of this study is to establish and enhance the
applicability of the nonlocal sediment transport numerical model in real
landscapes. Nonlocal sediment transport processes include bioturbation by tree
throw and burrowing animals, and fire-induced ravel. The project is composed of
several distinct but complementary modules with a range of experimental, field-
and data-driven components, and it naturally lends itself to outreach, education
and mentorship at the K-12 and undergraduate-level. Dr. Roth will establish a
new chapter of the NSF-funded Institute for Science and Engineer Educators'
Professional Development Program at the University of Oregon, which will provide
graduate students and postdocs with training in equitable, inquiry-based
pedagogy. This program will be a venue to design a new field-based inquiry
activity utilizing data from this study. The activity will be taught in the
Hillslope Geomorphology class at the University of Oregon and made publicly
available in online educational archives. The social relevance of topics
encompassed by this project (e.g., erosional responses to fires and clear
cutting) will also generate public interest and provide opportunities to
increase awareness of these issues through public lectures, popular press
pieces, and educational content published on YouTube and our web pages.

This project will bridge the gap between the well-developed theoretical work on
nonlocal transport and the need for field-based measurements and applications of
nonlocal transport. This study will also generate valuable datasets on particle
transport distances in a wide range of natural field settings. The nonlocal
transport model will address one of the major weaknesses of existing models by
taking into account roughness. The effects of roughness will be incorporated
into the nonlocal formulation for particle disentrainment via its influence on
critical slope and the probabilistic spacing of roughness elements. A modified
PÃ˜clet number for the relative importance of local and nonlocal transport
processes will be developed and field-tested in a range of natural settings. All
analyses and theory will be informed and tested with field experiments to
compare theoretical and measured particle travel distances and erosion rates in
the Oregon Coast Range and the Painted Hills badlands in Central Oregon.