* 1625137
* MRI: Acquisition of a scanning electron microscope with EDS, EBSD, and CL for research and teaching in a multi-user facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Ellen Cowan, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 561,842.00

1625137&lt;br/&gt;Carmichael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports acquisition of a scanning electron
microscope equipped with a high brightness electron source, an energy dispersive
spectrometer, an electron backscatter diffractometer, and cathodoluminescence
(CL) microscope to allow microscale textural and compositional imaging of solid
earth, biological and synthetic materials as well as study of rock fabrics based
on EBSD determination of crystallographic preferred orientation. The instrument
will replace an aging SEM rapidly nearing the end of its serviceable life and
will support research and research training Appalachian State University, a non-
Ph.D. granting institution. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity
and welfare given the importance of training the next generation scientific
workforce in methods of analysis and scientific research methodologies.
Appalachian State University is a primarily undergraduate institution and the
investigators have a strong track record of engaging undergraduate students in
laboratory and field research. Many of the students at Appalachian State are
first-generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will
support and foster a range of investigator and student research including study
of the role of microbes in manganese mineral formation, the geochemistry of mass
extinctions, the extent of coal ash releases into river systems, the use of
glacial grain roughness as a tracer for paleoclimate signals, applications to
fission track thermochronology, thermobarometry, and analysis of deformation
mechanisms to study dome formation in the Southern Appalachian mountains, the
kinematics of faulting in the Southern Appalachians, plant root development,
fluid-mineral reactions in volcanic ash, meteorite classification, metamorphism
of ultra-high pressure systems, Ediacaran fossil assemblages, the effect of
climate change on Fraser firs, vascular changes during pregnancy, the microbial
ecology of peat bogs, and a variety of archaeological studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***