* 1626602
* Engaged Student Learning: Coalition for Undergraduate Computational Data-enabled Science &amp; Engineering (CDSE) Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Matthew Ikle, Adams State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 510,021.00

This project will develop a virtual department across four partner campuses to
provide computer science education to students at campuses that are individually
too small to support this kind of department. The new department will focus on
the analysis of "big data" - large sets of computational and observational data
- that are becoming increasingly prevalent in STEM. Cyber-learning techniques
such as recorded lectures, archived materials, blog participation, and active
learning approaches will be combined to offer a set of classes in big data
science spanning meteorology, environmental science, biology and chemistry. By
combining students from different campuses into the same courses, problems with
minimal resources and limited potential enrollments on the individual campuses
can be overcome. In particular, the project will focus on developing courses in
biology and earth science, areas where students are not attracted by traditional
computer science classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
flexible, blended learning model and effective learning assessment tools that
can be implemented across multiple disciplines and institutions. The major goals
and corresponding objectives of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Develop and
implement high quality and relevant Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering (CDSE) courses in mathematical modeling, data mining, genomics and
bioinformatics, and problems in atmospheric and hydrospheric science using
active learning and research-based teaching methodologies that promote inter-
institutional and interdisciplinary collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;2) Use innovative
web-based technologies, to develop and implement learning assessment tools to
gauge achievement of students from diverse backgrounds and contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Develop, implement, and test an expanded CDSE pedagogical network
in which resource sharing allows institutions of all sizes and types to
consistently and sustainably offer CDSE coursework. &lt;br/&gt;Instructors from
different campuses will be paired in a peer teaching/peer review model for
course design and implementation. Including pairs of instructors from different
institutions ensures that (1) each instructor will gain the knowledge and
experience to teach a new course that is originally developed by the other
instructor; and (2) the courses are thoroughly reviewed and revised by peers.
The coalition will share its discoveries in building inter-institutional
teaching efficiency, undergraduate research opportunities, and learning
assessment via online networks, new coalition partners, conferences, and
publications.