* 1626643
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) for isotopic studies in earth and environmental studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 511,547.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a new Multi-Collector
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) instrument to support
cutting-edge research in the earth and environmental sciences at Oregon State
University (OSU). The acquisition of a latest generation MC-ICP-MS will have an
immediate broad impact on the research of faculty at OSU and in the Pacific
Northwest. Supported research activities have strong societal implications for
the residents of the Pacific Northwest and elsewhere including studies of
climate change, critical zone processes, anthropogenic pollution, natural
hazards, and fisheries management. The acquisition will improve the ability of
the College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences and the College of
Agricultural Sciences (OSU) to produce highly skilled graduates prepared for
careers in a range of settings. Undergraduate and graduate education and
research will be supported through facility tours and instrument demonstrations,
class projects, student research projects, and course
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analytical capability enabled by the new MC-
ICP-MS will position OSU to remain at the forefront of rapidly developing high
impact research areas. In just the past 5 years, analytical improvements in the
design of mass spectrometers continue to push the boundaries of precision and
accuracy at higher and higher sensitivities. These improvements will open up
many new avenues of research by reducing the amount of sample material needed,
improving the sampling resolution for all applications, removing interferences,
and through the simultaneous collection of a larger number of isotopes. Specific
examples of projects imminently proposed that will be supported by the MC-ICP-MS
include: developing heavy stable isotopes as tools in environmental applications
(e.g., detecting and quantifying uranium removal from contaminated groundwater;
tracing non-ferrous metal smelting emissions); understanding critical zone
processes (including tracing sources of soil inputs and examining the
relationship between climate, erosion, and weathering); laser ablation
measurements of isotopic compositions at high spatial resolution; and climate
change (including tracing ocean circulation in the past and reconstructing past
ocean nutrient distributions).