* 1626552
* MRI: Acquisition of a Data Lifecycle Instrument (DaLI) for Management and Sharing of Data from Instruments and Observations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Callum Ross, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2020
* USD 725,558.00

Data from instruments and observations are being generated at increasing rates
which leads to increased challenges in data management and computation. It is
critical that we address these challenges because these large datasets enable
massive breakthroughs across many scientific disciplines. Instruments and
observations can generate terabytes of data per day, which often must be
transferred from remote locations, field stations, or core facilities to the
user's home system for storage and analysis. To address these challenges, The
University of Chicago (UChicago) will acquire and operate a Data Lifecycle
Instrument (DaLI) to manage and share data from instruments and observations at
UChicago and the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL). DaLI will simplify data
management for researchers, allowing them to acquire, transfer, process, and
share data from instruments and observations in a single workflow as well as
share their data with a larger community of users. In partnership with UChicago,
MBL, and collaborating Minority Serving Institutions, DaLI will be used as a
training instrument to prepare students to meet the data challenges of the 21st
century and will support several outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Data Lifecycle instrument (DaLI) for management and sharing of data from
instruments and observations will enable researchers to (a) acquire, transfer,
process, and store data from experiments and observations in a unified workflow,
(b) manage data collections over their entire life cycle, and (c) share and
publish data. DaLI will also (d) enhance outreach and education opportunities
and (e) provide a replicable model for other institutions. DaLI will create a
scalable, seamless, and replicable infrastructure for data management and
sharing to enable new transformative science and enable researchers to implement
best practices in data management. The DaLI platform will consist of four pools
of resources: a high-performance compute resource for pre- and post-processing
of data, a high-performance storage pool, a low cost storage pool, and a tape
backup pool. In addition to hardware, DaLI is designed to have software tools
that create intuitive interfaces for data lifecycle management and integration
with the campus and national cyberinfrastructures.