* 1626666
* MRI: Acquisition of Three-Ion-Beam Microscopy System for Advanced Nanofabrication and Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* H. Kimble, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,202,939.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the acquisition of a
three-ion-beam microscope, the ORION NanoFab system, from Carl Zeiss Microscopy.
This tri-beam system can provide unprecedented resolution, precision and
versatility for the fabrication and characterization of materials and devices
all the way down to the nanometer scale (roughly a few times the atomic
spacing). The ORION NanoFab system is expected to make a significant impact on
interdisciplinary nanoscience research, particularly in the areas of quantum
matter and technology, medical and bio-engineering, photonic and optoelectronic
research, meta-materials, and renewable energy science. The tri-beam system will
be located at the Kavli Nanoscience Institute (KNI) of the California Institute
of Technology (Caltech), which provides laboratories with state-of-the-art
infrastructure and houses centralized nanofabrication and nano-characterization
facilities for researchers at Caltech, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and
corporations and other institutes in the greater area of Southern California. As
this form of tri-beam microscopy is only in its infancy, Caltech will also be
partnering with Zeiss in a technical outreach effort to bring experts together
to advance new ideas and applications of the tri-beam tool. This collaborative
outreach plan includes: hosting annual workshops at Caltech with industrial and
global research-community users of the ORION NanoFab to exchange information on
research highlights, technical challenges, and new technical developments and
applications. As part of outreach effort there is also a plan to offer
nanoscience "demo days" for K-12 students in which the advanced instrumentation
of the ORION NanoFab and other tools in the KNI can be used to explore the
nanoscopic world, as well as lectures and lab tours at Caltech to local high
school students and teachers on topics of nano-science and technology
(nano-S&amp;T) and applications of modern microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the acquisition of a
three-ion-beam microscope, the ORION NanoFab system, from Carl Zeiss Microscopy.
The ORION NanoFab is a three-ion-beam nano fabrication and microscopy system
capable of an imaging resolution of 0.5 nm and a cutting resolution of
&amp;#8818;2nm, virtually independent of material. The system is designed to
seamlessly switch between gallium, neon and helium beams, so that one has the
option of employing the gallium focused ion beam (FIB) to pattern materials at
the micro-scale, taking advantage of the powerful yet gentle neon beam for
precision nano-machining with speed, or using the helium beam to fabricate
delicate sub-10 nm structures that demand extremely high machining fidelity
and/or cutting of delicate materials (such as graphene) that are prone to damage
by high-energy electrons or heavy-element ion beams. Its capability of maskless
nano-patterning also minimizes possible contamination due to the multiple steps
required in processing and removing masks. The ORION NanoFab system is expected
to make a significant impact on interdisciplinary nanoscience research,
particularly in the areas of quantum matter and technology, medical and bio-
engineering, photonic and optoelectronic research, meta-materials, and renewable
energy science. The tri-beam system will be located at the Kavli Nanoscience
Institute (KNI) of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), which
provides laboratories with state-of-the-art infrastructure and houses
centralized nanofabrication and nano-characterization facilities for researchers
at Caltech, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and corporations and other
institutes in the greater area of Southern California. In partnership with Zeiss
we also plan to bring together the industrial and global research-communities in
a series of annual workshops at Caltech designed to help advance the technology
and applications of multi-beam microscopy and nanofabrication.