* 1626244
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer and Laser System for Investigating the Evolution of the Earth's Climate, Oceans, and Tectonics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Brendan Roark, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,000,237.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a new state of the art Laser
Ablation Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer system
(LA-MC-ICPMS) to be incorporated into the expanding Ken Williams Radiogenic
Isotope Geosciences Laboratory at Texas A&M University. The instrumentation will
be used by an interdisciplinary group of researchers across Texas A&M
University, the International Ocean Discovery Program, Texas A&M Corpus Christi,
and Texas A&M University Galveston to address transformative and
interdisciplinary questions in climate, biogeochemistry, environmental change,
and tectonics. Specific research topics include: 1) novel transition metal
isotope measurements such as iron, zinc, and cadmium as a tracer of oceanic
metal cycling; 2) understanding how isotope and trace element tracers can be
used to understand the relationship between past climate change and past oceanic
biological productivity, deep-ocean circulation, and patterns of continental
aridity and hydrology; 3) expanding geochronology research capabilities using
new methods in uranium series dating; 4) using boron and neodymium isotope
measurements in carbonates to reconstruct oceanic and atmospheric circulation
changes and seawater pH histories. The diverse team of early career and
experienced faculty along with their students will use this instrumentation to
transform our understanding of the way our planet works at the surface
(biosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere) and at depth (lithosphere). We intend to
engage large numbers of undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge STEM
training using state-of-the-art instrumentation through both research
experiences and high-impact teaching opportunities that provide hands on
training in the use of clean room laboratory techniques and in the operation of
the mass spectrometer.

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a Laser Ablation Multi-
Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer system (LA-MC-ICPMS) to
be housed in the Ken Williams Radiogenic Isotope Geosciences Laboratory at Texas
A&M University. The MC-ICPMS instrument comprises an ICP source, a magnetic
sector mass analyzer, and an array of multiple detectors that allows for the
simultaneous measurement of multiple isotopes. This static isotope ratio
measurement results in a precision far superior to that obtained by sequential
isotope measurement by single collector ICPMS. Laser ablation (LA) is a widely
used sampling method for in-situ ICPMS analyses of solid samples that are either
difficult to digest or where resolution of spatial relationships within sampled
micro-domains is critical. The laser system includes the HelEx sample chamber
necessary to produce stable signals and reproducible ablation effects. The
instrumentation will be used by an interdisciplinary group of researchers to
address questions in climate, biogeochemistry, environmental change, and
tectonics. Principle investigator projects will focus on 1) novel transition
metal isotope measurements as a tracer of oceanic metal cycling; 2)
understanding how isotope and trace element tracers can be used to understand
the relationship between past climate change and past oceanic biological
productivity, deep-ocean circulation, and patterns of continental aridity and
hydrology; 3) expanding geochronology research capabilities using new methods
for "petrochronology" by split-stream ICPMS and trace-element screening of
zircons for high-precision U-Pb dating; 4) U/Th dating and boron isotope
measurements in deep-sea corals to reconstruct ocean ventilation and seawater pH
histories; 5) Nd isotopes as a tracer of oceanic and atmospheric circulation.