* 1626116
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3d Photogrammetry Light Stage System for Scanning Shape, Motion and Appearance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Seth Berrier, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 298,426.00

This project, acquiring a 3D photogrammetric light stage instrument with
automatic synchronization and registration for instantaneous scanning of 3D
shapes with submillimeter accuracy, motion capture, and capture reflectance
properties, aims to capture image samples up to 128 viewing angles and 156
lighting angles simultaneously. It will afford the instantaneous scanning of 3D
shape with sub-millimeter accuracy in a range of sizes from a few cm up to
several meters and will also afford capture of motion over time. Unlike most
other photogrammetry systems, the device can also capture reflectance properties
giving rise to accurate appearance. This instrument would contribute to a wide
range of interdisciplinary projects and research (both at Stout and at
neighboring Ph.D. granting institutions) as well as broader enrichment of the
public through partnerships with art and history museums and non-profits.
Photogrammetry-based systems acquire information about an object?s shape and
appearance via images of the object from multiple angles. With a proper array of
cameras the object can be captured in a fraction of a second and no markers or
modification of the material of the object is necessary. Moreover, the precision
and density of the data is comparable to laser scanning devices. Even more
compelling is the similarity of this data to that captured by more complex and
custom light stages used in computer graphics light field research. However, a
gap still exists between these areas that this instrument, and the research it
enables, will endeavor to eliminate. This instrument will support collaboration
with photographers at the Minneapolis Institute of Art and with the director of
the Goldstein Museum of Design. These museums are open to the public and have a
common desire to spread their works into the wider community. This instrument
will also contribute to the work of the company Xan Scan that seeks to capture
objects of significant historical value (including Native American and ancient
Chinese artifacts) from smaller public museums. Xan Scan shares these scans with
schools providing broadening the access of students that would otherwise not be
able to visit these museums in a very cost effective manner. The instrument will
be used in several courses at the institution to enhance education of
undergraduate students in design, computer science, and digital humanities.
Students will have access to the facility and be better trained for research in
these areas. The impact should spread further. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
difficulty of entry into this area, commercial photogrammetry software and
hardware has not realized the potential to connect to light field rendering
research. The work enabled by this instrument seeks a remedy and provides an
open standard for representing, rendering, and sharing this data. Some project
examples are discussed, including work with designers to introduce
photogrammetry based objects into the design process and museum curators, to
scan objects for advanced archeological and historical research, as well as the
development of digital exhibits for wider access to their artifacts. Despite the
usefulness, photogrammetry has not been embraced by the archival preservation
group, possibly because of insufficient understanding of the data and format and
storage standards. Hence, archivists and historical personnel will be involved
specifically with the goal of addressing these issues and establishing or
expanding standards for metadata, photogrammetry images and 3D models.