* 1626041
* MRI: Development of a Redeployable Spread Spectrum Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) Meteor Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Philip Erickson, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2018
* USD 295,496.00

This award provides funding to construct a novel meteor radar instrument called
Multistatic Spread Spectrum Meteor Radar (MSMR). The MSMR design is innovative
in part because the electronics would be based upon commercial components that
would avoid radio wave interference problems. The primary purpose of the
application of this new instrument is to study the phenomena of mesospheric
dynamics, ionospheric irregularities, and meteoroid influx deposition. The
primary aim of the science application using this instrument would be to achieve
the measurements of the winds in the mesosphere-lower thermosphere region from
75 to 110 km. Unlike other meteor radar systems, this instrument would be easily
transportable, cheap to fabricate, with relatively low power required for any
radio transmission. The broader impact of this award is that it would provide an
excellent platform for young engineers to gain experience in working with a
design structure largely centered around the collection of immense amounts of
data that is analyzed on the fly to achieve intermediate data products. Summer
students would be supported on this project as well as a postdoctoral scholar
that would receive part time support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The radar system will
consist of three transmitter antennas and two interferometric receiver antenna
fields. A continuous pseudorandom phasecode unique to each transmitter would be
utilized for transmission of the radar signals. Because pseudorandom waveforms
do not correlate with external radio interference, the system has good rejection
of external radio interference. An unqiue property of MSMR that is unlike any
existing meteor radars is all of the transmitter antennas of MSMR can be
operated on the same frequency band with minimal mutual interference. The radar
system can also be used at a smaller peak power than current systems, while
utilizing the same average power as a pulsed system. The new innovations make
radio licensing easier, as a large radar network will only occupy a portion of
the radio spectrum that is equivalent to a single mono-static radar. These new
MSMR features allow construction of a dense meteor radar network that can be
applied to studies of mesospheric wind fields and trajectories of ablating
meteoroids using a significantly larger number of specular meteor echoes than
ever before. The radar can also be used to allow observations of field aligned
ionospheric irregularities (FAI) without the range-Doppler ambiguity that is an
issue for existing pulsed systems. The radar system relies on modern software
defined radio hardware, which greatly reduces the complexity of the radar
system, with most of the features implemented in software.