* 1626681
* MRI: Development of a single-mode terahertz free electron lasers for research in materials, physics, chemistry and biology
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 749,328.00

The terahertz frequency range lies at the heart of the electromagnetic spectrum,
between the domains of electronics and optics. An electromagnetic wave with a
frequency of one terahertz oscillates one trillion cycles per second?about 1000
times faster than the electromagnetic waves used by cell phones, and 500 times
slower than the electromagnetic waves that constitute visible light. Terahertz
electromagnetic waves have been, so far, relatively little used by society
because they are hard to generate. However, that is changing rapidly, propelled
by revolutions in optics and electronics. The UC Santa Barbara Free-Electron
lasers are the brightest sources of tunable terahertz radiation in the world.
This project will increase the brightness available to users of the UCSB Free-
Electron Laser facility by a factor between 100 and 1000. The upgraded facility
will enable fundamental research on the interaction of electromagnetic radiation
with electronic materials, molecules, and biological matter. The insights gained
from this fundamental research will have important implications for information
technology, defense, and biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz
technology is rapidly advancing, with tabletop sources now available that
generate peak electric fields in excess of 1 MV/cm (peak power &gt;106 W) in
pulses with bandwidths of ~1 THz, and much more compact electronic sources that
generate mW powers with sub-kHz linewidths. An increasing number of fascinating
scientific questions and important technological developments require access to
tunable terahertz electromagnetic fields with very high spectral brightness,
which combine extremely high power and electric field with extremely narrow
linewidth. The major research instrumentation to be developed here will greatly
enhance the state of the art in this high-power/narrow-linewidth niche. The UC
Santa Barbara Free-Electron Lasers, which are tunable from 0.24 to 4.5 THz with
&gt;1 kW power in few-microsecond pulses, will be enhanced by reducing the
linewidth of the emitted radiation to &lt;1 MHz over their entire tuning range
while precisely controlling and measuring the frequency of the emitted radiation
and enabling ?slicing? of the Free-Electron Laser (FEL) output into a series of
pulses with durations variable from ~1 ns to the full few-microsecond pulse
duration. The free-electron laser enhancements will enable important new
research in condensed matter physics, chemistry and biology by (1) improving the
precision and control of several experimental methodologies that have already
been developed at the UC Santa Barbara FEL facility, and (2) enabling some
experiments that could not previously be envisioned. This development heavily
leverages more than 35 years of infrastructure, investment, institutional
commitment, and expertise at UC Santa Barbara.