* 1626289
* MRI: Acquisition of an Aerosol Jet 3D Printing System for Flexible Electronic Circuits, Additive Manufacturing and Material Development
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Bahram Asiabanpour, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 10/31/2016
* USD 0.00

This project, acquiring a versatile Optomec Aerosol Jet 300 (AJ 300) printing
system for flexible electronic circuits and printable nanomaterials based
chemical/biological (CB) sensors, supports current and future initiatives in
additive manufacturing and material development. Flexible electronics and
printable nanomaterials based CB sensors are highly desired in many
applications, particularly those that require or may benefit from flexible
substrates. In addition to low cost, flexible electronics offers light-weighted,
thin-film electronics circuits capable of adhering on flexible and conformal
surfaces. Such technology is expected to bring revolutionary changes to the
current landscape of electronics, including thin-film cell phones, window-
stickable thin-film TV, and functional clothes or removal skin stackers with
various sensing, memory and communication capabilities. However, current
development of flexible electronics is limited by the lack of fundamental
knowledge of carrier transportation properties on flexible surfaces and the
impact of bending and strain on circuit performance. In addition, there is no
effective fabrication system capable of uniformly delivering materials on
flexible substrates with high resolution and multi-layer alignment accuracy. The
requested state-of-the-art system is expected to provide new capabilities to
promote interdisciplinary research and education. The acquisition of the AJ 300
printing system should greatly enhance the collaborations of different projects
through the sharing of the printer among cutting-edge, cross disciplinary
researchers since flexible electronics, nano-materials, high rate nano-
manufacturing, and chemical and biological sensors form part of the signature
research programs of the institution. The system would provide an unprecedented
opportunity for the education of flexible electronics and all the areas
addressed with hands-on training opportunities in a minority-serving university.
The proposed 3D printing system will serve as a key component to recruit and
grow enrollment in STEM disciplines. Through the integration of discovery
research into educational and outreach activities, the retention rate should
most likely increase. Moreover, the instrument enables development and
implementation of integrated classroom teaching and research. The AJ 300 printer
also provides new opportunities for and collaborative research with other
universities and industries for technology development and transfer for
commercialization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation, an additive, high-
resolution multi-layer printing system capable of uniformly delivering fluid and
nano-materials on almost any planar substrate or 3D surface with precise multi-
layer alignment accuracy, enables the PIs to perform systematic research on
fundamental issues of flexible electronics, such as carrier (electrons and
holes) transport on flexible surfaces, and circuit performance variation under
bending and strain due to changes in the band structure, Fermi-level, carrier
mobility, and threshold voltage. The knowledge obtained through systematic
research will form a solid base for the development of flexible electronics,
particularly for accurate modeling and design of flexible electronics. The AJ
300 printing system also provides a research platform for various flexible
electronics and optoelectronics devices such as conformal antenna, highly
ordered self-assembling polymer/clay nanocomposite, Terahertz radiation and
detection, and additive manufacturing. It can also function as a test printing
system for the printable nanomaterials development and printable nanomaterials
based CB sensors, including nanomaterial engineering, synthesis, and process
development as well as large-scale cost-effective CB sensor fabrication and
integration. Furthermore, the instrumentation would support research in scaling
and integration of direct printing and investigate the couplings between the
deposition of the droplets, formation of the composite structure, and device
performance.