* 1626565
* Departmental Action Teams: Sustaining Improvements in Undergraduate STEM Education Through Faculty Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,919,515.00

This project continues early work on a new model for institutional
transformation through focusing on the need to shift departmental structures and
culture to sustain improvements. The main institutional focus for this applied
research project is the University of Colorado at Boulder where most of this
work will take place. This University has a relatively long history of efforts
to engage in STEM education reform. The work centers on a new type of working
group, a "Departmental Action Team" (DAT). This team approach was developed by
the STEM Institutional Transformation Action Research project, which grew out of
the Science Education Initiative at this University that began nearly a decade
ago. A DAT is a self-selected group comprised mostly of faculty (but including
post docs and students) within a single academic department. DATs serve three
main goals. One is to address an educational issue of interest to the
department. A second and related goal is to sustain improvements made in solving
(or improving) a departmental issue by creating lasting structural and cultural
changes. The third goal is to provide a collaborative, community-building
experience for DAT members. DATs are departmentally-focused, externally
facilitated, faculty-driven, team-based, and focused on creating sustainable
changes. Currently this University has six DATs. The focus of this project is to
expand substantially the use of DATs to the point where departmentally-driven
institutional transformation becomes the new norm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work involves continuing to study and form DATs at the University of
Colorado and expanding the model to Colorado State University (CSU) to see if a
clean slate enactment can work. This project will develop: (1) a process for
enculturating DAT facilitators and institutionalizing DATs in campus Teaching
and Learning Centers (TLCs), (2) a theory of how DATs operate in different
contexts, and (3) cultural and structural change metrics. Much research on
change in university organizations identifies departmental culture as the
lynchpin of change. This study will contribute substantially to understanding
the prospects for adopting this model as an effective way to achieve
institutional transformation.