* 1626211
* MRI: Acquisition of a Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Keitz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 314,930.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Benjamin Keitz from the University of Texas Austin and colleague C. Grant
Willson have acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with solid state
capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as
those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as
well as the study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the study of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify
unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within
molecules, and to study the changing interactions between molecules in solution
or in the solid state. The results from these NMR studies have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument is located a general user facility managed by highly qualified
scientists as an integral part of research, research training and teaching. The
improved research infrastructure further enriches the research experience for
economically disadvantaged and underrepresented minority students at the
institution. It is used in collaborations with non-Ph.D.-granting universities
in the Austin metropolitan area. Specifically, faculty engages with students at
St. Edwards University and Huston-Tillotson University as part of existing UT-
Austin outreach programs. Such collaborations facilitate the development of
interactions where faculty and students from these universities visit UT-Austin
to use the spectrometer. Overall, the solid state NMR spectromater improves UT-
Austin's many successful diversity initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in: (a)
gaining information on polymeric materials, (b) studying conjugated
metallopolymers, (c) characterizing porous solids, (d) studying protein self-
assembly in structured biomaterials, (e) enabling the design of surface-modified
nanoparticles, (f) contributing to research in the geological sciences, and (g)
helping prepare new pharmaceutical dosage forms.