* 1626087
* MRI: Development of an integrated wide-band acoustical backscattering and large-area camera imaging instrument for studies of mesopelagic and bathypelagic ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Gareth Lawson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 804,984.00

The mesopelagic and bathypelagic zones together span ocean depths from
approximately 200 meters to 4,000 meters below the surface and form one of the
largest habitats on Earth. These zones are home to diverse communities of
zooplankton and micronekton, including a variety of small fishes, cephalopods,
crustaceans, and gelatinous organisms. Yet relatively little is known about the
biology, adaptations, abundance, biomass, and distribution of the inhabitants of
these deep and dark ecosystems. In general, such organisms are difficult to
sample by conventional nets due to a combination of the patchiness of the
organisms, avoidance of the nets by more mobile organisms, difficulties in
sampling synoptically at such depths using nets, and the destruction of fragile
species by the nets. However, recent evidence suggests that the global biomass
estimates of micronektonic fish in the mesopelagic zone based on sampling by
nets may be an order of magnitude too low and suggests a strong coupling between
surface production and mesopelagic fish biomass, hinting at a previously under-
appreciated biogeochemical role. This project will fill the current
technological void for characterizing mesopelagic and bathypelagic ecosystems by
developing a combined acoustical and optical ecosystem assessment instrument for
quantifying the biomass and distribution of zooplankton and micronekton in the
mesopelagic and bathypelagic zones. This instrument is particularly well suited
to understanding the diverse communities of zooplankton and micronekton in
relation to environmental variability, such as meso-scale oceanic eddies,
fronts, and upwelling regions, and abrupt topography, such as canyons,
seamounts, and shelf breaks. Impacts from this research will extend from basic
research problems underpinning science-based fisheries management and decision
making, to broader societally relevant problems. The project outcomes will most
likely guide the development of future commercially available instruments for
fisheries and ecosystem assessment for users from both the scientific and
fisheries research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
combined wide-band acoustic scattering and two-scale large-area camera imaging
towed instrument, rated to depths as great as 2,000 m, integrated with
environmental sensors that can address many of the challenges associated with
sampling in the mesopelagic and bathypelagic zones. This instrument capitalizes
on emerging broadband acoustical approaches. The acoustic frequencies will span
1-450 kHz almost continuously, simultaneously providing ?full spectrum?
information on zooplankton and micronekton, with the lower frequencies optimized
for resonance classification of gas-bearing organism, such as myctophids and
siphonophores, and the higher frequencies optimized for spectral classification
of organism without gas-inclusions, such as euphausiids and salps. The two-scale
camera system will provide images of these organisms over a large area for
taxa/species-level classification as well as behavioral observation, including
imaging larger and mobile micronekton, and will ground-truth the synoptic
acoustic data.