* 1626236
* MRI: Development of an Autonomous, Connected and Data-Driven Vehicle for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Project-Based Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* William Michalson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project, developing a connected and autonomous vehicle, aims to create
WAVE, a shared 'live' testbed/platform for faculty and students to investigate
many aspects of the driveless car. Involving research, experiments, and data
collection, these aspects include: safety, reliability, performance,
connectivity, interaction, and social impacts. Similar to the history of
wireless communications research over the past decade, researchers often
utilized SDR platforms to prototype and evaluate their proposed communication
systems. As connected and autonomous cars hit the road in the future, there will
be many issues. A prototype vehicle becomes absolutely necessary for these
research projects to collect data, conduct experiments, and prove concepts. The
'live' testbed will be shared by faculty and students across the university to
carry out their research and educational missions. A large number of research
activities and student projects will utilize this instrument, which will serve
the dual purposes of enabling multidisciplinary research and project-based
learning. The instrument will enable multidisciplinary research activities that
involve, but are not limited to, computer vision and machine learning, V2V and
V2I communications, optimal controls and reliability, big data analysis, human-
robot interactions, driver behavior and human factors, social impacts and
autonomous vehicle policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a fully autonomous
car is not currently commercially available, key components such as sensors,
processing platforms, and drive-by-wire devices can readily be integrated to
build a prototype. The instrument development team consists of experts from
multiple fields, including robotics, electrical, and mechanical engineering, as
well as computer science. The main efforts not only includes the
hardware/sensors installation, but also the software development for vehicle
control, data processing, and path planning. Comparing to the autonomous vehicle
prototypes in the literature, the proposed WAVE testbed exhibits three new
properties. It will be a 1. Connected vehicle equipped with DSRC (Dedicated
Short Range Communications) modules that can evaluate V2V (Vehicle-to Vehicle)
and V2I (Vehicle to Infrastructure) active-safety systems; 2. Data-driven
platform that will collect big data from roads, vehicles, and drivers; the data
will be shared openly with the research community; 3. Real-world tool for
university faculty to develop curriculum for project-based learning which will
enhance student experience through undergraduate research.