* 1626494
* MRI: Acquisition of Hybrid Mass Spectrometer for Geochemistry and Environmental Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Paul Zimba, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 681,416.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a hybrid Mass Spectrometer
for Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC). This instrument will make
a fundamental contribution to TAMUCC's goals of increasing training and research
opportunities for students and faculty, achieving national and international
recognition as a premier marine and environmental science research institution,
and promoting research collaborations among South Texas universities. This
instrument will expand the research capabilities of 12 members of the faculty at
TAMUCC. Each of these faculty members has research interests which largely focus
on environmental chemistry which is a key component of the growing research
endeavor in south Texas. It will provide an essential assessment tool for South
Texas scientists to understand aquatic carbon and nitrogen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the hybrid Mass Spectrometer researchers will be able
to detect and quantify thousands of compounds, including pollutants, in a single
analysis and then design experiments to assess the metabolic role or effects of
these compounds on organismal and ecosystem health. These areas of research are
vital, not only to the rapidly developing South Texas region, but throughout the
northern Gulf of Mexico. The PIs represent a broad spectrum of research areas
associated with marine and environmental science that would benefit from access
to a state-of-the-art mass spectrometer. Research areas include characterization
of dissolved organic matter, emerging contaminants, toxins, and natural
products. The new instrumentation will enhance these programs as well as open up
avenues for new research lines, new collaborations, and public-private
partnerships.