* 1626674
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spectrograph for the Central Washington University Research Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Christian Schwab, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2022
* USD 264,439.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will fund the acquisition of
scientific instrumentation for the new 0.6-meter telescope at Central Washington
University (CWU). The instrument will be a compact, low-cost, high-resolution
spectrograph designed to detect and measure the orbital characteristics of
Jupiter-sized planets around nearby giant stars. While the design is based on an
existing instrument, much of the assembly and testing of the instrument will be
carried out by undergraduate students. CWU students will also participate in the
international partnership that developed the initial design. The spectrograph
will give students the opportunity to experience how science, technology, and
engineering come together to solve research problems and make new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This primary scientific goal is detection and
monitoring of exoplanets in long-period orbits around giant stars. This will be
accomplished through long-term monitoring of a small number of bright targets,
which should also enable asteroseismology of giant stars. The instrument design
targets precision radial velocity studies in the m/s range and makes use of an
iodine cell. Much of the local engineering work and scientific observations will
be performed by undergraduate students. This will provide training opportunities
that generally are not available at non-PhD granting schools.