* 1626484
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer at Central Washington University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Anne Johansen, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 127,539.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award provides funding for the acquisition
of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectometer (ICP-OES) at
Central Washington University, a regional comprehensive university that serves
primarily undergraduates. This new instrument will provide high-quality chemical
analyses of water, wine, aerosol, soil, snow and ice core samples, allowing for
a range of interdisciplinary research on how chemicals vary and cycle near the
Earth?s surface and how their presence is influenced by human activity. Four
faculty members in the Geological Sciences, Chemistry, and Biology Sciences
Departments, and the Environmental Studies Program will incorporate the new
instrument into their research, their classes, and their outreach activities.
The four faculty members all have active externally-funded research programs
that include undergraduate and Masters students; the instrumentation will
broaden the research scope and training for these students. The faculty also
have strong ties with local, regional and national agencies such as the National
Park Service, the Washington Department of Ecology, the Yakama Nation, and the
Environmental Protection Agency. The new instrument will enhance these
collaborations and provide more opportunities for students to interact with
these external agencies. The instrument acquisition is timed to coincide with
the occupation of a new science building by the Geological Sciences Department
at CWU. As such, the instrument is supported by the addition of modern
laboratories and associated support staff, greatly amplifying the infrastructure
improvements provided by the new instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-
OES is a stable, reliable instrument that can generate large quantities of high-
quality concentration data for a range of major, minor and trace elements in
water; this instrument will provide new data that is fundamental for ongoing
research in environmental geochemistry/chemistry, atmospheric science, climate
science, and environmental science and complements data that can be obtained
using existing instrumentation (e.g., isotope ratio mass spectrometer, single
particle soot photometer, ion chromatograph) at CWU. The ICP-OES will be
integral to several lines of research at CWU that include elemental
concentrations in water, wine, aerosol, soil, and snow and ice core samples. PI
Gazis, an environmental geochemist, uses elemental data combined with other
geochemical tracers to characterize groundwater in order to better understand
groundwater mixing, groundwater-surface water interactions and groundwater
recharge versus withdrawal rates. She and her students have also used elemental
data to quantify changes in stream and soil water chemistry related to
anthropogenic perturbations and natural variations such as clear-cutting,
agriculture, wildfire, and climate. Co-PI Johansen, an environmental chemist,
studies aerosol chemistry, in particular how trace metals contained within
carbonaceous aerosols affect their toxicity and their effects on global climate.
In addition, she is a principle researcher in CWU?s wine quality testing
laboratory in which the chemistry of wines, including elemental analysis, is
compared to the wine terroir and wine characteristics and faults. Co-PI Kaspari
is a climate scientist who uses geochemical records from ice cores to
reconstruct past climate and environmental variability. Additionally Kaspari
studies how the deposition of black carbon and other impurities on snow and ice
reduces albedo and accelerates melt. Co-PI Arango studies nutrient cycling in
aquatic ecosystems and the response of these cycles to perturbations such as
stream restoration and metal deposition. All of these areas of research will
benefit from the fundamental geochemical data that an ICP-OES can provide. In
addition, this instrument will create opportunities for new collaborations
between these scientists in their areas of overlapping research interests such
as snow and precipitation chemistry, biogeochemical cycles in and around
streams, and atmosphere/climate interactions.