* 1626123
* Collaborative Research:  Enhancing  Public Access:  Archiving Court Cases to   Study Genocide and Transitional Justice
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Hollie Brehm, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 155,285.00

SES-1626123 Hollie Brehm Ohio State University

SES-1626753 Christopher Uggen University of Minnesota

In the twentieth century, genocide killed more people than wars or homicide.
Understanding who commits genocide and how to bring justice in its aftermath is
therefore vitally important in the twenty-first century. Accordingly, this
project will examine unique court data from the 1994 genocide in Rwanda to
assess the characteristics of the hundreds of thousands of civilians who
participated in the genocide, how courts in Rwanda sought to hold these
individuals accountable, and how such legal responses to mass violence affected
individuals and communities. Because many other instances of mass violence
involve civilian participation, understanding the characteristics of people who
commit mass violence holds the potential to inform interventions to stop or
prevent violence. Courts and related justice mechanisms that hold perpetrators
accountable are also implemented in countries worldwide, and understanding how
these courts function and the effects they have on people and communities will
likewise inform future justice efforts. The project results will therefore be
widely disseminated to academic, governmental, and public audiences that include
organizations forecasting and responding to mass violence, such as the UN
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, as well as organizations that
facilitate legal responses in the aftermath of violence, such as the
International Center for Transitional Justice.

This project asks three related questions to contribute to social scientific
scholarship on mass violence and its aftermath: 1) Who participates in mass
violence? 2) What influences legal responses to this participation? And 3) How
do legal responses to mass violence affect individuals and societies? To do so,
the investigators examine the case of Rwanda, where as many as one million
people were killed in 1994. Rwandans who participated in the violence were later
tried in gacaca courts, a community-based justice system that the Government of
Rwanda created in the aftermath of the genocide. By analyzing 1.96 million
gacaca court case files, this project will assess who participated in the
violence, how the gacaca courts responded, and the influence of the gacaca
courts on Rwandan citizens and communities today. This project makes three core
scientific contributions: (1) Existing studies of genocide stress the normality
of perpetrators, though few large-scale studies have empirically assessed the
characteristics of those who take part in violent collective action. Gacaca
court records constitute the largest dataset of perpetrators of violence to
date, allowing for an analysis of the characteristics of the civilians who
participated in the genocide. (2) The gacaca court system uniquely blended
punitive and restorative justice to respond to civilian participants. Better
understanding how these courts functioned is vital to scientific understanding
of the law in action, transitional justice mechanisms, and community-based
justice. This will include an analysis of the individual and community-level
factors that influenced court processes and punishments, invoking questions that
are central to scholars of inequality and socio-legal processes. (3) Third,
understanding gacaca will inform literature on transitional justice mechanisms,
ranging from their long-term influence on participants to their influence on the
communities where court proceedings occurred.