* 1626455
* Collaborative Research: UTMOST: Undergraduate Teaching in Mathematics with Open Software and Textbooks
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* David Farmer, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,258.00

The UTMOST 2.0 project will design, develop and study innovative approaches to
the teaching and learning of undergraduate mathematics using open software and
electronic textbooks. This project will study students' use of electronic
textbooks when these are made freely available in a variety of formats and on a
variety of devices. These textbooks will support interactive computation through
a seamless integration of Sage, the leading open-source computing system for
mathematics. The main vehicles for this integration will be SageMathCloud, a
rich online environment for computation and collaboration between students and
their course instructor, and Sage cells, self-contained interactive calculation
modules that can be embedded in any web page while requiring no software
installation or prior knowledge of Sage, because the commands are pre-loaded.
Additionally, UTMOST 2.0 will support the further adoption of MathBook XML, an
authoring platform that enables the creation of highly functional, open-source
textbooks--in particular, textbooks which can exist both in print and in an
online format that contains Sage cells. The project includes technical
improvements to Sage cells which will make it easier for instructors to create
their own Sage cells for their particular course needs. A catalog of Sage cells
will be curated, which will further lower the barrier to widespread adoption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online dynamic textbooks provide a unique opportunity to
directly measure all aspects of how they are used. UTMOST 2.0 is designed to
leverage technology to enhance the quality and breadth of the mathematical
education research into how students and teachers use electronic textbooks and
modern online tools for communication about technical subjects in real
classrooms. UTMOST 2.0 will work with instructors at multiple institutions, all
of whom will use MathBook XML textbooks, some in the online version and some in
the printed version. The online version will be hosted in the cloud, on a server
that will be configured to record all user activity at an extremely fine-grained
level. The automatic online data collection will be combined with classroom data
collection methods, providing a means to validate the information collected that
can later be correlated with student gains in course content knowledge. UTMOST
2.0 will also assist authors of undergraduate mathematics textbooks that have
already converted to the Mathbook XML format in the next steps of incorporating
interactive features such as Sage cells and WeBWorK exercises. This will greatly
increase the number of books with those advanced features and simultaneously
expand the areas in which the UTMOST project can perform its research
investigations.