* 1626093
* MRI: Acquisition of Multi-Mode Microplate Detection System for the Multidisciplinary Research Track at Molloy College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Anthony Tolvo, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2019
* USD 121,768.00

An award is made to Molloy College to acquire a multimode platform detection
system with Western blot and imaging cytometry capabilities. The instrument will
be a vital part of several research projects representing a broad cross section
of interests including molecular genetics, immunology, molecular biology, cell
cycle biology, cellular physiology, developmental biology and environmental
science. Biology and environmental studies students participate in these
research projects as part of their education and training at Molloy. The
students present their findings at regional and national conferences and publish
in peer-reviewed journals. High school students are incorporated into the
research groups through a high school internship program allowing for
undergraduates to gain valuable mentoring experience. The high school students
enter local, regional and national science competitions in line with Molloy's
mission-directed goal of assisting high school districts in promoting a keen
interest in science among their student body. In addition to research
activities, the equipment will be incorporated into several courses in the
Biology, Chemistry and Environmental Studies Department which will expose a
majority of the biology and environmental studies majors as well as the biology
education majors of the College to the many experimental techniques supported by
absorbance, fluorescence, and luminescence detection. The use of this equipment
in these research and training activities directly addresses the National
Science Foundation's goal of increasing the use of modern state-of-the-art
research equipment by scientists and undergraduate students. Additionally, the
STEM initiatives currently in place at Molloy will be strengthened and area
students will be provided with advanced training in science that will ultimately
make them more competitive for summer positions, research internships, civic
engagement opportunities and careers in the biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multimode detection system will be used to augment
ongoing and planned research projects that further understanding of the 1)
mammalian immune system and clarify the role of the stem cell in this system 2)
role of highly evolutionarily conserved hormonal systems in the regulation of
bone and cartilage development and growth 3) biological role of BLM protein in
maintenance of genomic stability in multicellular organisms 4) cell-death
pathways initiated after DNA damage and 5) inflammation mechanisms activated by
the milk protein, Beta-casomorphin 7. The enhancement of these research efforts
at Molloy will in turn raise the research profile of the students, faculty and
College.