* 1626069
* MRI: Development of the IsoDAR Front-end
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 977,165.00

This award funds the development of a Radio Frequency Quadrupole (RFQ) to be
used as part of a front-end for ion injection into a cyclotron, a type of
particle accelerator. The outcome will be a novel, fully-working front-end
instrument that can be used for multiple purposes. Based on a concept originally
introduced in 1981, but never realized, this will be the first demonstration of
RFQ direct injection into a compact, high intensity cyclotron. The design is
potentially transformative and promises a 3-5 times increase in efficiency of
bunching and injection over classic front-end cyclotron designs. It is more
compact and of comparable cost, significantly advancing accelerator technology.
The accelerator system planned relies on conventional, well known, proven
technologies. The innovation is in the combination of these technologies. The
challenges are in the demonstration of, on one hand, the individual performances
of the various components (the current from a source, RFQ and transmission, and
coupling to the cyclotron) and, on the other hand, their integration into a
compact, high beam current, cost-effective proton driver front-end.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton drivers have a broad impact; they are research
tools (for neutrino physics, secondary particles for condensed matter research,
neutron sources), tools for the future of energy, and more. The development of
high intensity cyclotrons has two important impacts for industry. The first is
to increase the energy, intensity and versatility of radiopharmaceutical
cyclotrons. Protons from a cyclotron can, for example, efficiently produce
Strontium-82, important for medical imaging. In addition, this work also has
relevance to Accelerator Driven Systems (ADS) technology, applied, for example,
to driving thorium reactors, thus supporting the development of safe nuclear
energy sources. A factor of 5-10 improvement in current would have a significant
impact in these areas. The development and running of the front-end will include
MIT undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. This will provide an
excellent educational experience, with increased accelerator science at
universities and more hardware experience for young scientists. Upon successful
demonstration, the new front-end could be used in the IsoDAR (Isotope Decay-At-
Rest) experiment which has the potential to advance our knowledge about sterile
neutrinos and shed light on several anomalies observed with
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to make use of RFQ injection of H2+
into a compact cyclotron. Each H2+ ion provides 2 protons after stripping thus
reducing the necessary beam current by a factor of 2 and reducing space-charge
forces, overcoming the limitations of injecting an intense proton beam into the
cyclotron central region. The RFQ injection uses RF radiation in a quadrupole
structure as a method to alleviate the ion source requirements by improving the
bunching efficiency. The efficiency of the direct coupling of the RFQ to the
spiral inflector injection channel of the cyclotron (a matter of bunch matching
between the two accelerators) is a delicate part of system integration; it has
to be demonstrated and is a goal of the project.