* 1626505
* MRI: Acquisition of robotic tools for studying brain, behavior and embodied cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Spivey, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,806.00

This project will make a new robotic exoskeleton arm with integrated virtual
reality and eye-tracking facilities available to researchers for the study of
human embodied and situated cognition at UC Merced, the tenth and newest campus
of the University of California system. The equipment would enable cutting-edge
research in the study of human cognition using tools from robotics benefitting a
range of Faculty and students across various departments including Cognitive
&amp; Information Sciences, Electrical Engineering &amp; Computer Science,
Mechanical Engineering and Digital Humanities. The equipment will catalyze
research in several directions including 1) Human Motor Control &amp; Action
Dynamics with applications for physical rehabilitation 2) Embodied Cognition and
Action 3) Brain-behavior interactions 4) Fundamental human-inspired robotics
research 5) Human-machine interactions 6) Language, Communication &amp; Gesture.
The robotic arm will provide a sophisticated platform to monitor and manipulate
the upper limb, providing a broad range of hand and joint-based kinesthetic
information and gaze information. With built in virtual/augmented reality, the
robot arm system will allow for altering visual information to be presented to
human participants while manipulating their arm movements. The work will help
build institutional capacity in an area of strategic focus at UC Merced and will
result in direct collaborations between scientists and students across various
departments on campus. The impact of the training resulting from the equipment
is expected to be particularly broad at UC Merced due to its exceptionally
diverse student body and the large number of programs focused on increasing the
participation of underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers
including the PI: Balasubramaniam and Co-PIs Spivey and Carpin also plan on
perturbing neural activity using techniques such as Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation (TMS) and recording brain activity during the perturbation of arm
movements using the robotic device. The transformative aspect of this research
comes from its ability to observe and manipulate brain activity and complex
motor behavior simultaneously.