* 1626670
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser-ablation, multi-collector ICP-MS for research and training in Earth, Environmental, and Anthropological Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Brian Kennedy, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 596,778.00

This award will permit the acquisition of a multi-collector, inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometer coupled with a laser ablation system (LA-MC-ICPMS) for
research, education, and training in Earth, Environmental, and Anthropological
Sciences at Washington State University. The instrumentation will be utilized in
diverse applications by a team of researchers seeking to address problems across
a wide spectrum of scientific disciplines including geochemistry, geochronology,
petrology, volcanology, tectonics, fish ecology, archeology, and anthropology.
The LA-MC-ICPMS will be housed in the existing ICP-MS laboratory within the
GeoAnalytical Laboratory (GAL) in the School of the Environment. This laboratory
has not only provided data and research training for students and faculty at
WSU, but has also served as an analytical center, supporting the research needs
of many outside users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental research problems to be
addressed include chemical evolution of the Earth, geochronology of metamorphic
processes, models for mountain belt formation and deformation, salmon migration
and life history, and ancient human migration and trade. The instrument will
allow improved access to a wide range of isotope systems and methods: zircon Hf
isotope geochemistry by LA-MC-ICPMS and solution MC-ICPMS; zircon U-Pb
geochronology by LA-ICPMS; whole-rock Hf, Nd, Pb and Sr isotope geochemistry;
Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd garnet, lawsonite and apatite geochronology; Sr isotope analysis
by LA-MC-ICPMS on minerals, fish otoliths, and archeological artifacts; and
laser ablation split stream (LASS) techniques including U-Pb and Hf isotopes in
zircon and U-Pb and Nd isotopes in monazite and other accessory minerals.