* 1626280
* Collaborative Research: Research as a base to develop adaptable curricula bridging instructional paradigms in Quantum Mechanics
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Steven Pollock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 273,607.00

This project will investigate and improve instruction in one of the fastest
growing and most important areas of contemporary physics: quantum mechanics
(QM). QM is the physics of extremely small systems (e.g. the size of an atom).
Advances in engineering have led to an increased number of technologies that
manipulate matter on this scale, leading to an increasingly critical need for a
quantum-literate STEM workforce in both industry and research. This project
leverages research into student learning and the challenges associated
specifically with learning quantum physics. The outcomes of this work will have
a significant impact on the education of STEM majors across the country, and
will better prepare students for the growing number of careers in quantum
technologies and research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new
research-based educational materials that are easily adoptable by faculty from a
diverse range of institutions and student populations. This will be done by
answering four questions: what must students learn, what are students currently
learning, how can their learning be improved, and how can faculty be helped to
effectively utilize the resources developed? Thus, the key goals of this
research project are to: 1) develop a set of learning goals for undergraduate
quantum mechanics instruction by collaborating with a broad spectrum of faculty,
industry, and research leaders; 2) improve understanding of student learning and
student difficulties in QM with a focus on student learning in different
instructional settings; 3) develop educational materials and assessments for
quantum mechanics instruction suitable for use in multiple instructional
paradigms, that are easy for faculty to modify and use in a diverse range of
institutions; and 4) widely disseminate these materials, support new users, and
evaluate the effectiveness of the curriculum. The scope of the research and
curriculum development will target a diverse population of students so the
results and curricular materials will be broadly applicable.