* 1626360
* MRI: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous Computing Platform for Biometrics Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Joseph Skufca, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 397,354.00

This project, acquiring a heterogeneous high-performance computing cluster, aims
to support parallel processing research of biometrics and identification
technology, as well as broad disciplines of engineering research. Operational
capabilities of managing and analyzing large-scale biometric information in an
effective and efficient manner constitutes a major challenge faced by
researchers in advancing biometrics. Emerging computing elements, such as many-
core processors and hardware coprocessors, play an essential role in achieving
this goal. This project enables the proponents to investigate novel applications
of emerging hardware technology to a problem of current national interest. The
platform should achieve effectiveness with great performance from its
heterogeneous architecture and efficiency with power-awareness and energy
awareness. Both the biometrics and high-performance research computing community
will gain from the heterogeneous high-performance computing platform that can
employ various state-of-the-art parallel architectures for hardware acceleration
of biometric applications. It can serve as a design reference for next-
generation commercial and governmental biometric systems. Since this institution
currently serves as the lead site of the Center for Identification Technology
Research (CITeR), a multi-university NSF I/UCRC, the instrumentation serves as a
great enabler in support of continued research efforts of its affiliates
interests as these evolve towards more advanced research in high-performance
computing aspects of biometrics. This instrumentation provides the capability
for the researchers to contribute towards and advance the parallel processing of
biometric applications on heterogeneous computing platforms. The system lends
suitable capability for processing a wide range of biometrics applications
beyond those currently available. Moreover, the equipment also supports efforts
to compete for other competitive research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster
consist of Central Processing Units (CPUs), Graphics Processing Units (GPUs),
Many-Integrated Core (MIC) co-processors, and Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs), tightly integrated with a light field camera as a data-capturing front-
end. The high-performance computing community acknowledges that with the
transition from single-core processor to multi/ many-core processors, no one
single processing element can achieve the best performance for biometrics
applications (as well as other different applications) since often different
parts of the program have different parallelism characteristics suitable for
acceleration by different processing elements. Inherited in biometric
applications a large degree of data parallelism exists that requires carefully
mapping the different region of the biometric applications onto different
hardware components and orchestrating them to function as whole, so as to
produce results in an effective and efficient manner. So, in order to achieve
the best performance, a combination of computing elements need to be used.