* 1626157
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-Inductively-Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectroscopic Instrument (LC-ICP-MS) for Speciation of Metal Ions in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Lee Clapp, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 222,194.00

1626157&lt;br/&gt;Camacho, Lucy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
occurrences and chemistry of metal species in the environment poses a research
challenge to the areas of chemistry, agriculture, and chemical and environmental
engineering. Elemental speciation is important because, for many elements,
properties such as toxicity or nutrient value, mobility, and volatility, depend
on the species or chemical form of the element present in the environment. A
multidisciplinary group of faculty members from the Environmental Engineering,
Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Agriculture, Agribusiness, and Environmental
Sciences departments at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMUK) will conduct
research, educational, and outreach activities using the LC-ICP-MS instrument.
TAMUK is a Minority Serving Institution and is the only institution with an
Environmental Engineering Ph.D. program in South Texas. This project will allow
preparing STEM students, particularly Hispanic, with skills in conducting high
quality and competitive research in critical interdisciplinary environmental
areas. This project will allow TAMUK to attract inter-institutional research and
education collaboration from other institutions in South Texas, particularly
Texas A&amp;M University in Corpus Christi (TAMUCC) and the University of Texas
Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV), since no other institution in the region possesses a
hyphenated instrument for species identification and quantification and multi-
element determination. This project will directly impact the research expertise
of graduate and undergraduate Hispanic students at TAMUK and other
research/educational institutions in South Texas. It is anticipated that more
than 150 graduate students at TAMUK will become involved in laboratory-
activities related to the instrument over the three years of the grant. Due to
the strategic location of TAMUK in South Texas, the potential for international
and interdisciplinary experiences for students exists, which will create a
broader spectrum for future global collaboration. For this purpose, summer
research exchange programs between institutions at the U.S.-MÃ©xico border will
be promoted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge on
speciation reactions that metal ions undergo in environmental systems due to
natural and anthropogenic causes. This project is divided in seven sub-projects
that will allow identifying problematic ion species present in a broad range of
environments, as well as determining how to negate the toxicity and mitigate the
effect of these ions species on the environment. The objectives of the sub-
projects are to 1) determine the adsorption of As(III)/As(V) from brackish
groundwater on manganese oxide-modified natural zeolite (MCZ); 2) conduct a
comparative study of the aqueous-phase adsorption of sulfamethazine (SMN) onto
powdered activated carbons in the presence of heavy metal ions; 3) evaluate
alternative inorganic reductants for stimulating autotrophic reduction and
immobilization of uranium (VI) at in-situ recovery mining sites; 4) conduct
element speciation analysis of trace metal- and metalloid-containing compounds,
such as vanadium (V), nickel (Ni), mercury (Hg/Hg(II)), arsenic (As(III)/As(V)),
and sulfur (S/S(II)/S(III)), in petroleum-related materials; 5) conduct an
assessment of nutrient foliar spray impact on citrus production; 6) evaluate the
reduction of combustion flue gas emissions of mercury by enhanced oxidation with
hydrogen peroxide; and 7) determine the immobilization of homogeneous catalysts
for atom economical alkene and alkyne functionalization. The LC-ICP-MS
instrument will be used by the sub-projects to 1) quantify the transformation of
As(III) into As(V) species during the adsorption on MCZ; 2) quantify arsenic,
antimony and copper on the adsorption of SMN onto powder activated carbon
materials; 3) quantify uranyl-carbonate concentrations by using inorganic or
organic reductants; 4) analyze vanadium (V), nickel (Ni), mercury (Hg/Hg(II)),
arsenic (As(III)/As(V)), and sulfur (S/S(II)/S(III)) speciation in collected
crude oil and gas condensate samples from the Eagle Ford Shale; 5) measure
chelated elements, such as Ca, B, Cu, and Si that will be applied as foliar
sprays to young grapefruit leaves; 6) provide a more distinct separation of
mercury species and increase the analytical precision, resulting in better
reproducibility and optimization of experimental runtimes; and 7) monitor
possible catalyst leaching effects from reaction solutions immobilized by an
alkyl tether on isotactic-propylene/hexane copolymer or silica. Results from the
sub-projects will 1) provide an alternative method to remove and mitigate As
species that have potential health effects and that have been found in fresh
water aquifers in the Gulf Coast of Texas; 2) allow mitigate the environmental
impact of antimicrobial SMN drug released to the environmental through excretion
by cattle and swine; 3) provide a process for groundwater restoration at uranium
in-situ recovery (ISR) sites in South Texas; 4) allow understanding the role
that species have on catalyst poisoning mechanisms; 5) allow developing new
management practices and guidelines for growing crops that are better adapted to
abiotic and biotic stresses in the Lower Rio Grande Valley; 6) help implement
enhanced oxidation with hydrogen peroxide to produce soluble species of mercury
that can be removed by absorption from scrubbers in power plants; and 7) provide
insight into atom economical processes, which do not generate any waste products
and are therefore of great importance for industrial applications.