* 1626733
* Knowledge and Flexible Implementation of Construal Level in Self-Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kentaro Fujita, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 409,118.00

Despite the best of their intentions, people often fail to act in a manner that
is consistent with their important goals and values. These discrepancies between
people's intentions and behavior have been implicated in some of society's most
pressing problems, including obesity, substance abuse, discrimination,
aggression, and poor financial decision-making. Self-regulation research
attempts to understand who, when, and why some succeed--and others fail--in
realizing their goals and values in their every day behavior. One important
insight from this research is that self-regulation involves a number of distinct
challenges that must each be addressed in unique ways. At times, self-regulation
requires thinking about circumstances that extend beyond the immediate here-and-
now. To illustrate, although students might be tempted to attend a week-night
social gathering, it is their ability to think about the distant future rewards
of studying that advances their academic goals. At other times, self-regulation
requires attention to the details of the present context. Proof-reading for
typographical errors, for example, requires students to narrowly focus their
attention on the specifics of the task at-hand. The present work aims to test if
people have developed unique thinking styles or mindsets that are tuned to help
them address each of these two types of challenges--namely, high-level and low-
level construal. Critically, the investigator tests the novel prediction that
successful regulation requires flexibly matching the right mindset to the right
challenge. That is, knowing when to engage in which psychological mindset may be
the key reason why some people are able to attain their goals, and others are
not.

These questions are explored in six studies. The studies examine people's
beliefs about what kinds of thinking will promote their goals under different
circumstances. Those beliefs are compared to what research indicates will
improve versus undermine self-regulation in those situations. In particular, the
investigator tests the prediction that those who intuitively know what research
reveals to be good versus bad for self-regulation will be better at attaining
goals. Experiments also examine the factors that might explain why some are
able, and others not, to engage in the right kinds of thinking styles at the
right time. For example, some people may be more cognitively flexible--able to
think about the same event from multiple perspectives--whereas others may not be
so flexible. Studies examine to what extent cognitively flexible individuals may
be better at self-regulation because of their ability to adopt the most
advantageous thinking style at any given moment. To examine the practical
implications of this work, a field study tests to what extent these hypotheses
explain students' performance in a classroom context. Such a context is ideal in
that it is a real-world situation known to present numerous self-regulation
challenges. Understanding the factors that promote self-regulation may spur the
development of new interventions and policies that enhance people's ability to
behave in line with and eventually attain their valued goals.