* 1626344
* MRI:  Acquisition of a sputtering deposition system to expand science and engineering research at Utah State University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tsung-Cheng Shen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 144,918.00

Thin films of various metallic and insulating materials of a few-nanometer thick
are widely used in devices and sensors. At present, Utah State University (USU),
a land-grant university of more than 28,000 students, has no thin film
deposition system that can perform a uniform thin-film deposition across a 4-in
wafer. The fact that the existing small evaporator can only deposit low-melting
point metals, such as aluminum and gold, severely limits the research capability
at Utah State University. This proposal is to acquire an advanced sputtering
deposition system which will provide crucial improvements include: (1) substrate
holder for a 4-in wafer, (2) substrate heater up to 800 °C, (3) sufficient power
to sputter high-melting point metals, magnetic materials, and dielectric
materials, and (4) a load-lock to improve through-put and film quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sputtering deposition system will enable a
broad range of funded transformative research at USU including: (1) carbon-
nanotube-based radiometer for unprecedented accuracy on measuring radiation for
monitoring global warming and calibrate laser power. (2) Depositing catalytic
nano-particles on patterned carbon-nanotube sidewalls for CO2 capture to help
mitigate climate changes and conversion to useful chemicals such as methanol.
(3) Depositing dielectrics and growing graphene patterns for the fabrication of
intelligent antennas for next generation of cognitive wireless communication.
(4) Fabricating titanium oxide nano-structures to investigate cell behavior
affected by nanotopography. (5) Depositing thin film of cobalt and phosphorous
to enhance electrocatalytic water splitting for high-energy-density chemical
fuels. (6) Depositing nickel and alumina thin films to investigate nanoparticles
self-assembled by solid-liquid interface instability for optoelectronics and
magnetic data storage. (7) Depositing various oxide and carbide thin films to
investigate electrical charging, deposition and electron transport in multi-
layered samples to mitigate electrostatic discharge damage to spacecraft and
power grid. More innovative research will be supported since the tool is only
limited by the targets available from suppliers around the globe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this tool should be assessed by the
synergy with other tools at NDL as a whole. The proposed sputter coater will be
integrated into NDL which has been serving the research needs of faculty from at
least 5 departments in Colleges of Engineering and Science. Approximate 30
graduate and undergraduate students from the 6 profiled major research groups
are expected to be trained and using this tool with other tools at NDL for their
research. This tool is also planned to be involved in the capstone and senior
research projects (~20 students/yr) in 4 engineering classes and a laboratory
module for two microfabrication classes (~30 student/yr). In addition to
offering advanced training for university students, NDL participates in many
activities organized by various units of USU for disseminating new science and
technology to the general public. The expanded research capability brought by
the proposed tool will also help academia-industry partnership such as the
existing SBIR and STTR programs with Box Elder Innovations, LAM Research, Ball
aerospace, and Orbital Sciences, among others.