* 1626600
* Collaborative Research: A Technology Pathway Program in Data Technology and Applications
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Xiao Su, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 495,152.00

This project is developing an interdisciplinary technology pathway program (TPP)
in data technology and applications for behavioral, social, and health science
students at two California State Universities. It consists of four technical
courses covering Python programming, data structures and algorithms, data
technology, and an interdisciplinary senior project (or database). It will be
offered as a minor degree program as part of bachelor's degree programs, or as a
certificate program. The TPP program will use evidence-based teaching practices
that encompass effective pedagogy as well as learning communities and faculty
professional development. The program will use contextualized problem-based
pedagogy in which students acquire key technical knowledge and skills by solving
real-world problems. Each cohort of participating students will be formed into a
learning community that will include professors and industry professionals in
Silicon Valley for student support and role-modeling. The engineering and
computing faculty who will teach the students in this program will engage in
professional development in order to learn pedagogical approaches that have been
shown effective for the diverse students in the social, behavioral, and health
sciences. These faculty have agreed to participate in a Faculty Learning
Community throughout the academic year and a summer Technology Pathway Summer
Institute.

The project is expected to generate research contributions towards the
development of a technical education program for a diverse group of students and
the creation of a sustainable interdisciplinary program that crosses internal
organizational boundaries and links to external sponsors. If this project
succeeds, it will very likely spur other campuses to develop similar programs
through faculty development and dissemination plans. The ongoing evaluation of
the propagation process and its outcomes will reveal valuable lessons for
launching such interdisciplinary initiatives. One of the participating
institutions is a minority serving institution.