* 1626825
* Computational Techniques for Studying Everyday Multiattribute Choice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sudeep Bhatia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 08/31/2019
* USD 394,474.00

Everyday choice objects, such as food items, movies, clothes, and consumer
goods, can be seen as possessing different attributes or features. Although
choices between everyday objects involve attending to and evaluating these
attributes, the attributes themselves may be complex and not easily observed by
researchers. This project attempts to develop computational techniques to
uncover the attributes involved in everyday choice by combining insights from
machine learning and statistics with existing theories in decision making
research. It offers the possibility harnessing developments in machine learning
and data science to advance our theoretical understanding of everyday decision
making and, in the process, yield broader impacts by informing and improving
implementation of and policy toward important decisions like those concerned
with health care or retirement planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two
major components to this project. The first is computational, and involves the
use of statistical techniques to recover (otherwise unobservable) attribute
representations for real-world choice objects from large-scale user-generated
internet data. The second major component is empirical, and involves the use of
these recovered attributes, combined with existing multi-attribute decision
rules, to study multi-attribute choices between various real-world objects.
Overall, the project applies the proposed approach to three domains: movie
choice, book choice, and food choice, and for each of these domains, attempts to
predict choice probabilities, decision times, and judgments of attribute
importance in naturalistic decision problems involving movies, books, and food
items, given to participants in the laboratory. In a similar manner, this
project uses these domains to test whether behavioral effects such as choice set
dependence and reference dependence, established using the types of stylized
experiments popular in multi-attribute research, also hold when the objects
under consideration are naturalistic and are not described using explicit
attribute-by-object matrices. Finally this project uses these domains to study
decisions in which the choice sets themselves are stored in memory, and are not
explicitly presented to decision makers.