* 1626655
* MRI: Acquisition of Dynamic Immersive Virtual Environment for Research in Human-Machine Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Panadda Marayong, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 381,075.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award supports the acquisition of an
immersive virtual reality (VR) environment with synchronized full-body motion
tracking system to facilitate interdisciplinary research in human-machine
interactions and enhanced teaching and student research training. This room-size
virtual reality system provides multiple computer-generated displays that allow
users to fully immerse and collaboratively interact with the simulated
environment in real-time while the motion tracking system captures the user's
physical movements. The VR system will enable several research studies across
multiple disciplines to gain a better understanding of human-machine
interactions and human motor skills and learning. This will lead to the
development of technologies that enhance human mobility and function and foster
collaborative operations between robots and humans. The research activities
envisioned to be impacted by the acquisition of this system include those in
rehabilitation, sports training, advanced manufacturing, and design of human-
machine interfaces such as intelligent cockpits. The activities have a strong
potential for technology transfer that can directly improve the quality of life
for individuals in the community. Additionally, the instrumentation will provide
an attractive resource for several outreach activities to motivate students to
pursue a college career in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument is a turnkey, well-integrated CAVE virtual reality environment with a
four-wall projection system, eight-camera real-time motion capture system with
finger tracking capability, and a control software suite for customized software
development and additional hardware integration. The instrumentation will enable
fundamental research activities in several key areas. Researchers will
investigate interaction models between humans and robots in a dynamic
environment to develop effective control strategies for human-robot
collaboration. Additional projects will study human perception, biomechanics of
human movement under various stimuli, and development of assistive technologies
and training protocols to enhance motor skills and learning. The instrumentation
will also enable researchers to develop models and evaluation metrics for human
interactions in complex environments that include multisensory feedback,
perturbations, advanced modes of display, and multiple users. The VR system
provides a cost-effective design solution that can be adapted, utilized, and
evaluated to fit the needs of different projects that require a rich visual
display that captures the dynamic variation in the real world.