* 1626338
* MRI: Development of iSNARLD (Instrument for Situational Network Awareness for Real-time and Long-term Data)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gregory Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2020
* USD 822,120.00

In partnership with Alliance Technology Group (Alliance), The University of
Tennessee (UT) proposes to develop an instrument for Situational Network
Awareness for Real-time and Long-term Data (iSNARLD). Developing this unique
instrument enables network packet capture coupled with a powerful analytics
engine capable of providing insights into the characteristics of network
traffic, breadth of traffic flows, detection of potential attacks or
unauthorized data exfiltration, sources of inefficiencies or incorrect
behaviors, and the behaviors of user or automated traffic. This instrument will
enable, for the first time, analysis that can focus on a specific point in time
(such as for real-time analysis), across a range of time spanning months to
years, or both. Leveraging the respective strengths in the current the
partnership will greatly enhance the prospects for developing an effective
instrument with unprecedented capabilities and versatility. Furthermore, the
collected network traffic data and associated analytics capabilities will
provide information enabling revolutionary new insight into a spectrum of
exciting new research thrusts, such as cyber security in forensics and intrusion
detection, real-time network situational awareness, operations research into
network performance and bottleneck identification, as well as a limitless
panoply of other possibilities that heretofore have been impossible. Ergo, the
project has extraordinary potential impact on the broad research community as
well as to society as a whole. Moreover, the system will impact national
cyberinfrastructure and local research as well as the educational mission at UT.
Finally, the proposed system has excellent prospects for wide commercial
adoption through the partnership with Alliance
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument for Situational Network
Awareness for Real-time and Long-term Data (iSNARLD) will fundamentally
transform networking and security research through its packet capture and
impressive analytics capability. The instrument is the next major step in the
evolution of networking infrastructure that provides high bandwidth coupled with
security capabilities to detect intrusion and protect computational and data
assets. The instrument will build upon a 20Gb/sec SentryWire Sentry 250 system
from Alliance with an effective capacity of up to 4 PB (sufficient for months of
network data, depending on specific traffic patterns). The proposed system will
provide: (1) high-bandwidth, lossless packet capture; (2) metadata extraction to
summarize and aggregate packet data to enable efficient analytics; (3) (near)
real-time data analytics to support situational awareness of flows and
performance along with security applications such as intrusion detection and
prevention of data exfiltration; (4) batch or off-line analytics for machine-
learning-based discovery; (5) visualization support for enhanced situational
awareness and network usage insight; and (6) unprecedented scale of network data
(months to years) for analysis. The proposed system presents dramatically
improved capabilities for providing situational awareness and understanding
network usage in real-time or across periods spanning months to years, providing
revolutionary opportunities across a broad spectrum of networking research,
operations, and even social science.