* 1626579
* MRI: Development of a Scalable High Performance Computing System in Support of the Lattice Light-sheet Microscope for Real-time Three-dimensional Imaging of Living Cells
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Carol Lushbough, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project, developing a scalable high performance computational system, aims
to support the acquisition, processing, and dissemination of data collected by
the recently constructed Lattice Light-Sheet Microscope (LLSM). Developed in
collaboration between SDSMT, the University of South Dakota (USD), and South
Dakota State University (SDSU), the instrument contributes to multiple proposed
fluorescence imaging research projects, especially those in conjunction with the
statewide Biochemical Spatiotemporal NeTwork Resource (BioSNTR) collaboration.
The unified implementation allows investigators to access and apply any set of
algorithms to any set of on-line imagery, independent of where the data resides
and without requiring data conversion before processing. The power of the LLSM
lies in its ability to capture high-speed three-dimensional (3-D) data
constructed from wide-field fluorescence images, resulting in real-time
volumetric imaging of living cells at sub-wavelength spatial resolution. To
effectively utilize the capabilities of this advanced microscopy technique,
significant computational hardware and software solutions must be developed to
address the specific needs of this ultra-wide bandwidth system. The
instrumentation also includes a web-portal design to allow geographically
distant researchers seamless access to large volumes of fluorescence imagery.
The instrumentation enables important studies that could contribute to the
fundamental understanding of signaling processes in diverse biological systems
and support the development of future bio-technologies, including improved bio-
materials, improved understanding of cell signaling, and improved understanding
of drought-tolerant plant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
supports the need to dynamically visualize the evolution of fluorescently
labeled markers within cellular and sub-cellular compartments of biological
systems to inform bioinformatics studies and systems biology approaches towards
the understanding and discovery of regulatory networks in biological systems,
and to reveal the architecture of important biological systems studied with the
LLSM. This project serves as the nexus for collaborative science undertaken by a
diverse group of physicists, computer scientists, biologists, and chemical
engineers with broad scientific, educational, and societal impacts. Methods for
3-D volumetric fluorescence imaging within cellular and sub-cellular
compartments of animal and plant biological systems are necessary to extend
current understanding of living systems. The impetus for the instrument resides
in the need to tightly couple initial and subsequent bioimage informatics
processing with the LLSM instrument itself, providing investigators with
transparent and seamless access to the instrument, data, and appropriate
processing techniques. Furthermore, the proposal emphasizes the significant
effort needed to both collect and develop the appropriate techniques needed for
this bioimage informatics initiative.