* 1626103
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction Instrument for the Creation of an X-ray Diffraction Facility at the University of Puerto Rico
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Dalice Pinero, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,922.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program as well as the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Dalice Pinero from
the University Puerto Rico Rio Piedras and colleague Vilmali Lopez-Mejias have
acquired a crystal X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper source. Crystal
diffraction is a powerful modern tool to determine the atomic structure of solid
materials from small but relevant molecules to polymers and biological materials
such as pharmaceuticals, natural products and DNA. The instrument is used in
undergraduate research projects and in thesis projects of graduate students. The
structural information enables researchers to understand the behavior and
properties of the substances they synthesize, isolate and characterize. This
information impacts the advance of basic science and technological progress from
manufacturing of nanomaterials, pharmaceuticals and many other substances used
in everyday life. The diffractometer is housed at the University of Puerto
Rico's Molecular Sciences Research Center (UPR-MSRC), establishing a complete
state-of-the-art X-ray diffraction facility that supports the research and
educational efforts of multiple scientists across the metropolitan area of the
island of Puerto Rico.

The single crystal X-ray diffractometer is used in structural analysis of solid
materials. It is aimed at enhancing research in a variety of areas including (a)
synthesizing and characterizing magnetic materials for memory devices, sensors,
and imaging agents, (b) designing applications and mechanistic studies for
crystallization on surfaces, (c) designing a non-aldol approach towards the
synthesis of polypropionate derived natural targets, (d) developing layered
inorganic compounds as hosts for catalysts and drugs, (e) isolating and
structurally elucidating marine natural products, (f) structurally
characterizing pharmaceutical solid forms obtained in continuous crystallization
processes, (g) synthesizing new transition metal complexes based on pyrene
derivatives with promising applications in memory devices; and (h) synthesizing
and characterizing aromatic heterocyclic compounds as potential pharmacological
agents.