* 1626177
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Advanced, Accelerated Computational System for Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Kostas Orginos, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of strong interactions, the
fundamental force in Nature that binds quarks and gluons into subatomic
particles (hadrons), such as protons and neutrons. The study of QCD properties
is one of the central scientific challenges in nuclear physics. Nuclear physics
scientists use computational methods and large-scale simulations to further the
detailed understanding of hadronic structure. These simulations make use of
state-of-the-art computational resources and researchers continue to improve
their high-performance computing (HPC) methods to take advantage of the latest
breakthrough in computer technology. This project will allow the acquisition of
a parallel computer cluster incorporating the next-generation Intel multi-core
processors (Knights Landing) and a high-performance communication network. The
Knights Landing architecture has the potential to revolutionize scientific
computing, by providing large computing resources at low cost and using
significantly less power than conventional computer clusters. This computer
cluster will be housed in a state-of-the-art computing center in the new
Integrated Science Center at the College of William &amp; Mary and will form the
centerpiece of high-performance computing on the W&amp;M
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific driver for the system is to
use lattice QCD methods to build a solid foundation for nuclear physics based on
the Standard Model of elementary particle physics. With increased computational
power and recent algorithmic developments, the research carried out with this
system will advance the Lattice QCD program. This system will be used as a test
bed for the development of new algorithms for lattice QCD calculations. These
algorithms will be designed in collaboration with computer scientists
specifically for the modern multi-core architectures that are currently the
trent in high-performance computing. Furthermore, this computer cluster will
serve as the center of interdisciplinary research between computer scientists
and physicists and will catalyze the integration of research and education
through the training of students and postdoctoral researchers in the groups of
the senior investigators and in the wider academic community at William and
Mary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of the National
Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at sustaining and
enhancing the U.S. scientific, technological, and economic leadership position
in High-Performance Computing (HPC) research, development, and deployment.