* 1626468
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution/Accurate Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer for Multi-Disciplinary research in the State of New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Nirmal Khandan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 699,070.00

An award is made to New Mexico State University to acquire an Orbitrap Fusion
mass spectrometer, to be housed in the Chemical Analysis and Instrumentation
Laboratory. This instrumentation is the state-for-the art for chemical
characterization of extremely complex mixtures and will be used in a wide
variety of applications that range from alternative fuel research to disease
research and fundamental biology. This instrument will be used to describe the
chemical composition of complex mixtures to help improve the manner in which
biomass is cultivated and processed into fuel and will be a key component to
multiple health-related research projects including the imaging of live cells.
Given the wide range of applications where the instrument will be used, this
research will generate both novel applications and significant advancements in
the application of this technology. Finally, the collaborative research projects
that use the Orbitrap Fusion will provide a framework for discovery that will
improve the ability of our institution to recruit and retain excellent faculty
and will provide enormous opportunity for student participation in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this acquisition is twofold.
First, this acquisition will enable mass spectrometry-based proteomics for a
number of collaborative research projects. Modern proteomic capability is
currently absent in the state of New Mexico. The Orbitrap Fusion instrument
architecture includes three orthogonal fragmentation techniques (electron
transfer dissociation, collisional dissociation and higher energy collisional
dissociation) and multiplex-in-time ion fragmentation capability, all of which
are critical for modern quantitative proteomics and the analysis of protein
post-translational modification. Second, with respect to multiple current
research efforts in energy, environment and lipid applications, the Orbitrap
Fusion offers excellent mass accuracy, ion transmission efficiency across a
broad mass range and high resolving power for complex mixture analysis with
collisional and higher energy collisional fragmentation methods to aid
structural elucidation. Within those project areas, we will utilize the Orbitrap
Fusion for the analysis of bio-oils and fuel precursors from biomass
thermotreatment and upgrading, algal growth media and feedstocks, lipid mixtures
from various biofuel feedstocks and complex environmental samples.