* 1626604
* MRI:   Acquisition of Optical Coherence Tomography at Montana State University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Diane Bimczok, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,000.00

1626604 - Wilking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide researchers at
Montana State University (MSU) access to an advanced imaging instrument known as
optical coherence tomography (OCT). OCT was originally developed as a medical
technology for imaging deep into the eye, but the technique has recently been
adopted by academic researchers to see the internal, microscopic structure of
thick biological samples that are impenetrable to traditional microscopy. OCT
operates on principles similar to ultrasound but uses light rather than sound to
image. At MSU, OCT will enable researchers in the Center for Biofilm Engineering
(CBE) to look inside thick microbial biofilms. These are films formed by
microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi, are widespread in natural, medical,
and industrial environments, and cause a tremendous number of problems,
including tooth decay, medical device infections, industrial clogging, and
fouling of ships. Knowledge of biofilm structure will provide researchers with
the insight necessary to address biofilm-related problems in health, industry,
energy and security. The CBE, one of the oldest NSF Engineering Research Centers
in the US, has an excellent history of supporting education, outreach, and
diversity over the past 25 years. Undergraduate and graduate researchers are
majority female, and the CBE has a strong involvement with Native American
communities. In addition, over the past ten years, the CBE has conducted more
than 40 biofilm workshops for over 300 participants representing industry and
government agencies. Through these workshops, the CBE has been instrumental in
raising the awareness of biofilms in the medical and healthcare community. OCT
imaging will play a key role in graduate and undergraduate research, as well as
in future biofilm imaging workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide an optical coherence tomography (OCT) instrument to researchers at
Montana State University (MSU), including those in the Center for Biofilm
Engineering (CBE). The instrument will be used to study the structure and
properties of biofilms, multicellular communities of microorganisms that form on
surfaces. These films are widespread in natural, medical, and industrial
environments, and knowledge of biofilm structure is critical for academic and
industrial biofilm research and development activities. Typically, confocal
microscopy is used to obtain biofilm microscale structural information; however,
confocal microscopy requires fluorescent labeling and offers limited
penetrations depths, on the order of tens of microns. By contrast, OCT, which
provides spatial and temporal resolutions nearly comparable to confocal
microscopy, does not require labeling and can provide tissue penetration depths
on the order of millimeters. The acquisition of OCT will provide a combination
of resolution, penetration depth, and flow dynamics imaging unmatched by
equipment currently available at MSU and will fill a gap in resident imaging
capabilities. In addition to supporting fundamental and applied research, the
OCT instrument will be used to support education, outreach, and diversity. The
CBE has an excellent track record of broadening the participation of women and
Native Americans in engineering and science through its research programs. Of
the current CBE graduate and undergraduate students, 53% and 62% are female,
respectively. Moreover, the MSU campus has multiple programs for involving
Native Americans in science and engineering, and the CBE is a regular
participant in these programs. Over the past ten years, the CBE has conducted
more than 40 biofilm workshops for over 300 participants representing industry
and government agencies. Through these workshops, the CBE has been instrumental
in raising the awareness of biofilms in the medical and healthcare community.
OCT imaging will play a key role in graduate and undergraduate research, as well
as in future biofilm imaging workshops.