* 1626586
* MRI: Development of a Cloud Based Instrument for Heterogeneous Biomedical Body Sensor Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Ming Li, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,898.00

This project, developing a cloud-based instrument, aims to aggregate data driven
from an array of body sensors. The instrument can be used in a wide range of
wearable sensor-based medical applications. The proponents investigate research
challenges focused on Biomedical Body Sensor Data Acquisition, Transmission, and
Analysis. Recent advances in cloud computing and sensor technologies have made
feasible to develop a software instrument that is able to integrate all aspects
of heterogeneous biomedical body sensor systems, from sensor data preprocessing,
transmission, and critical event detection at sensor side, to data reliability
evaluation and enhancement, data analysis, sensor control at data aggregator
(usually a smart phone or PC), and finally data storage, retrieval, and further
extensive analysis at the cloud server. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Build jointly with
UT-Dallas, the instrument development includes: 1. Android developing; 2. Mobile
cloud computing; 3. Cloud infrastructure and set up; 4. Cloud API and Sensor
side APUI; 5. Reliability Enhancement, and 6. Event detection. Its major
components include: 1. A cloud cluster to support data storage/indexing
analysis; 2. APIs for sensor side data preprocessing, critical event detection,
and transmission strategies based on open source platform TinyOS; 3. Mobile App
development ; and 4. API for sensor data access and analysis algorithms
evaluation.