* 1626792
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Collective Efficiency Building
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Rebecca Niemiec, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 41,158.00

Addressing local environmental threats and improving neighborhood quality often
requires the collective actions of numerous and diverse residents. One example
of an environmental and socio-economic threat that poses a neighborhood-scale
collective action problem is invasive species. Combatting invasive species
across private lands and achieving the associated ecological and socio-economic
benefits typically requires motivating a critical number of residents to engage
in control efforts on their property. A wide range of literature has suggested
that, in such collective action scenarios, residents may be influenced by their
perceptions of collective efficacy, or the extent to which they believe that
enough others will contribute so that the collective goal will be achieved.
Although recent literature has suggested that residents? invasive species
control actions may be related to perceptions of collective efficacy, field
research is lacking on how neighborhood collective efficacy can be built among
residents to encourage sustained engagement in invasive species control. Rather,
the majority of outreach and educational programs aimed at motivating resident
engagement in control efforts have focused primarily on providing financial
subsidies for control supplies and information about the impacts from invasive
species. This project investigates an outreach intervention?s effectiveness at
enhancing residents' perceptions of collective efficacy and sustained engagement
in invasive species control on their property and in their neighborhood. If this
intervention, which is based on social-psychological principles, is effective,
then the study would suggest a novel approach that could potentially be used for
building collective efficacy in a diversity of contexts in which the
provisioning of a public good requires the actions of numerous and diverse
participants. The intervention could, for example, be applied to enhance
residents' collective efficacy to improve neighborhood informal social control
or enhance resident engagement in other pro-social behaviors that have an impact
at the neighborhood scale, such as volunteering for local parks or
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically seeks to increase
resident engagement in control of the invasive little fire ant (Wasmannia
auropunctata) on private lands on the island of Hawai'i. The researchers, in
collaboration with the Big Island Invasive Species Committee, conduct a field
experiment to examine the extent to which a collective efficacy-building
intervention increases residents' participation in behaviors to monitor and
reduce the spread of little fire ants on their property and in their community.
Some residents recruited to attend meetings in six communities will receive
individual and collective ant control goals, be encouraged to make public
commitments regarding future ant control behavior, and have opportunities to
discuss and share their efforts. Other residents will receive more traditionally
used "knowledge-transfer" approaches and financial subsidies for ant control
supplies. The researchers assess the effectiveness of new and traditional
approaches using pre- and post-intervention surveys of resident perceptions and
self-reported behavior, and monitoring of little fire ant populations. The study
addresses gaps in the literature by integrating an array of techniques used or
hypothesized to build collective efficacy and cooperation in collective-action
situations.