* 1626337
* Professional Development Emphasizing Data-Centered Resources and Pedagogies for Instructors of Undergraduate Introductory Statistics (StatPREP)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Jenna Carpenter, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,849,364.00

The recent report A Common Vision for Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences
Programs in 2025 (Saxe &amp; Braddy, 2016), expressing the collective vision of
the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC), American
Mathematical Society (AMS), American Statistical Association (ASA), Mathematical
Association of America (MAA), and Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM) and endorsed by the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS),
urged the mathematics and statistics community to modernize undergraduate
curricula and pedagogies in order to improve student learning. Among the
challenges the report issued was a call for the community to close the ever-
widening gap between the traditional introductory statistics courses taught at
higher education institutions across the country and the data-driven workplace
today's college students will enter. Toward addressing this issue, this project,
"Professional Development Emphasizing Data-Centered Resources and Pedagogies for
Instructors of Undergraduate Introductory Statistics (StatPREP)", will catalyze
the widespread use of data-centered methods and pedagogies in undergraduate
introductory statistics courses. The project will build on prior work; the
positioning of the AMATYC, ASA, and MAA; and existing infrastructures, including
the MAA's long-running MAA Professional Enhancement Program (PREP) for
mathematics faculty professional development. Specifically, the project will
work directly with 240 college-level instructors by (1) offering an extended
professional development program for mathematics instructors, particularly at
two-year institutions, who teach introductory statistics; (2) establishing
regional communities of practice to support instructors who teach introductory
statistics; and (3) establishing a national online support network comprising
instructors who teach introductory statistics and statistics education
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;StatPREP will stimulate community transformation
by increasing faculty capacity to enact curricular change by incorporating
statistical analysis software and computing technology, complex data, open-ended
investigations, and statistical thinking into their existing courses. The
resources developed by StatPREP will include a library of field-tested lessons
appropriate for wide-scale integration into statistics courses as well as
interactive, online faculty-development tutorials that will be openly available.
Parallel to the intervention and implementation work, the project will address
the following questions: (1) How effective is this professional development
model in serving as a catalyst for faculty to modernize introductory statistics
courses? I.e., did it prompt changes participants' beliefs about statistics
education and result in changes in content and instructional practices? (2) How
accessible is this model for full- and part-time faculty members at two-year
institutions? (3) Does this prompt the formation of sustainable communities of
practice and national network? (4) What are the benefits and barriers related to
faculty participating in regional communities of practice a national online
network?