* 1626420
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Amplification System for Sensitive, High-Resolution, Multi-Time Scale Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Malcolm Forbes, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 223,750.00

With this award from The Major Research Instrumentation and Chemistry Research
Instrumentation and Facilities Programs, Professor Malcolm D. Forbes from
Bowling Green University Main Campus and colleagues H. Peter Lu, Alexander
Tarnovsky, Ksenija Glusac and Alexis Ostrowski have acquired an ultrafast laser
amplification system. Ultrafast lasers are powerful tools in the investigation
of photochemistry and photophysical processes such as the conversion of sunlight
into energy as in solar cells or the production of carbohydrates in plants by
photosynthesis. The time scale of such processes is often very fast, even
femtoseconds (ten to minus fifteen seconds). The instrumentation is used in
research and training by undergraduate and graduate students as well as high
schools students preparing them for technical careers and advanced education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas investigated at Bowling Green State University
such as studying (a) fundamental research in solar energy conversion, (b)
photocatalysis, (c) ultrafast molecular reactions, (d) proton-coupled electron
transfer reactions, (e) water splitting reactions for the development of
inexpensive alternative energy resources, (f) single molecule imaging of
biomolecules and (g) the development of photo-tunable materials.