* 1626549
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research, Training, and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Piotr Kaszynski, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Kying Ding from Middle Tennessee State University and colleagues Piotr
Kaszynski, Scott Handy, Tibor Koritsanszky and Anatoliy Volkov have acquired a
single crystal X-ray diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles. It also provides accurate
information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring
molecules. These studies impact a number of areas, including organic and
inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an
integral part of teaching as well as research and training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry. Collaborators from regional institutions
such as the universities Motlow State, Volunteer State, Nashville State, Fisk,
Alabama A&amp;M, East Tennessee State, Austin Peay, Belmont, Lipscomb, Memphis
and Central Arkansas also use the instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as: (a) characterizing molecular geometry in non-precious metal
organometallic catalysts and intermediates, (b) confirming stereoisomers and
molecular geometry in families of organic compounds, (c) determining
intermolecular associations in heterocyclic stable radicals, liquid crystals and
dyes, (d) incorporating high resolution charge-density data for small- and
medium-sized structures into charge density calculations, (e) carrying out
preliminary measurements before neutron and X-ray synchrotron diffraction
studies, and (f) collecting structural data that can be used in computational
predictive modeling.