* 1626406
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence-Avtivated Cell Sorter (FACS) to Enhance High-Impact Learning
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gordon Wolfe, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 544,343.00

An award is made to California State University (CSU), Chico to acquire a
Fluorescence- Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) machine, an essential scientific
instrument in modern biology that provides fast, objective, and quantitative
recording of signals from individual cells as well as their physical separation.
The FACS machine will enhance the mission of the Department of Biological
Sciences and stimulate an interdisciplinary program with the Departments of
Chemistry and Computer Science by allowing hands-on, high impact research
between undergraduate students, Master's students, and faculty members. This
scientific instrument will prepare biology majors for careers in the biological
sciences and enhance educational opportunities for students at the undergraduate
and Master's level by being utilized in multiple lower- and upper-division
classes, advanced research-focused classes, and for individual student research
projects outside of the classroom. Importantly, the FACS will catalyze an
interdisciplinary effort between scientific departments, improving the
educational experience of biology, chemistry, and computer science students by
allowing authentic research projects for students to collaborate on. These
collaborations are essential; the ability to work together as an
interdisciplinary team to solve complex problems is an essential aspect of
modern research that many students do not have adequate exposure to.
Additionally, acquisition of a FACS machine will establish CSU Chico, a
Hispanic- serving public university with a service area that spans 21% of rural
California, as a leading undergraduate institution in Northern California for
immunology, chemical biology, and bioinformatics. Allowing our diverse student
population with different scientific backgrounds to perform interdisciplinary
research activities with their peers will build their enthusiasm for research,
encouraging students from this traditionally underserved rural population to
pursue further studies that combine these research fields. This investment in
research capital will also allow faculty and students to attain more research
grants, allowing more hands-on, practical, high-impact learning that benefits
the community.

In modern biology, deciphering an organism's genome and understanding the
effects of changes in the gene expression of a given tissue, organ, and
individual cells is now standard methodology, requiring the isolation of
individual cells before interrogating changes in their gene expression. Specific
research projects enabled by the FACS machine are focused on understanding the
genes responsible for the proliferation and maturation of blood stem cells,
understanding the differences in gene expression that make blood cell
populations heterogeneous, investigating the effects of chemicals on these
processes, and elucidating the evolution of the vertebrate immune system.
Additionally, the FACS machine will be utilized to study microbial ecology in
diverse geological locations in Northern California, to analyze how microbial
and viral pathogens infect a wide variety of cells, and to understand plant and
animal cell cycle control, the regulation of cell death, and protein expression.
Importantly, data generated from these studies requires combining knowledge of
biological processes, chemical signaling, and computational analyses,
necessitating that biologists, chemists, and computer scientists work together
to solve complex problems.