* 1626065
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual-EELS Gatan Quantum Imaging Spectrometer to Upgrade the JEOL ARM200CF at UIC.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Christos Takoudis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 520,100.00

Low dimensional materials had, and continue to have, a huge potential to
revolutionize the development of technological devices. For low dimensional
materials, which often consist of just a single layer of atoms, it is essential
to be able to examine their atomic structure and develop an understanding of how
it influences the device properties. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is
one of the only means by which atomic structures of low dimensional materials
can be studied. Until recently, the spatial resolution of TEMs was inherently
limited by the aberrations of the optical imaging system. However, the
development of aberration correctors, the equivalent of a pair of reading
glasses, which correct for some of the microscope's aberrations (e.g.
astigmatism), has allowed improvement of spatial resolution of atomic-scale
images by more than a factor of three. In 2010, as part of the ARRA-funded NSF-
MRI-R2 program, the University of Illinois at Chicago was awarded a grant to
acquire an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope
(STEM), which can achieve single atom resolution on a routine basis. This
current project will upgrade one of the most crucial components of the this
instrument: the electron energy-loss spectrometer (EELS). The upgrade will
impact the research of the more than 150 users, including the 13 co-PIs and
collaborators at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), surrounding
institutions and from around the world. The installation of this upgraded EELS
system dramatically improves the teaching and outreach capabilities of the
involved faculty at UIC, and establishes a regional center of excellence in a
central Midwest location providing unparalleled TEM instrumentation access to
students and scientist &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) is an essential tool in the study of the atomic-scale structure-property
relationships of functional nano-materials and 2-dimensional materials systems.
With the development of aberration correctors and cold-field emission electron
sources, the spatial resolution of TEMs operated at 200kV has now reached 70 pm
with an energy resolution of better than 350 meV. This project seeks funding to
upgrade the existing electron energy-loss (EEL) spectrometer on the aberration-
corrected cold field-emission JEOL ARM200CF STEM/TEM to better serve the
materials science research and education at the University of Illinois - Chicago
(UIC). The proposed upgrade will replace the current Gatan Enfina spectrometer
with a Gatan Dual EELS Quantum spectrum-imaging filter, an advanced, high-speed,
high-sensitivity spectrometer with increased energy resolution. In doing so, the
PIs will dramatically improve i) the attainable spatial resolution during EEL
spectrum imaging due to the presence of a camera at the end of the imaging
filter; ii) the acquisition speed of individual EEL spectra or entire spectrum
images due to the acquisition electronics and increased collection efficiency;
and iii) the energy resolution and range due to higher-stability electronics and
more efficient acquisition cameras. The broader impacts on the TEM community in
the Midwest and the local educational resources will be significant. The
upgraded instrument will continue to be operated by UIC's Research Resources
Center, a center of excellence for teaching and training of advanced TEM. The
faculty at UIC will further use the instrument to develop strong collaborative
interactions with groups at surrounding academic institutions and industrial
laboratories, as well as collaborators from around the world to maximizing the
outreach opportunities for training and research of UIC's diverse student body.