* 1626015
* MRI: Acquisition of a Solid-state-enabled Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 453,287.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Jamie Walls from the University of Miami (UM) and colleagues Vaidhyanathan
Ramamurthy and Burjor Captain have acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equippped
with solid state capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as the study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the study of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the changing interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. The results from these NMR studies have an
impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is located in a general user facility managed by
highly qualified scientists is an integral part of research, research training
and teaching. The improved research infrastructure further enriches the research
experience for economically disadvantaged and underrepresented minority high
school students in Miami-Dade county that participate in UM bridge programs
within the Chemistry Department. Additionally, the spectrometer provides solid-
state NMR and microimaging capabilities that had been unavailable in South
Florida. Access to the instrument fosters collaborations between UM and local
industries, colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in: (a)
investigating trimetallic nanoclusters incorporated as heterogeneous catalysts;
(b) studying supramolecular host/guest complexes functionalized on solid
surfaces and crystals; (c) analyzing spin dynamics in dipolar and quadrupolar
coupled spin systems; (d) characterizing the formation of peroxycarbonates, and
(e) obtaining the direct metabolic profiling of biological tissue samples.