* 1626619
* MRI: Acquisition of Rocky Mountain Environmental X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Facility for In Situ Characterization of Active Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Manika Prasad, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 576,450.00

CBET - 1626619&lt;br/&gt;Decaluwe, Steven&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
fund acquisition of an Environmental X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (E-XPS) to
establish a unique regional facility for exploring behavior of material surfaces
in operating and/or reactive environments and for training in advanced
measurements at the&lt;br/&gt;Colorado School of Mines (CSM) and collaborating
institutions across the Rocky Mountain region. For many functional materials
critical to our nation's energy and environmental future, performance depends on
material surface properties during device operation, which can vary quite
significantly from surface properties under conditions typically measured by
standard high vacuum surface analysis tools. For this reason, the E-XPS user
facility established by this award will enable new insights into in a diverse
array of material-dependent technologies and scientific fields. This E-XPS
center will significantly expand access for new and interested users across the
Rocky Mountain Region in engineering, chemistry, geophysics, and other
disciplines to employ E-XPS to study materials and surfaces in active
environments. The instrument will be installed and established as a self-
sustaining user facility at CSM to advance XPS capabilities in the region for
both internal and external users. The established facility will provide world-
class material science research and education experiences for the next
generation of science and engineering leaders from CSM and elsewhere. The
facility will advance students' knowledge of instrumentation, instrument
capabilities, sample preparation, and data analysis relevant to their respective
fields of study in undergraduate and graduate coursework and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous interfaces play a critical role
in many engineered processes and natural systems. Active surfaces mediate multi-
phase chemical reactions, often instigate fracture or failure in materials or
devices, and are very sensitive to local environments. Because surface
properties under active conditions can deviate significantly from bulk
properties, the inability for many researchers to study interfacial chemical
states during device operation or in relevant ambient conditions presents a
substantial barrier to fundamental scientific insight. The E-XPS will provide
invaluable non-destructive evaluation of surface and near-surface states for
materials and devices in real and operating environments, thereby overcoming the
limitations of conventional, lab-based XPS at UHV conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The
E-XPS user facility established by this award will allow measurements of solid-
vapor and solid-liquid-vapor interfaces at pressures up to 25 mbar, temperatures
up to 800Â°C, and can operate with electrochemical perturbation of non-
equilibrated surfaces. These capabilities enable surface characterization in
realistic chemical, electrochemical, and thermal environments for processes
related to energy conversion, chemical processing, geochemistry, and materials
degradation. The unit can measure lateral or depth profiles in a single
spectrum, and can operate under standard XPS (i.e. UHV) conditions, thereby
meeting a critical need at CSM.&lt;br/&gt;E-XPS has only recently expanded from
heavily oversubscribed synchrotron-based user facilities to laboratory-scale
instruments. This user facility will therefore greatly improve access and
throughput for E-XPS capabilities, enabling groundbreaking and collaborative
interdisciplinary materials research at CSM and at collaborating regional
universities and federal research labs. Expected users from numerous engineering
disciplines, physical sciences, and geological sciences will employ the E-XPS
instrument to address outstanding questions about material surface behavior in
arenas such as energy conversion technologies, geochemistry, environmental
processes, and materials fabrication. It is further anticipated that
technological implications of these unique measurements in active environments
will draw in industrial users in these fields.