* 1626726
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Does Restorative Justice Contribute to Human Rights and Peace? Explaining Diffusion and Evaluating Impacts Using a Multi-Method, Multi-Level Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Kathryn Sikkink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,083.00

Increasingly, states are choosing restorative justice mechanisms such as truth
commissions and reparations to address past human rights harms. Transitional
states now see transitional justice as a route to legitimacy and stability.
Restorative justice advocates claim that truth commissions and reparations play
a critical causal role in bringing about a diverse set of positive societal
outcomes including improving human rights, democratic development, and
consolidating peace. Despite the global diffusion of the restorative justice
discourse and the widespread adoption of domestic truth commissions and
reparations policies, there is little evidence that restorative justice actually
works. The first research question this project will address is: do restorative
justice mechanisms contribute to improvements in human rights, democratic
development, and peace consolidation, and if so, how? Second, if restorative
justice does not have these positive impacts, then why have restorative justice
policies diffused so widely and why do state officials, advocates, and academics
continue to make claims about policy efficacy? Applying a multi-method, multi-
level approach to explain restorative justice diffusion and evaluate its impacts
at the global and subnational levels, the research will clarify explanations for
policy diffusion, and establish the relationship between different forms of
justice (e.g. retributive, restorative) and reconciliation. It will provide a
much-needed evidence base to help guide policy design and help channel resources
into the most impactful transitional justice and peacebuilding programs; and it
will contribute to current policy debates about how to achieve sustainable
peace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To empirically test different explanations for
policy diffusion, the principal investigators (PIs) statistically analyze cross-
national data from the NSF-supported Transitional Justice Research Collaborative
(TJRC) database. They also utilize newly collected meso- and micro-level data
from recent field work in Colombia to identify new diffusion pathways and
construct different measures of (non-geographic) spatial nearness. To evaluate
the impact of restorative justice on human rights, democracy, and peace
outcomes, the PIs statistically analyze cross-national data from the TJRC
database and micro-level data from a recently completed Harvard-led population-
based survey in Colombia. Supported by the NSF Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
Grant, the PIs will implement an innovative survey experiment in Colombia to
explore the relationship between restorative justice and reconciliation -- the
most commonly claimed outcome among restorative justice supporters. Utilizing an
experimental vignette methodology (EVM), which uses survey sampling methods to
produce a collection of experimental subjects and experimental methods to
randomly assign participants to variations of the independent variable, they
will test how different provisions of justice (e.g. restorative, retributive,
distributive, and procedural) impact individual judgments about reconciliation.
In transitional settings, these provisions of justice are delivered through
transitional justice processes such as criminal prosecutions, truth commissions,
and reparations. The experimental field survey helps establish and clarify
pathways between different forms of justice and reconciliation, and will be used
to explore how different forms and combinations of justice change subjective
judgments about reconciliation. The research design draws from a basic
comparative design according to which randomly selected individuals from
different groups are compared. The PIs will make comparisons, among others,
between the general population, war victims, and Afro-Colombians. The PIs draw
on insights from political science, sociology, and anthropology in order to
study restorative justice dynamics at the global and subnational levels.