* 1626197
* Using Engineering Principles of Design to Advance Teacher Education of Prospective Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Kendra Erk, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,018,951.00

There is a critical need to provide pre-service elementary school teachers with
content-rich engineering design learning experiences in order to develop their
knowledge, skills, and understandings for STEM teaching and student learning. In
this research-based project, science, engineering, and education university
faculty collaborate to create an innovative, scalable, and sustainable model for
elementary science teacher preparation in order to address the unprecedented
need to prepare elementary science teachers to teach engineering practices
nationwide. By examining elementary pre-service teachers' learning of
engineering practices, researchers can uncover the factors that contribute to
the generation of high quality elementary STEM teachers as well as the
challenges science and engineering faculty face when creating, implementing, and
assessing cutting edge learning materials. This Using Principles of Design to
Advance Teacher Education (UPDATE) project is a development, implementation and
educational research project with the following goals, to: 1) refine, implement
and assess the impact of an engineering design-based model for enhancing pre-
service elementary science teachers' understanding of engineering practices; 2)
research the impact of this approach on pre-service elementary science teachers'
learning of engineering practices across multiple undergraduates science course;
and 3) propagate and assess the model for transferability beyond Purdue
University. Thus, this Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE-EHR)
Development and Implementation II tier project, in the Engaged Student Learning
track, will positively contribute to the goals of the IUSE-EHR program which
seeks to identify best practices to improve K-12 STEM education through
undergraduate pre-service STEM teacher preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will redesign an existing elementary science teacher preparation model
consistent with the goals of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).
UPDATE will work directly with 240 elementary pre-service teachers over five
years to broaden the STEM learning landscape by purposefully integrating
engineering design across five required undergraduate science courses and
growing a new generation of high quality, exemplary elementary STEM educators.
The project objectives are to: 1) refine innovative, content-rich, engineering
design-based science tasks; 2) map the tasks to course objectives and related
content; 3) implement the engineering design-based science tasks and pedagogies;
4) generate evidence-based outcomes for understanding how pre-service elementary
teachers learn engineering practices and how to teach science using engineering
practices; 5) utilize outcomes and faculty reflections to continually improve
practice; and 6) validate a model for an integrated engineering design-based
science approach to elementary science teacher preparation for transferability.
During implementation of project UPDATE, the following research questions will
be investigated: 1) How do pre-service teachers conceptualize engineering
practices? 2) To what extent does pre-service teachers' knowledge of engineering
practices change over time? 3) How do pre-service teachers perform on
engineering design tasks within their respective undergraduate science courses?
4) In what ways does pre-service teachers' engagement in engineering design
affect their science conceptual understandings relative to each task? 5) In what
ways do pre-service teachers utilize their engineering design-based experiences
from their undergraduate science courses to inform their lesson plans and
implementation? and 6) What design-informed pedagogies do they employ in field
experiences in the methods course? To measure learning of engineering practices
and targeted science concepts, the research team will employ a mixed methods
approach using inventories, concept assessments, interviews, and classroom
observations. Anticipated project outcomes include a working, transferable,
scalable model for elementary science teacher preparation that will include a
collection of high quality, standards- and engineering design-based science
tasks that emphasize the application of core disciplinary concepts; updated and
enhanced undergraduate science courses that focus on learning science through
design; enriched elementary science methods courses focused on the learning and
teaching of science through engineering design; assessment tools that measure
pre-service elementary teachers learning of engineering practices; and a
portfolio of exemplars of student design artifacts, notebooks, and lesson plans.
The model this project will develop and test, as well as the research findings
that emanate from this project are likely to be very attractive and useful to
other elementary teacher preparation programs across this nation that seek to
incorporate engineering standards into their respective programs.