* 1626238
* MRI: Addition of High Performance Computers for the Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate Computational ChemistRY (MERCURY)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Marc Zimmer, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 10/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

With this award Professor George Shields from Bucknell University and colleagues
Marc Zimmer (Connecticut College), Carol Parish (University of Richmond) and
Maria Gomez (Mount Holyoke College) have acquired a computer cluster to be
shared by a large consortium of primarily undergraduate universities and
colleges referred to as MERCURY (Molecular Education and Research Consortium in
Undergraduate computational ChemistRY). The cluster is used in computational
chemistry research projects. These projects employ theoretical chemistry
programs and algorithms or processes using principles from quantum mechanics or
molecular mechanics (often called molecular dynamics simulations). The
computations are used to predict and understand a wide range of properties of
molecules such as their acidity, chemical reaction mechanisms such as those that
lead to the production of tropospheric ozone and hydroxyl radicals, biochemistry
questions such as the binding of small molecules to proteins and even the study
of environmental problems such as the chemistry of steroids that are common
contaminants in surface and wastewater. The consortium involves 27 computational
chemists from 24 primarily undergraduate institutions. The acquisition has a
broad impact on the training of undergraduate research students who are
incorporated into the workforce or those who attend graduate and professional
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research in
areas such as those described above. Further examples include: (a) studies of
defect conduction paths with applications to fuel cells, (b) understanding the
molecular behavior of model compounds such as polyradicals, and elucidating
biomolecular dynamics and bond making and breaking reactions, (c) computations
to understand the photophysics of light-producing and light-detecting proteins,
(d) studies of the conformations of small peptides and other important areas.