* 1626939
* Closing Gaps: Connecting Assessment and Culture to Increase Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Jonathan Boxerman, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,349,718.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by investigating ways
to make science assessment and science instruction more culturally relevant to
Native Hawaiians. Closing Gaps: Connecting Assessment and Culture to Increase
Achievement, a three-year design and development study, opens new doors for
understanding how technology can enhance teaching and learning. The project
focuses on ways in which technology-rich learning environments can improve
instruction and assessment practices for diverse indigenous students. It
combines two innovative learning technologies -- SimScientists and FieldScope --
that support STEM teaching and learning through the practices of science.
Teachers in the Na Lei Na'auao Native Hawaiian Charter School Alliance use these
innovative technologies in their classrooms and on ecosystems-themed field
trips. Project researchers will study how features of each technology can foster
learning and enhance assessment. The project addresses a persistent limitation
of STEM learning: students' lack of access to connected and familiar experiences
that can help build foundational knowledge. Although new technologies to support
STEM learning are available each year, many deliver inaccessible information
because the context of the information is unfamiliar and does not relate to
children's own experiences and intuitive knowledge. This promotes fragile
understandings rather than the kinds of knowledge valued by NGSS and in work
environments. This project explores how to design educational learning tools
that can be adapted to a local context yet be standardized enough to align with
state and national guidelines. Findings may prove critical in improving test
development practices for diverse populations. Testing in diverse indigenous
communities is underexplored; little is known about how assessments can be
adapted to serve the dual role of assessing content and practice standards while
attending to specifics of the local context. This project intends to enhance the
educational advancement of all students in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project intends to advance the field of educational technology to maximize
benefits of cultural and contextual diversity in technology-rich learning
environments. It addresses four research questions: (1) Can features of two
learning technologies be customized to be both contextually relevant and aligned
with standardized learning goals?; (2) Can technology-rich learning environments
be used to make salient connections between instruction and the culture in which
learning is situated?; (3) Can assessment embedded into technology-rich learning
environments be responsive to ways of knowing and demonstrating understanding
unique to an indigenous culture?; and (4) Can assessment embedded in technology-
rich learning environments support inferences about student understanding of the
practices, core ideas, and crosscutting concepts of science with appropriate and
sufficient evidence? In Year 1, the project will conduct initial feasibility
studies with students and teachers to inform revisions to existing SimScientists
modules and reflection activities. In Year 2, the project will revise existing
modules to enhance their cultural relevance and then conduct small-scale
usability and feasibility testing with the revised modules. In Year 3, the
customized modules will be piloted with 12 teachers. Data collection and
analysis strategies include: (a) design charrettes; (b) focus groups and
usability testing; (c) cognitive labs for cultural relevance, construct validity
and innovation impacts; (d) pre/posttest of American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) items; (e) benchmark assessment data; (f) teacher
surveys; (i) case studies; (j) classroom and field trip participant observations
(k) differential item functioning; (l) analysis of covariance; and (m) analysis
of variance on posttest scores (outcome variable) to compare the means across
student groups (by intervention mode) and their prior science achievement levels
to measure the technical quality of the assessments. Project success means
students will make personal connections between the knowledge they gain
throughout the course of their lives and the knowledge that is important in STEM
fields, offering additional ways to see the value and possibilities of STEM
careers.