* 1626276
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffraction System for Nanostructured and Advanced Materials Research and Research Education and Outreach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Clement Burns, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 452,399.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a state of
the art X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) system that will support multidisciplinary
research and education in institutions throughout West Michigan. This modern XRD
enables cutting edge research in nanotechnology, physics, materials science,
chemistry, electrical engineering, and other areas. The knowledge generated will
be used to design new materials and processes, and "tailor" their structure and
properties to specific demands, such as materials for green energy production,
medical devices, sensors, flexible electronics, and more. The XRD will help
educate future researchers by providing opportunities using modern research
instrumentation. In addition, the PI's university has strong outreach programs,
including training and retaining science teachers and providing opportunities
for high school students. The XRD instrument will greatly benefit these programs
and attract students to STEM research as a career path. In addition to serving
as a shared, multi-user, multi-purpose facility for the Western Michigan
University and other area institutions, it will also be used by local high-tech
businesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modern X-ray powder and surface diffraction
system is an essential tool in multiple scientific research fields. Knowledge
gained from diffraction analyses is critical for the determination of
crystalline structure, phases and phase transformations, thickness of thin
layers, size of nano-particles, crystallographic preferred orientation, residual
stresses, and as a result, is critical for the design of new materials. This
instrument will enable numerous research projects, including the creation of
nanostructured magnetic and thermal shape-memory smart alloys for new
applications, such as developing new micro- and nano-electromechanical systems.
It will also enable determination of the surface properties of thin films being
developed for semiconductor gas sensors for detecting chemical species. Other
studies include the properties of semiconducting films that may be suitable for
low cost solar cells and determination of the nanoparticle properties in
ferrogels for drug delivery purposes. The structure and degree of crystallinity
of 3D printed materials will be measured to help improve the technique for
printing biocompatible materials. Developing better high temperature
superconductors is another goal. High tech applications include the development
of machining materials, using Laser Augmented Diamond Drilling for materials
that are not machinable using conventional techniques.