* 1626645
* MRI: Acquisition of Hybrid CPU/GPU High Performance Computing and Storage for STEM Research and Education at San Jose State University
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Brooke Lustig, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 04/30/2020
* USD 900,798.00

This award is to acquire a state-of-the-art high-performance computing (HPC)
facility at San Jose State University (SJSU). The HPC system will provide
faculty and students regular access to a modern, on-campus computing facility
for computational science and engineering research. As a key hub for STEM fields
in the San Francisco Bay Area, this facility will promote the progress of
science and engineering, as well as offer a wide diversity of experiences for
our students through required laboratory courses and research opportunities.
This multidisciplinary and collaborative project involves faculty and students
from biological science, chemistry, computer science, aerospace engineering,
computer engineering, meteorology and climate science, physics, astronomy,
mathematics, and statistics. The HPC will further enhance SJSU?s capability as a
focal point in training members of the biotechnology/ pharmaceutical and
information technology workforce in the Bay Area. This facility will also
contribute to attracting students from underrepresented groups as well as local
community colleges into STEM fields at SJSU. It is anticipated that more than
200 students from SJSU each year in STEM related courses and activities will
benefit from such an instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprising a hybrid
central processing unit (CPU)/graphics processing unit (GPU) HPC built using
1696 compute cores and a 1.0-petabyte High Performance Storage System (HPSS).
This system will be used for computational analysis, data-intensive research,
rich media, three-dimensional computer modeling, data mining, and large-scale
simulation. The projects that are poised to commence include: on-demand
numerical weather prediction, assimilation, and analysis (Atmospheric Science);
dynamical modeling of orbits and dark matter in gas-poor galaxies (Physics and
Astronomy); computational modeling of Tat peptide mutants binding to BIV TAR RNA
and protein-protein interfaces (Biochemistry); quantum mechanical properties of
materials in the atomic scale (Physics and Astronomy); guidance and trajectory
optimization strategies in presence of wind, and spacecraft and orbital
trajectory optimization (Aerospace Engineering); genomic assessment of
adaptation, and pharmacological and evolutionary perspective on bioactive
compounds in marine invertebrates (Biological Science); high-resolution
simulations of weather phenomena, dust transport, and climate on Mars (Planetary
Science); and efficient algorithms for modeling large amount of data in high
dimensions (Mathematics and Statistics). The HPC infrastructure and associated
user group will enable many further follow-up projects, including cross-
disciplinary collaborations as well as participation from the wider SJSU
community.