* 1626374
* MRI: Development of iCAVE2 (Instrument for Connected and Autonomous Vehicle Evaluation and Experimentation)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Chunming Qiao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project, developing an integrated 5-in-1 instrument for connected and
autonomous vehicle (respectively, CV and AV) evaluation and experimentation
(iCAVE2), addresses open research challenges in surface transportation systems
where statistics on accidents and fatalities, congestion, fuel consumptions, and
emissions have raised serious concerns. This work addresses a critical societal
need related to evaluating and experimenting with the emerging and potentially
transformative CV/AV technologies by developing a necessary instrument that can
bridge the gap between existing simulators and road testing facilities. The
instrument is useful to researchers in academia and IT industry, and developers
and decision makers in the auto-manufacturing, auto-insurance and government
transportation agencies. Graduate assistants will be trained with hands-on
experiences and multi-disciplinary knowledge. The instrument enables expansion
of several programs and contributes to the education and training in the STEM
fields. Consequently, better driver training and related rehabilitation should
be expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iCAVE consists of: 1. Multiple driving
simulators (DS) to conduct human/hardware-in-the-loop experiments in a Virtual
Reality (VR), 2. A traffic simulator (TS) whose vehicles can mimic, CVs and AVs
move in mixed traffic situations with a fairly realistic traffic environment, 3.
A Network Simulator (NS) with realistic wireless communication models to
evaluate various Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I)
communications technologies, 4. Several Instrumented Vehicles (IVs) including a
fully instrumented CV and a AV to conduct real-world experiments and connect
data, and 5. An Instrumented Environment (IE) with various traffic sensors and
road-side units for V3V/V2I communications covering an area of approximately1.2
square miles with representative urban traffic. The instrumented environment and
vehicles provide real-world measurement data to build and calibrate
parameters/models for use by the integrated simulators. They can also be used to
run CV/AV algorithms and applications to collect data, and evaluate their
performance and effectiveness. The instrument will be available to both local
and remote users. Its main software module will be developed based on a
framework for real-time data distribution, with open APIs and as an open-source
project. New designs, technologies, infrastructure, and applications will be
evaluated and validated before deployment. This flexible, scalable, safe, and
realistic platform, expected to be particularly suitable for answering various
"what-if" questions related to safety, efficiency, and sustainability arising
from human-automation interactions with not-yet-available technologies and
rare/extreme events, is the first-of-its-kind with unprecedented capabilities,
not offered by any simulator-based instrument or test-beds in academic,
industrial or government-based R&amp;D laboratories. The instrument should also
enable activities related to Big Data transportation systems.