* 1626372
* MRI: Acquisition of High Resolution Exact Mass Liquid Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer (LCMS) to Broaden and Enhance Chemical and Biological Education and Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Marc Libault, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 416,500.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF) as well as
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor
Robert Cichewicz from the University of Oklahoma Norman Campus and colleagues
Laura Bartley, Marc Libault, Zhibo Yang and Si Wu have acquired a high
resolution exact mass liquid chromatograph mass spectrometer (LCMS) with ultra
performance liquid chromatograhic (UPLC) capabilities. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex matrices.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph provides additional structural identification power by separating
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse students in research and
research training using this modern analytical technique. It also provides
training opportunities to a large number of undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students as well as high school students through a variety of
internship programs, such as the STEM-to-Store Academy and Sooner Upward
Bound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) analyzing chemical and
biochemical species in single cells; (b) studying changes to the biomolecules
inside of single plant root hair cells in response to environmental stresses;
(c) mapping the spatial distribution of molecules in biological tissues; (d)
studying the spatial distribution of metabolites of grass stems to investigate
cell wall development; (e) characterizing the proteomics of regulatory networks
controlling legume nodulation such as detecting the transcription factor binding
partner networks involved in nodulation; (f) analyzing the metabolites of plant
stem cell wall synthesis and regulation; (g) analyzing the proteomics of fungal
secretomes for biomass degrading enzymes and (h) quantifying the diversity of
the fungal natural product chemosphere.