* 1626673
* MRI: Acquisition of an Upgrade to a Console with Solid State Capabilities for a 14.1 T Magnet
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 430,913.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Leonard Mueller from the University of California Riverside and colleague
William Harman have upgraded a 600 MHz spectrometer by equipping it with a
console for a 14.1 Tesla magnet. The instrument also has solid state
capabilities. The upgrade provides new electronics and thus updated capabilities
to this 600 MHz spectrometer to allow research in a variety of fields such as
those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as
well as the study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. The results from these NMR studies have an
impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument, located in a general user facility managed by
highly qualified scientists, is an integral part of research, research training
and teaching at this Hispanic Serving Institution. The facility provides
training for the next generation of scientists and engineers and broadens the
participation of groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. Because
the University of California at Riverside is a comprehensive NMR user facility,
the award provides the means to establish outreach efforts and service
structures to both smaller colleges and universities, the private sector and the
broader scientific community in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in
areas such as (a) studying structure and mechanism in typtophan synthase; (b)
studying well-defined heterogeneous catalysts via solid state NMR; (c)
exploiting N-H resonances for glycosaminoglycan characterization; (d)
characterizing microscopic photomechanical molecular crystals; (e) studying
ligand binding, enzyme kinetics and inhibition; (f) regulating DNA methylation
by the CXXC domain of the ten-eleven translocation (Tet1) proteins; (g) using
molecular electrets for bioinspired charge transfer; (h) studying cooperative
bond activation at reactive N-heterocyclic silylene complexes; (i) exploring
self-sorting, supramolecular catalysis and molecular dynamics; (j) exploring
catalysis and energy storage enabled by carborane anions; (k) studying the
antioxidant selenoeine and (l) isolating and characterizing insect
semiochemicals.