* 1626073
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope to support faculty-student collaborative scholarship at a research-intensive liberal arts college
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Clara Moore, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 403,189.00

An award is made to Franklin &amp; Marshall College for a laser scanning
confocal microscope that will enable the study of cells, tissues, and other
materials at high resolution that cannot be achieved with traditional light
microscopy, and thus allow investigation of new questions in both research and
teaching. A diverse group of faculty and students from multiple departments at
F&amp;M (Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics and Computer Science, Physics and
Astronomy, and Psychology), from other institutions of higher education
including Millersville University and Elizabethtown College, and from the School
District of Lancaster will use the laser-based microscope system for state-of-
the-art image capture and analysis. In addition to student-faculty collaborative
research projects, the confocal microscope will enable cutting-edge research
experiences for a large and diverse group of about 170 science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) undergraduates and 55 urban high school students
annually. Students will view and measure stained or living cells in courses from
high school biology to advanced neurobiology and will investigate the immune
system, cancer, and development. The microscope will contribute significantly to
the education of first-generation college students (about 15% of F&amp;M's
student population) and underrepresented groups. The confocal microscope will
provide research opportunities for undergraduates that integrate technology
common at research universities with direct faculty mentoring that is the
hallmark of a liberal arts education at F&amp;M. The confocal will also enhance
local research infrastructure and increase the participation of women and
underrepresented groups in science. The high quality, state-of-the-art
instrument will enhance F&amp;M's ability to offer up-to-date training to
students and provide outreach to train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will enhance the
scientific findings of many faculty who study a diverse range of topics in
terrestrial and aquatic microbes, plants and animals, from fundamental
mechanisms of cellular processes to biomechanics, development and cognition, and
will help offer high-quality research opportunities to undergraduates. Projects
that will use the range of capabilities of the confocal microscope include: gene
expression involved in the formation of plant seeds; modification of hippocampal
dendrites as a function of space use; novel cellular mechanisms of mammalian
brain development; computer simulations of brain cell function in different
regions of cortex; characterization of NLR proteins involved in inflammation;
distribution of proteins critical for heart and skeletal development; signaling
regulation of tumor suppressor proteins; and the morphology of obliquely
striated muscle cells. Research at nearby Millersville University and
Elizabethtown College focused on evolving spatial patterns of microbes diversity
over time, migration of cells during turtle shell formation, and cellular stress
responses of aquatic Hydra species will be enhanced with access to the
microscope allowing diverse scientific discoveries.