* 1626566
* MRI Consortium: Development of Environmental Control for Resonant X-ray Scattering on Organic Samples
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Harald Ade, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 509,939.00

Nanoscale interactions and structures within organic materials are of critical
importance for our understanding of their macroscopic properties and functions.
These organic materials range from engineered (e.g. Kevlar, polymer batteries)
to biological (e.g. cellular proteins), but what is common among them is that
final solid properties are seeded during liquid processing or that many of their
properties and functions only occur in specific operational environments.
Resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) is uniquely capable of probing the
nanostructure of these materials using intrinsic chemical bonds within the
molecules, but currently RSoXS can only be performed on samples suspended in a
vacuum. In this project, RSoXS will be combined with environmental control
suitable to create the conditions in which these organic systems operate. The
developed instrument will be first of its kind and provide an exquisite view
into the molecular interactions and structures that govern formation and
operation of organic matter during such formation and operation, and therefore,
enable leaps in understanding and control of materials for technology, energy,
and life. The availability of such facility will continue to place the USA at
the international forefront of X-ray science for many years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) utilizes
intrinsic chemical sensitivity of absorption fine structure of molecular
transitions from core electronic orbitals. The technique, therefore, is uniquely
sensitive to molecular bonds and their orientation in organic materials where no
or low crystallinity and/or density contrast exists and, furthermore, does not
require laborious and potentially disruptive labeling. Thus it is particularly
useful in investigating interactions and structures of small molecules, polymers
and proteins that drive materials properties and biological functions.
Currently, however, samples are investigated in vacuum, limiting the study of
these materials. This project funds the development, construction and
installation of sample environmental control for RSoXS at beamline 11.0.1.2 of
the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Berkeley National Laboratory. Such an
instrument will enable measurements of nano-to-mesoscale structure and
interaction of organic molecules under full environmental control (gasses,
liquids, temperatures, electric fields, and charges). The project will combine
the superior sensitivity and selectivity of RSoXS to organic molecules and their
orientations with the ability to measure their structure and interactions in
their in-situ or in-operando environments. Such an ability to probe organic
matter in their native environment is critical to obtaining information that is
relevant to the very applications in which they form, exist and function.