* 1626496
* A Model of Educational Transformation: Developing a Community of Faculty Implementing Next Generation Physical Science and Everyday Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Fred Goldberg, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,877,300.00

This project addresses a critical aspect of science education, that of preparing
elementary teachers to be knowledgeable of physical science concepts and
confident in engaging early grade students in exploring physical science.
Moreover, this project seeks to address the first recommendation of the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Engage to Excel
report, to "catalyze widespread adoption of empirically validated teaching
practices." This project will tackle a core challenge associated with moving
beyond dissemination to implementation, impact, and sustainability. It will
engage a community of faculty, professors of physics and of physics education,
in course transformation and continued professional development through the
implementation of and research on an existing physical science curriculum for
pre-service elementary teachers, the Next Generation Physical Science and
Everyday Thinking (Next Gen PET) curriculum, which is aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS), and the National Research Council K-12
Science Education Framework. Preliminary data indicate the effectiveness of
these materials. However, the simple availability of these materials does not
ensure their adoption by a wider audience; rather, research indicates that
"develop and disseminate" approaches have limited impact. This project will
instead form a community of instructors that can share expertise, and document
implementation strategies, challenges, and lessons learned. This community will
engage 50 faculty members from across the country in course transformation using
Next Gen PET, and will reach more than 7000 students during the project. Long-
term impacts will include a large group of prospective elementary teachers
better prepared to meet the challenges of teaching NGSS-aligned activities to
their future students, as well as a community of expert practitioners and
advocates who can engage in educational transformation in the larger physics
education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide the project. The
first is to establish and engage the Next Gen PET community of practice,
consisting of project leadership and faculty implementers. The community of
practice (CoP) will include three tiers: the project leadership, a small group
of experienced PET instructors called the expert-cadre (already identified), and
a larger expanded-cadre. Goal two is to evaluate direct impacts on faculty and
students. The third goal is to contribute to the research base on faculty change
and educational transformation. This project hypothesizes that faculty
involvement in a structured and supported CoP will lead to far-reaching and
sustainable educational transformation. The project's research agenda will
examine this conjecture by investigating an overarching question: To what extent
does the Next Gen PET community of practice lead to effective educational
transformation? The research design uses an embedded systems or ecological
perspective on human development where individual faculty are seen to influence
the development of the community and the community is seen as influencing the
development of faculty (Cole, 1996; Rogoff, 2003). Several levels of research
will contribute to addressing the overarching question above. Community-level:
How does the CoP get established and how does the CoP develop discursive norms
around effective pedagogical practice over time? Faculty-level (a): Does the CoP
support faculty in responding to known challenges associated with course
transformation efforts (which are often barriers to change in the standard
dissemination models)? Faculty-level (b): What are the partial and conditional
ways faculty take-up the Next Gen PET materials and core pedagogical practices
over time? Broad Community-level: To what extent does the CoP model impact
faculty not directly involved in the CoP? Ultimately, this project will
contribute to a more informed, scientifically literate population and to the
literature on educational transformation and faculty change. This project
contributes to the improvement of undergraduate education as it attends to the
NSF-IUSE framework which "promotes new and exciting approaches to using research
on STEM learning and education to address STEM education challenges across and
within institutions, as well as within and across specific disciplines."