* 1626362
* Program to integrate mobile, hands-on experiments into the ME, AE, and ECE curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* J.V. Prasad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,947.00

Well designed, laboratory experiences can make engineering concepts come to
life, giving students a real-world confirmation of concepts and theory from
lectures. However, students rarely have enough time in traditional labs to
complete the tasks assigned along with pre- and post-lab exercises. Mobile
hands-on learning would remove these restrictions and allow students to do
experiments in their own time at any location with the help of web-based
resources. The goal of this project is to develop portable hands-on engineering
lab experiments for use by students outside of traditional engineering
laboratories in classrooms or dorm rooms. Based on previous experiences in
electrical and computer engineering, the PIs plan to deploy the portable labs
across the curricula in mechanical and aerospace
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is to
develop and validate low-cost, highly-flexible, mobile, hands-on experimental
platforms in mechanical and aerospace engineering. Technological innovations
that enable this paradigm shift in lab instruction include new data acquisition
devices, powerful micro-controllers and low cost sensors. The portable hands-on
experimental modules to be developed will feature moving parts, fluidic and
thermal components that are typically found in mechanical and aerospace
engineering systems. It is expected that a new pedagogical model that promotes a
more complete integration of theory and practice will be created, one that will
open new avenues for inquiry-based learning. Several research questions will be
addressed pertaining to the impact of the new modules on student learning,
student interest, and on long-term retention of knowledge. Specific studies will
be done to examine the impact of the developed modules on students from
underrepresented groups and to seek instructor intervention methods that improve
that impact. The role of online discussion forums as a support mechanism for
mobile hands-on learning will also be examined. The broader impact of this
project includes giving students the ability to perform experiments at their own
pace anywhere/anytime while providing educators with innovative and flexible
educational technology. Partnering with Georgia Tech are Howard University,
Southern Polytechnic State University, National Instruments, Piazza, and Texas
Instruments all of whom will work to ensure the validity of the methods
developed and ensure their dissemination to a broad audience.