* 1626449
* NSF-MRI: Acquisition of Integrated Glovebox Vapor Deposition and Spin Coating Systems for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lamartine Meda, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 198,832.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a lithium evaporation system
at the Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA). This new system will complement
the existing infrastructure at the Solid High Energy Lithium Battery (SHELiB)
Center at XULA and it will be used for research and training of underrepresented
minority students in critical research areas such as nanotechnology and energy.
XULA students will gain experience in the state-of-the-art lithium battery
technology. In addition, students from GaTECH and Auburn University will come to
XULA to use the equipment. The acquisition of this instrumentation will
contribute to the mission of the SHELiB Center which is to provide opportunities
and support systems that recruit, retain and develop undergraduate students in
STEM-related disciplines. Several postdocs, graduate students, and over 60
underrepresented minority students will be impacted by the availability of the
new instrumentation.

This proposal is to acquire a lithium evaporation system imbedded in an MBraun
Labstar glovebox for research and education, to advance the understanding of a
variety energy storage systems, with a focus on creating novel interface
phenomena. The acquisition of this system will have an impact on the wide
variety of research activities conducted in the Solid High Energy Lithium
Battery (SHELiB) Center at XULA. This system will enable the preparation of
controlled interfaces between anode materials and solid or polymer electrolytes.
This will allow the study of transport and stability across the interfaces that
will lead to the development of solid, high-energy lithium batteries.
Participating investigators from XULA, Georgia Institute of Technology, Auburn
University, US Army Research Lab (ARL), and NASA will directly benefit from the
availability of the new equipment. This system will enable the preparation of
the desired interfaces in situ without exposing the materials to ambient
environment. Interfacial research is critically needed for designing new
electrolyte systems that are stable against Li electrodes. To take advantage of
Li high energy capacity electrode, the reason for their instability must be
understood. The PIs have expertise and active research programs that explore
these types of materials and their interfaces. The proposed projects will pave
the way towards the formation of all-solid-state lithium batteries with high
energy density and enhanced safety. Also, knowledge gained in interfacial
processes will broadly benefit areas related to energy needs such as fuel cells
and hydrogen production.