* 1626112
* MRI: Acquisition of an Accurate-Mass LC-QTOF Mass Spectrometer for Advancing Environment, Life Sciences, Bioenergy and Chemistry Research, Education and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Michael Lydy, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 0.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor Da
Chen from Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIUC) and colleagues Michael
Lydy, Yanna Liang and Dale Hales have acquired an accurate mass LC-QTOF MS
(liquid chromatograph quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer). In general,
mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex mixture
(matrix). In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer
where they are broken apart into charged species and measured. This is highly
sensitive technique allows detection and determination of the structure of
molecules. A mass spectromter coupled with a liquid chromatograph provides
additional structure identification power by separating mixtures of compounds
before they reach the mass spectrometer. This instrument acquisition strengthens
the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse students in research using this
modern analytical technique. The project also provides training opportunities to
a large number of SIUC undergraduate students through a variety of programs,
such as the Research Enriched Academic Challenge (REACH) Program, Undergraduate
Assistantship Program, McNair Post-baccalaureate Achievement Program, Illinois
Louis Strokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP), as well as the
National Science Foundation Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as: (a) studying the
environmental presence of chemicals of emerging concern and exposure in
wildlife; (b) analyzing environmental transformation of emerging contaminants;
(c) looking at the fate and effects of antibiotics on freshwater communities;
(d) assessing the ecological impact of neonicotinoid insecticides; (e) searching
for chemical signatures of cyanobacterial species and environmental conditions;
(f) developing spatially resolved, tissue-specific chemical profiles of emerging
contaminants in Great Lakes trout.