* 1626531
* Developing Instructional Teams for Evidence-Based Instruction in Large Collaborative Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Cox, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,750,794.00

This project will significantly improve opportunities for learning experienced
by all students in large enrollment introductory STEM courses. Too often,
undergraduate introductory STEM courses are offered in 100+ seat lecture halls
where student engagement in the hard work of learning new information, as
opposed to simply listening to an expert talk about it, is the exception rather
than the rule. Many undergraduates entering STEM majors need help in learning
how to learn, especially in large enrollment classes with challenging STEM
content. This project will change this situation. Using large classrooms
recently redesigned for small group collaborations, this project will use
evidence from research on learning, teaching, and assessment to create and
refine a model for training teams of STEM instructors and their instructional
assistants as learning leaders. All students in the collaborative learning
environments, with guidance and support from the instructional team, will have
opportunities to learn STEM in collaborative, task-oriented classes.
Simultaneously, students will learn how to learn STEM in an environment which
likely resembles the work environment of their future professional careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a professional development
model that improves instructional team members' abilities to practice evidence-
based instruction in large enrollment undergraduate STEM collaborative learning
environments (CLEs). The quality of instruction and assessment practiced by
these teams is an important aspect of successful student learning in large
enrollment CLEs. Each team will be comprised of four roles: (1) a lead
instructor, a faculty member who will be the primary instructor, curriculum
planner, and developer of learning tasks; (2) a learning assistant trainer, a
faculty member who will train learning assistants on evidence-based practices
for engaged student learning; (3) assessment coaches, experienced learning
assistants who will serve as lead assessors of student engagement by monitoring
and supporting learning coaches' formative assessment practices and feedback
providers to lead instructors and learning assistant trainers; (4) learning
coaches, learning assistants who will directly engage with students and provide
formative assessment. The project will build upon research on learning task
quality, formative assessment practices, and student-assisted teaching, which
suggests that productive student learning in large enrollment CLEs: (1) requires
engagement with appropriately challenging, high quality learning tasks, (2) is
fostered with evidence-based formative assessment practices, and (3) involves
efficient functioning of instructional teams prepared to support student
learning with evidence-based practices. Built upon these premises, the project's
professional development activities will build instructional team members'
abilities to succeed in their roles. Research goals are to: (1) track changes in
task quality, formative assessment practices, and instructional team performance
over several semesters within six to nine large enrollment CLEs, and (2)
document and describe the challenges associated with achieving the desired
evidence-based practices of task development, formative assessment, and
instructional team performance using, and annually revising, the professional
development model.