* 1626326
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope with STEM and EDS Capabilities for Interdisciplinary Research and Education at Towson University
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Rajeswari Kolagani, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 530,545.00

The scanning electron microscope requested in this proposal is an instrument
capable of obtaining images of various materials and biological specimens with
extremely high (nanoscale) resolution. The instrument also includes capability
for analyzing the chemical composition of materials with high precision. The
proposed instrument will be used to advance research in several areas of
biological, chemical, geological and physical sciences, involving faculty and
students across multiple departments in the Fisher College of Science and
Mathematics at Towson University (TU). The ultrahigh resolution imaging and
chemical analysis offered by the new scanning electron microscope is expected to
enable break through discoveries that will impact the fundamental science in
these diverse disciplines while also contributing to several technologies that
are key to societal advancement and sustenance. Examples from the proposed
research projects include enhancing our understanding of how and what
chemosensory information is detected, analyzed, encoded, and responded to by the
insect nervous system, exploring and manipulating the behavior of materials at
extremely small size limits that underlie nanotechnology, harnessing the power
of "meta materials" to achieve superconductivity at high temperatures with the
potential of revolutionizing many technologies including power transmission and
quantum computing, developing catalyst materials that are essential for
achieving viable renewable and clean energy technologies, and understanding the
mineral biosignature preservation in geological systems which is the key to
finding life forms in extraterrestrial habitats. These projects will provide
opportunities for active participation of undergraduate and master's students at
TU and collaborating institutions, who will be trained and supervised by the
faculty members on the use of this advanced instrument for interdisciplinary
research. Student research will result in their authorship in journal
publications and conference presentations. The research and professional careers
of participating students is expected to benefit greatly from the hands-on
experience and training on this advanced instrument. In addition, the instrument
and the research it enables will also be employed to enhance class room and
laboratory instructions in several undergraduate and master's level courses
offered by the departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics,
Astronomy and Geosciences. The K-12 partners will benefit through outreach
activities, such as site visits and demonstrations, involving the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports Towson University's (TU) acquisition of a
state-of-the-art low vacuum 30keV Schottky field emission scanning electron
microscope (FESEM) with capabilities for nanometer resolution in scanning
transmission mode (S-TEM), in-situ e-beam patterning, and elemental analysis via
energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The instrument is crucial to meet
the needs in ongoing and future research projects in inorganic, electronic,
environmental, forensic, entomological and geobiological material. The FESEM
will make a decisive impact in generating advanced scientific understanding,
increased speed of research turn-around, and technological innovation by
researchers at TU and its committed users from neighboring institutions, namely
Loyola University of Maryland and Goucher College. Besides being a flexible tool
catering to the ongoing inter-disciplinary research at TU, it will fill a void
by serving as an in-house imaging, characterization, and structure fabrication
instrument. The project addresses distinct research questions in individual and
cross-disciplines, while sharing common characterization and fabrication needs.
In short, these are: (1) image cuticular structures on the surface and within
subsurface pores in biological samples using beam deceleration; (2) the ability
to image with nanometer resolution zero-, two- and three-dimensional objects to
understand optical property changes; (3) resolve with high resolution quantum
sized nano clusters, ferro-fluids, metamaterial superconductors, perovskite
catalysts, in S-TEM mode; (4) the ability to obtain high resolution lithographic
patterning, and (5) elemental analysis using EDS. This suite of imaging,
fabrication and chemical analysis capabilities within the instrument will allow
researchers at TU, and its neighbors, to bolster ongoing research activities
with student co-authors, while also propelling new learning outcomes in courses.
It will equip students with an understanding of key technologies. This
educational emphasis of primarily undergraduate institutions, like TU, affords
unique opportunities for such training.