* 1626166
* MRI: Acquisition of Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Research and Training in the Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael H. Temkin, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 282,390.00

An award is made to St. Lawrence University (SLU) to acquire a confocal
microscopy system. Many modern cellular and molecular biology techniques use
natural fluorescence, fluorescently tagged molecules, or fluorescent dyes to
label specific cellular components. A confocal microscope is an instrument that
uses lasers to produce high resolution images of cellular and subcellular
components within living and fixed cells that have been labeled with one or more
fluorescent molecules. In addition, 3D reconstructions of these fluorescent
structures can be created using a series of images collected by the confocal
microscope as it focuses down through a specimen. Consequently, this instrument
has the resolving power to address many types of biological problems including
identifying cell types, cellular localization of specific molecules, determining
gene expression, and examining cell differentiation. The research faculty
involved in this project require the enhanced flexibility of use and special
capabilities (e.g., UV laser, spectral detector, and environmental chamber) of
this confocal system to obtain quality images of their work for their
contributions to their scientific fields, including publications, national and
international meeting presentations, student training, and other applications.
Thus, this award will broaden research, training, and teaching opportunities
both at SLU and the Associated Colleges of the St. Lawrence Valley Consortium.
Acquisition of this instrument will expand the existing partnership between SLU
and Clarkson University (CU), especially increasing summer fellowship projects
for CSTEP and McNair Scholars; two programs that support students from
populations underrepresented in STEM. In addition, the new microscope will fuel
outreach activities for dozens of K-12 teachers, students, and community members
in our economically disadvantaged, rural region of northern New
York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Nikon C2+ spectral imaging confocal microscope
system with wide field camera and environmental chamber systems and specialized
capabilities will support and expand current and future research, teaching, and
undergraduate training activities of STEM faculty and students at the Associated
Colleges of the St. Lawrence Valley (SLU, Clarkson, SUNY Potsdam, and SUNY
Canton), a higher education consortium in upstate New York. The new instrument
will augment the research and scholarly contributions of research faculty and
enhance teaching and training activities of eleven faculty and science
professionals in cell and developmental biology and ecology and evolution,
including the PI and Co-PIs' projects, which focus on the theme of subcellular
trafficking and tissue localization of specific molecules during development.
The acquisition of this confocal microscope will provide the flexibility
important for all users to achieve successful imaging with their respective
biological systems of study, while also being easy to use and having a
relatively low cost infrastructure. In particular, this system will allow
research faculty to explore the biological effects of cerium oxide
nanoparticles; gene expression in cheilostome bryozoans; and the essential role
of the evolutionarily conserved IME4 mRNA methyltransferase in metazoan
development. High-resolution imaging is required to publish in high profile cell
and molecular biology journals, and confocal microscopy is now the expected
minimal standard for publishing microscopy-based research using fluorescence.
Specifically, this instrument will positively impact the relatively new field of
cerium oxide nanoparticles, as the new system will enable Drs. Erlichman and
Estevez to characterize how the chemistry of cerium oxide nanoparticles
influences their cellular trafficking and whether cellular localization
influences pro-oxidant vs antioxidant effects. Body axes are determined multiple
times during the bryozoan life cycle (embryogenesis, metamorphosis, and asexual
budding). Using the proposed instrument, Dr. Temkin will acquire data on Hox
gene expression during two different patterns of asexual budding. These data
will provide a foundation to examine Hox gene expression at other points in the
bryozoan life cycle. Lastly, a fundamental question in developmental biology is
how cell fates are determined. To answer this, Dr. Hongay will employ the new
microscope to perform high resolution confocal analyses to determine how a
highly evolutionarily conserved RNA-modifying enzyme dictates cell fates and
cell differentiation in Drosophila spermatogenesis.