* 1626271
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with integrated EDS, WDS, and EBSD for research and undergraduate research training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Steven Wojtal, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 332,105.00

1626271&lt;br/&gt;Page&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program award supports acquisition of a scanning electron microscope
equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer to allow microscale textural and
compositional imaging of solid earth, biological, and synthetic materials. The
instrument will support faculty research and undergraduate research training at
Oberlin College. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare
given the importance of training the next generation scientific workforce in
modern techniques of microanalysis and research methods. Faculty research using
the instrument will also be of societal interest including studies of antibiotic
resistant bacteria and studies of fault rocks with implications for improving
understanding of the physics of earthquake rupture.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specific research that will be facilitated by the acquisition
includes investigations of antibiotic resistant bacterial biofilms, the
structures of hybrid inorganic-organic network compounds, characterization of
elemental zoning in garnet porphyroblasts in high and ultra-high pressure
metamorphic rocks to elucidate metamorphic history, the paleoecology of marine
mollusks, and study of mineral fabrics in carbonate fault rocks and deformed
quartzites to understand deformation processes in fault
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***