* 1626450
* MRI: Development of an Advanced Micro-Spectroscope for Imaging Quaternary Structure, Trafficking, and Dynamics of Macromolecular Systems in Live Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ionel Popa, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,974.00

Recent investigations have shown that spectrally resolved fluorescence
microscopy, in conjunction with Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer
Spectrometry (or FRET Spectrometry), is an effective technique for uncovering
the quaternary structure of membrane protein complexes in living cells. To
realize the full potential of this approach and determine the supramolecular
structures of protein complexes, as well as their relative concentrations,
dynamics and spatial distributions Inside a cell or tissue, one must obtain
three pieces of critical information at image pixel level: the concentrations of
donor and acceptor molecules, and the FRET efficiency occurring between the two.
Acquiring this information necessitates exciting the sample at two distinct
wavelengths. Existing laser-scanning microscopes (including confocal, two-
photon, and FLIM microscopes) perform two-wavelength excitation scans in a
serial fashion. This leads to a long time delay (10-100 s) between the two
successive scans on a pixel level. As membrane proteins can diffuse in and out
of a pixel within 0.100 s, the two excitations are scanning different molecules,
thereby compromising the molecular-level resolution. Furthermore, reducing the
number of molecules per pixel requires increased spatial resolution, which is
not available using current FLIM, confocal, or two-photon microscope
technologies. Availability of this cutting-edge technology will open up a new
avenue of research in cell signaling and provide an untapped source of
pharmacological targets, which in turn may improve public health. The design of
the instrument will be made available to other researchers, while the instrument
itself will be made available for use by interested research groups. We will
also partner with US companies to bring this instrument to the market. Besides
to impacting the research programs of investigators around the nation and
abroad, the proposed instrument will provide exquisite training opportunities
for undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate trainees in interdisciplinary
research across the boundaries between biology, biochemistry, pharmacology and
physics. This instrument also will be used for new education initiatives
developed by the PI, which bring practical applications of physical and
mathematical concepts to elementary and high school students as well as college
freshmen, including underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposed instrument development project, we will design and construct a two-
photon optical micro-spectroscope capable of quasi-parallel excitation of tens
of focal spots spread in one or two dimensions, and rapid switching between two
different excitation wavelengths. This instrument will present several
advantages over existing ones: (1) The parallel excitation of multiple sample
voxels will lead to dramatically increased signal-to-noise ratio of 20X to 100X
compared with single point-scan microscopes. (2) Spectrally resolved
fluorescence will be collected at two excitation wavelengths separated by 10 ms;
this switching time is 100-1000X faster than existing technology and will enable
the currently unattainable determination of the localization of differently
sized oligomeric species together with their size distribution (e.g., monomers,
dimers, tetramers) on a pixel level. (3) Finally, this instrument will present
both reduced out-of-focus blur and increased axial resolution (by about 2X)
compared to existing two-photon microscopes. The dramatic improvement in
temporal and spatial resolution as well as data accuracy will provide biologists
with a means to determine how protein oligomerization and function affect one
another. The multidisciplinary team assembled by the PI is ideally suited to
develop and validate this technology, since it combines exquisite technical
expertise, facilities, experience with developing and running an imaging
facility, and close collaborations between physicists, biologists and other life
scientists.