* 1626249
* Developing Teaching Assistants' Pedagogical Knowledge of Inquiry Science Teaching &amp; Instructional Leadership Skills, and Assessing the Impact on Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Maxim Bychkov, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,482.00

To improve student learning in introductory college science lab courses, there
is need for inquiry instruction that promotes coherent understanding and
assessments that are aligned with the instruction. However, successful enactment
of inquiry instruction in introductory college science lab courses requires
teaching assistants' sound pedagogical knowledge for inquiry science teaching.
Therefore, this research-based project is developing teaching assistants'
pedagogical knowledge for teaching project-based guided inquiry science labs,
and assessing the impact on student learning and attitudes towards science. The
importance of this project is that it will provide research evidence on the
development of teaching assistants' pedagogical knowledge of inquiry science
teaching, resulting instructional practices, and the impact on student learning
and attitude towards science, and subsequently increase student learning in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many teaching assistants start teaching
introductory college science labs without training in inquiry science teaching,
yet the success of this instruction largely depends on the type of training they
receive in inquiry science teaching. The goal of this project is to develop,
implement and evaluate professional development training to develop teaching
assistants' pedagogical knowledge for teaching project-based guided inquiry
science labs and to assess the impact of the enhanced teaching on student
learning and attitudes towards science. The project will employ a two-cohort
cluster randomized trial with repeated measures design of pre- and post-
measures, where introductory chemistry, physics and biology lab courses serve as
the cluster level. Data will be collected through several instruments, including
pre/posttests, interviews and observations protocols. A significant aspect of
this project is that it will provide empirical evidence on how professional
development training enhances teaching assistants' pedagogical knowledge for
inquiry instruction, project-based guided inquiry lab development skills,
inquiry instructional practices, and understanding of student engagement in
science activities.