* 1626257
* MRI: Acquisition of a genomic sequencer within a shared resource facility for interdisciplinary sciences and training at Oklahoma State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Andrew Doust, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

An award is made to Oklahoma State University (OSU) to acquire an Illumina
NextSeq500 genomic sequencer. Sequencing technologies are essential to STEM
curricula that include bioinformatics at all student levels. The NextSeq will
provide hands-on undergraduate research experiences. The instrument will be used
to enhance the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce
through the Bioinformatics Certificate Graduate Program, designed to improve
academic and workforce employability of graduate students. The project will
enhance research from interdisciplinary users including faculty from
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Botany, Integrative Biology, Plant and Soil
Science, Animal Science, Veterinary Sciences, Microbiology, Plant and Soil
Science, Entomology, Zoology, and many more. The instrument will dramatically
improve capacity to identify pathogens in metagenomics studies for forensics of
food contamination including improved national security through the National
Institute for Microbial Forensics &amp; Food and Agricultural Biosecurity
program which seeks to rapidly identify pathogens related to bioterrorism. The
project will benefit society by strengthening genetic marker breeding research
in wheat, beef, and many other agriculturally important crops and animals.
Existing interdisciplinary programs that require significant sequencing such as
the Wheat Improvement Team, The Oklahoma Center for Respiratory and Infectious
Disease, and the Bioenergy Center will benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NextSeq500 is a high-throughput sequencing machine capable of generating up to
120 giga-base-pairs of sequence data per run. This instrument has the capacity
needed for eukaryotic de novo genome sequencing, RNA-seq experiments,
metagenomic experiments, and other modern high-throughput data experiments at
low cost and rapid turnaround. Access to this instrument will strengthen
research, research training, collaborations, and outreach across multiple
interdisciplinary programs at Oklahoma State University, including existing
national leadership programs in agricultural breeding, plant virus biodiversity,
plant bioterrorism forensics, population genetics of bald and golden eagles in
collaboration with Native American tribes in Oklahoma, collaborative projects
with regional institutions including targeted breeding at Langston University
(an HBCU), environmental metagenomics projects related to evolution, climate,
ecosystem remediation, and multiple de novo sequencing projects of non-model
organisms. Undergraduate students will be trained by collecting and sequencing
environmental specimens and learning associated bioinformatics in classes and
workshops. This instrument strategically complements existing
cyberinfrastructure for data management, high throughput data, and big data
analyses at OSU.