* 1626376
* MRI:   Acquisition of a Cathodoluminescence Spectrometer on an Electron Probe Microanalyzer for Multidisciplinary Research and Hands-On Education at Fayetteville State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Daryush Ila, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 201,900.00

This instrumentation project, proposed by Fayetteville State University (FSU)
through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program is to acquire a
cathodoluminescence spectrometer that will be installed on a state-of-the-art
field-emission Electron Probe Microanalyzer at a multi-user facility at FSU. It
will be open for access and support research at academic and federal agencies in
North Carolina, South Carolina and nationwide. The new instrument will be used
for materials characterization, which will significantly strengthen the research
capabilities at the FSU. The new instrument will be used as a centerpiece for
training minority students at FSU, producing more minority and female
professionals for diversified and motivated STEM workforces. In addition, the
new capability will serve as an open platform for outreach to local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI project supports several research
projects at Fayetteville State University as the fast X-ray detection using
nanoscale size and composition-controllable scintillator nanowires, effects of
dimensionality, size and chemical doping on luminescence of ceria nanofibers,
fundamental mechanisms controlling growth and packing factor of nanocrystals in
ion implantation, and magmatic and tectonic processes by analyzing zoning in
igneous and detrital zircons. Through these in situ studies, the material
microstructure, shape, size, composition and luminescence properties can be
correlated from the same specimens.