* 1626190
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Capacity Data Analysis System for Gravitational-Wave Detection with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* David Kaplan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 874,669.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) is an NSF-funded
project to detect gravitational waves, the ripples in space and time emitted by
violent astrophysical events such as supernovae or colliding pairs of neutron
stars or black holes. The first detection of these waves in September 2015
confirmed a central prediction of one the most fundamental theories in science:
Einstein's theory of general relativity. With this and subsequent detections,
LIGO is now operating as an astronomical observatory allowing us to explore the
Universe using a completely new sense: gravitational waves. This award provides
computing resources at UWM to analyze the LIGO data and will accelerate the
discoveries enabled by the LIGO instruments. The computing cluster is designed
to address the specific needs of Advanced LIGO data analysis. It is an integral
part of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) effort to analyze the full
Advanced LIGO data sets. LIGO analysis activities will be prioritized on 90% of
the cluster; other activities on the remaining 10% will include searches for
radio pulsars/transients, the detection of gravitational waves using pulsar
timing arrays by NANOGrav, and numerical astrophysics. Analyses to be run on the
new cluster include searches for compact binaries and related parameter-
estimation. The facility will be available to all 1000+ members of the LSC, and
thus will have broad international impact. Moreover, these facilities have also
been used by researchers at UWM and elsewhere for interdisciplinary research in
fields such as astronomy and astrophysics. This will continue, thus ensuring
that this instrument will have a broad scientific reach at UWM and beyond. The
deployment and use of this instrument will also provide a hands-on opportunity
for education and training to undergraduates, graduate students, post-doctoral
scientists and academic staff in the use of large-scale computing hardware to
tackle complex technical questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The baseline
computational instrument will consist of 720 execute nodes with 2,280 modern
E3-1241v3 CPU cores. The group will add several high-memory login nodes, storage
servers (1,152 TB gross storage) and networking equipment. Theoretical peak
performance will be about 300 TFLOPS (AVX2) with sufficient storage to host all
of the calibrated data from advanced detectors (30 TB/yr) and several months of
raw data (600 TB/yr). Benchmarks indicate that the cluster will be able to
process over 28 million template matches in real time. The scale of this project
is commensurate with a new aspect of this mission within LIGO data analysis as a
secondary site for running the real-time (latency of seconds) search for compact
binary mergers -- a task best handled at a dedicated site such as UWM. This
instrument will facilitate and participate the discovery and the study of the
exotic astrophysical events throughout the Universe that produce gravitational
waves. This award will provide part of the computational resources needed to
analyze the data as it is delivered by the new Advanced LIGO instruments. It
will support an array of scientific activities including the detection of new
gravitational-wave signals and the broader astrophysical and astronomical
follow-on analyses.