* 1626905
* NSF-DEB-RAPID: Evolution of reproductive barriers in long-lived conifers
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Jill Hamilton, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,752.00

Understanding the mechanisms underlying speciation is a fundamental aim of
evolutionary biology with direct implications to conservation and species
management in a rapidly changing landscape. This research aims to understand how
barriers to reproduction have evolved in a long-lived conifer, Torrey Pine, one
of the rarest pines in the world. With a restricted distribution to just two
discrete populations, a mainland population and an island population, this
research uses a particularly exciting approach to understand the evolution of
reproductive barriers in a long-lived species using longitudinal monitoring of
plant phenotypes and fitness characteristics within a common environment.
Established in 2007, mainland, island and first-generation hybrid seedlings
representing island maternal plants fertilized by mainland pollen donors were
planted into a single common environment at the Santa Barbara Botanic Garden.
Annual monitoring of these trees suggests there is an advantage to being a
hybrid in the common environment, with hybrids taller and exhibiting increased
fecundity relative to parent trees. However, whether this advantage is
maintained across future generations remains a question, which will provide
insight into mechanisms that contribute to reproductive isolation. This research
will study those factors that define a species, and will have conservation and
management implications for rare, endemic species. This project will provide
field and database management exposure for students at the undergraduate and
graduate level. In addition, this project will bring together partners from
governmental (USDA-Forest Service), non-governmental (Santa Barbara Botanic
Garden) and research institutions to promote the long-term preservation of these
genetic resources, which have fundamental scientific and applied conservation
value, and educational impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will fund
a collection of data and tissue from a long-term provenance trial of Torrey Pine
(Pinus torreyana), a rare, endemic California conifer planted at the Santa
Barbara Botanic Garden in Santa Barbara, California. The objectives of the
project will be to (i) collect cones for processing and planting within a
containerized common garden at the Institute of Forest Genetics in Placerville,
CA, (ii) collect needle tissue for long-term storage and genomics work, and
(iii) assess trait and morphological data for future association analyses with
genomic data. The common garden property may be listed for sale shortly, which
could restrict access to the mainland, island, and F1 individuals that were
established in 2007 and that are only now reproductive and producing an F2
generation. Therefore, this funding provides an opportunity to sample tissue and
collect data for the development of a longer term Torrey pine project which will
aim to understand the genomic and phenotypic architecture underlying the
evolution of population differences in a long-lived conifer.