* 1626008
* MRI: Development of an Observatory for Quantitative Analysis of Collective Behavior in Animals
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Kostas Daniilidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 339,174.00

This project, developing a new instrument to enable an accurate quantitative
analysis of the movement of animals and vocal expressions in real world scenes,
aims to facilitate innovative research in the study of animal behavior and
neuroscience in complex realistic environments. While much progress has been
made investigating brain mechanisms of behavior, these have been limited
primarily to studying individual subjects in relatively simple settings. For
many social species, including humans, understanding neurobiological processes
within the confines of these more complex environments is critical because their
brains have evolved to perceive and evaluate signals within a social context.
Indeed, today's advances in video capture hardware and storage and in algorithms
in computer vision and network science make this facilitation with animals
possible. Past work has relied on subjective and time-consuming observations
from video streams, which suffer from imprecision, low dimensionality, and the
limitations of the expert analyst's sensory discriminability. This instrument
will not only automate the process of detecting behaviors but also provide an
exact numeric characterization in time and space for each individual in the
social group. While not explicitly part of the instrument, the quantitative
description provided by our system will allow the ability to correlate social
context with neural measurements, a task that may only be accomplished when
sufficient spatiotemporal precision has been achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument enables research in the behavioral and neural sciences and
development of novel algorithms in computer vision and network theory. In the
behavioral sciences, the instrumentation allows the generation of network models
of social behavior in small groups of animals or humans that can be used to ask
questions that can range from how the dynamics of the networks influence sexual
selection, reproductive success, and even health messaging to how vocal decision
making in individuals gives rise to social dominance hierarchies. In the neural
sciences, the precise spatio-temporal information the system would provide can
be used to evaluate the neural bases of sensory processing and behavioral
decision under precisely defined social contexts. Sensory responses to a given
vocal stimulus, for example, can be evaluated by the context in which the animal
heard the stimulus and both his and the sender's prior behavioral history in the
group. In computer vision, we propose novel approaches for the calibration of
multiple cameras "in the wild", the combination of appearance and geometry for
the extraction of exact 3D pose and body parts from video, the learning of
attentional focus among animals in a group, and the estimation of sound source
and the classification of vocalizations. New approaches will be used on
hierarchical discovery of behaviors in graphs, the incorporation of interactions
beyond the pairwise level with simplicial complices, and a novel theory of graph
dynamics for the temporal evolution of social behavior. The instrumentation
benefits behavioral and neural scientists. Therefore, the code and algorithms
developed will be open-source so that the scientific community can extend them
based on the application. The proposed work also impacts computer vision and
network science because the fundamental algorithms designed should advance the
state of the art. For performance evaluation of other computer vision
algorithms, established datasets will be employed.