* 1626611
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope to Enhance Research and Student Research Training in Engineering, Biochemistry, Biology and Physics departments at SF State Univ
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Andrew Ichimura, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 472,818.00

This award, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI), brings
new research and teaching capabilities to four Departments/schools at the
College of Science and Engineering at San Francisco State University (SFSU) via
acquisition of a multipurpose microscope (Bio-AFM). This instrument (Bio-AFM)
combines two powerful microscopes: (1) a fluorescence microscope that provides
detailed optical images of translucent biological samples, such as cells and
soft tissues, and (2) an atomic force microscope (AFM) that provides high-
resolution contour maps of samples as well as a broad range of physical
properties, such as force, friction, and electric potential. The lack of
quantitative techniques in biological sciences has forced researchers to use
traditional assessment tools that are typically subjective or not completely
quantitative. This instrument will close this gap by empowering development of
new quantitative techniques to detect the small effect of medications and
medical interventions that occur at the molecular and cellular scales. The
techniques will allow researchers to study aging and genetic predisposition by
accurately measuring their affects on physical properties of the tissues in
micro and nano scales. The instrument will serve as a catalyst for stimulating
interdisciplinary collaborations within the college as well as with external
users and colleagues at universities, research organizations, and private
industries across the Bay Area. The Bio-AFM serves as a critical pedagogical
tool in interdepartmental courses designed to offer Masters and undergraduate
students hands-on experiences. It will also expand opportunities for recruiting,
retaining, and engaging students at a large, urban, comprehensive university
with a significant population of individuals who are traditionally under-
represented in the disciplines of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. Exposure to this state-of-the-art imaging and data acquisition
system will augment the training experiences of students and help prepare them
for Ph.D. programs or professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
promotes a number of new collaborative research projects that will allow in-
depth characterization of the mechanical, electrical, and optical properties of
natural and engineered materials, as well as imaging of a wide variety of
samples, ranging from soft biological tissues to hard metals. The instrument,
with its uniquely integrated fluorescence microscope, cutting-edge actuation
system, and advanced controls, will ensure the development of open source,
quantitative assessment tools that enable any modern AFM to capture the
comprehensive micro-mechanics and nano-dynamics of soft biomaterials by finding
intrinsic bi-phasic characteristics including elasticity and permeability. Use
of the Bio-AFM by SFSU researchers will also enable research advances in the
following areas: detecting subtle effects of multiple biological factors such as
age and genetic modification on the functions and mechanics of biological
materials by using the force indentation tools of the AFM as well as the
explained quantitative assessment tool; understanding the impact of different
synthesis conditions on the formation and conductivity of polycrystalline thin
films under ultraviolet illumination, commonly used in photoelectrochemical
applications by using the conductive AFM technique; elucidating the effects of
key fabrication parameters on the surface characteristics and mechanical
properties of meso-scale materials for energy and filtration applications, by
direct mapping and quantification of the surface roughness of electrospun
fibers; investigating extracellular organelles synthesized by bacteria and
measuring adhesive forces generated by these organelles using the AFM imaging
capabilities and the integrated fluorescent microscope; and evaluating the
strength of cell-cell interactions by detecting morphological changes and
mapping the electrostatic surface potential by using the conductive AFM
technique.