* 1626153
* NNCI Coordinating Office at Georgia Tech
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Jameson Wetmore, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 3,500,000.00

Proposal: ECCS-1626153&lt;br/&gt;PI: Oliver Brand&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia
Tech Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Title: NNCI Coordinating Office at Georgia
Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) comprises 16 university sites
and their partners awarded individually by the National Science Foundation to
provide open access to nanoscale fabrication and characterization user
facilities and staff expertise across the nation. The NNCI Coordinating Office
at Georgia Tech is established to enhance the impact of NNCI as a national
infrastructure network by promoting its capabilities, facilitating user access
to its resources, sharing best practices, and improving overall efficiency
through coordination of activities of the individual sites. The Coordinating
Office will assist users from academe, industry, and government in finding NNCI
fabrication and characterization resources to meet their research needs through
an interactive NNCI web portal. It will use the expertise of site staff to
facilitate programs in education and outreach, social and ethical implications,
and computational modeling and simulation across the network, and help provide
linkages with other national and international nanotechnology resources. The
overall activities of the NNCI Coordinating Office will contribute to the
economic competiveness of the U.S. in training a globally competitive workforce
and in providing efficient access to resources for innovation and
commercialization of nanotechnology. They will also help to inform and educate
the general public on fundamentals and advances of nanoscience and engineering
and their social and ethical implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of
the NNCI Coordinating Office is to support the individual NNCI sites, site
users, and broader public interests using the combined assets of a nation-wide
network of university nanotechnology user facilities. A key component of the
Coordinating Office will be the development of mechanisms for communicating
availability of network assets to users of the facilities as well as for
fostering interactions among the sites. A primary mode for this communication
will be an interactive NNCI web portal, which will allow new and existing users
to efficiently locate capabilities and expertise within the network, and also
provide up-to-date nanotechnology resources to the K-20 communities and broader
public. To emphasize the importance of a network of sites, the Coordinating
Office will be guided by an Executive Committee with representation from all 16
sites and will organize a number of working groups and committees to address
topics of broad interest and solve common problems. A flagship event for the
NNCI network will be an annual NNCI Conference that will highlight the research
supported by the individual sites, as well as provide a venue for site staff to
share best practices and research trends with the broader nanotechnology
community. An External Advisory Board with members selected from the external
advisory boards of all sites will provide input on network management issues and
future directions. Education and outreach activities will be coordinated across
the network to share and disseminate best practices and resources for impactful
programs at the local, regional, and national levels. Social and ethical
implications programs, such as an annual retreat and conference forums, will
enable social scientists to interact with nanoscale scientists, engineers, and
students so that all groups can consider the potential impacts new discoveries
might have on society. Computational modeling and simulation needs of the user
community will be supported through an inventory of available resources and
close collaboration with the existing Network for Computational Nanotechnology
(NCN). Assessment of the strength of the sites and the network as a whole will
be determined through metrics developed in collaboration with the sites and will
be based on site usage, site productivity and technical impact, contributions to
the network, and education and outreach activity.