* 1626418
* MRI: Acquisition of Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer (TOF-SIMS) for high resolution 3-D materials analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,166,249.00

1626418&lt;br/&gt;Verduzco, Rafael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All matter is made up of
atoms, but determining the precise atomic structure of materials is a
fundamental challenge across virtually all fields of scientific research.
Knowledge of the atomic structure of materials provides clues to the history of
the Earth, the complex chemistry of the environment, the development of
technologies for energy storage, and the structure and function of biological
systems. This project will provide detailed imaging and compositional analysis
of a broad range of materials through the acquisition of a Time-of-Flight
Secondary Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). TOF-SIMS is a powerful
technique that can detect atoms across the entire periodic table and provide a
three dimensional image of materials' atomic composition and structure. The TOF-
SIMS instrument will serve a wide range of fields, ranging from the Earth and
environmental sciences to the biomedical fields and have a direct impact on the
technological innovation and competitiveness of local industry. The projects'
intellectual merit crosses fields as diverse as geology, materials for energy
storage and conversion, nanomaterials research, bioengineering research, organic
and hybrid organic/inorganic thin films, and Earth sciences. The broader impacts
include the creation of new educational programs and support of regional
research institutions and industry. At present, the Houston area does not have
TOF-SIMS capabilities. The instrument will be managed by Rice University's
Shared Equipment Authority, making the instrumentation available to both on-
campus and off-campus users. The instrument will serve as a venue for a number
of educational opportunities either directly by providing training opportunities
to students and researchers in the Houston area or indirectly by supporting the
educational efforts of related projects. Annual TOF-SIMS user meetings will be
organized by the PI and held at Rice University to exchange techniques and
results on different samples, bring in new participants, and educate interested
researchers. The PI will also establish a graduate-level course focused on TOF-
SIMS analysis of materials in materials science, and the course will include a
hands-on module for sample analysis and student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative compositional and structural
analysis from the nanoscale to the micron-scale is essential for advances in
virtually all fields of scientific research. This project will establish a Time-
of-Flight Secondary Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TOF-SIMS) at Rice University
for elemental, molecular, and isotopic imaging of materials relevant to earth
sciences, energy storage and conversion, environmental remediation, and
biosciences. Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) is a powerful technique that
can provide elemental or isotopic mapping at the sub-micron level for a wide
range of materials, and the use of a time-of-flight detector (TOF) enables full
mass-spectrum analysis, including the capability to separate species that differ
in mass by as little as 0.001 amu and for collecting a wide mass range from H to
U and beyond. The instrument can image materials with sub-50 nm lateral
resolution and perform depth profiling with sub-10 nm resolution, thereby
enabling three-dimensional materials analysis. Altogether, a modern TOF-SIMS
instrument provides the capabilities required to analyze surfaces, organic
films, biological materials, trace metals, and other materials both in-depth and
in three dimensions. The projects' intellectual merit crosses fields as diverse
as Earth sciences, materials for energy storage and conversion, nanomaterials
research, bioengineering research, and organic and hybrid organic/inorganic thin
films. In the Earth sciences, TOF-SIMS will be applied to geologically-relevant
materials to study pathways and kinetics by which elements are transported in
geological processes and trace element partitioning in micro- and nano-phases in
hydrothermal systems. In energy-related research, the three-dimensional
structure of photovoltaic blends and composite electrodes will be elucidated
through TOF-SIMS. TOF-SIMS will be used to quantify the growth and doping of
two-dimensional materials. TOF-SIMS will also be critical to the study of
nanoparticle transport and toxicity in biological systems, providing
simultaneous imaging of trace elements intracellularly, allowing parallel CN, P,
and Pb images. Finally, TOF-SIMS will provide nanoscale lateral and through-
depth compositional analysis of thin film coatings. The proposed TOF-SIMS
instrument will serve these and other research projects of interest to internal
and external researchers in the Gulf Coast Region. The projects' broader impacts
include fundamental advances in science and engineering research, support of
local industry, and the creation of new educational activities. The acquisition
represents the only TOF-SIMS instrument in the Gulf Coast region, and the
instrument will be made available to regional research institutions and industry
through Rice's Shared Equipment Authority. The TOF-SIMS at Rice will serve a
wide range of fields, ranging from the Earth and environmental sciences to the
biomedical fields and have a direct impact on the technological innovation and
competitiveness of local industry. Educational activities include annual TOF-
SIMS user meetings, a graduate-level course focused on TOF-SIMS analysis of
materials in materials science, and hands-on training for summer students and
researchers.