* 1626262
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster to Enable Transformative Research across Disciplines
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* David Binkley, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,120.00

Loyola University Maryland will acquire a computing cluster with central
processing and graphical processing units (CPU and GPU). The computing cluster
will be utilized for computationally expensive research projects spanning
multiple fields, including computer science, materials engineering, electrical
engineering, physics, chemistry, and economics. As a primarily undergraduate
institution, Loyola is also committed to training the next generation of
researchers via undergraduate research opportunities. Through the acquisition of
its first major computing cluster, Loyola will expand opportunities to introduce
undergraduate students to modern computationally-intensive tasks and
multidisciplinary research, preparing them for graduate school and computational
work within their chosen fields. Additionally, it will support projects within
the university's new interdisciplinary Data Science M.S. degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial eleven research projects will impact
areas as diverse as software development, medicine, and social policy. Example
impacts include developing techniques leading to drugs to fight SARS;
understanding protein-DNA interactions for biotechnology applications; providing
policymakers with a better understanding of how job competition and human
capital allocation influence the optimal design of unemployment insurance;
improving software quality by helping programmers identify and avoid the
introduction of dependence clusters; improving techniques for coordination in
pursuing a moving target, such as in military operations, autonomous automobile
police chases, or surveillance programs; new methods for the creation of fossil
fuel alternatives; providing secure communications for mobile devices in the
Internet of Things; and improving techniques for nondestructive evaluation of
electromagnetic materials, which is of critical importance in agriculture, bio-
electromagnetics, aerospace, and the design of integrated circuits. This high
performance computing cluster will significantly increase the shared computing
resources on campus, thereby expanding opportunities for faculty research,
faculty recruitment, and student research.