* 1626424
* MRI: Development of a hyper-sensed environmentally controlled wind tunnel
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Joel Thornton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2019
* USD 639,700.00

1626424 - Riffell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation Award
will support the development of a wind tunnel system instrumented with multiple
sensor types that allow feedback from and control of the environment within the
tunnel, thereby allowing detailed examination of physical, chemical, and
biological processes in a conventional laboratory environment. Located at the
University of Washington, this system will enable critical research advances in
environmental flow control and sensory neuroscience, as both fields share deep
connections involving the fusion of uncertain data for real-time control in a
rich sensory environment. The ability to characterize and control highly dynamic
processes that occur over short time are increasingly important in a number of
research efforts. The integration of multiple sensor information types
(chemical, flow, motion) for environmental control will enable advances in
sensory neuroscience - where neural systems rapidly process information to
affect motor decisions remains a fundamental open problem - and advances in flow
control and robotics. Work enabled by this instrument has significant research
and commercialization potential, resulting in novel technology and processes to
integrate multiple sensor streams into effective control algorithms; for
instance, the acquired knowledge and experience will impact robotics and
semiautonomous systems for search and rescue, agricultural inspection, and
environmental monitoring. This program will also have positive impact on the
STEM workforce by supporting additional course offerings and laboratory modules
in undergraduate and graduate engineering and biology courses, as well as at the
K-12 level by providing demonstrations to students that provide real-world
examples for creative opportunities in engineering and neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing need exists for a state of the art, multi-
sensing wind tunnel to study fluid dynamic transport phenomena while also
allowing for real-time closed loop control of the wind tunnel environment. Such
a system can provide novel insights into bio-inspired research, such as flight
control in flapping insect flight or the sensory basis of mosquito navigation to
human blood-hosts - while also providing advances in basic fluid dynamical
processes, including development of energy harvesting devices, like wind
turbines. Currently no commercially available solution is available that enables
multimodal sensing (chemical, flow, motion) for environmental control. The
unique capabilities of the hypersensed wind tunnel include: (1) coupled analysis
of mass spectrometric and PIV systems to illuminate the reaction timescales and
turbulent transport of pollutants; (2) new data techniques and laser development
for PIV to improve analysis capabilities of existing PIV systems; (3) creating
virtual environments based on neural and behavioral feedback from free-flying
insects; and (4) advancing closed-loop turbulence control for energy extraction
that will translate to technologies in drag reduction, lift increase, mixing
enhancement, and noise reduction with countless applications. The findings and
results about and from this facility will be disseminated to the research
community through conferences, journal publications and news agencies.