* 1626480
* MRI:   Acquisition of 3D Laser Scanner for Research Evaluating Structural and Agronomic Damage from Catastrophic Meteorological Events in "Tornado Alley"
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert DeOtte, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 101,585.00

Acquisition of a FARO X330 laser scanner by West Texas A&M University (WTAMU)
through this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award enables cross-
disciplinary researchers to rapidly and accurately collect and preserve
perishable damage data resulting from the action of severe wind storms where
traditional (contact) measurements cannot be accomplished due to safety concerns
or due to limitations on access, time, and personnel. Laser scanning rapidly
provides a permanent record of damage conditions for subsequent detailed
analysis, including wind-induced damage to structures and thunderstorm-induced
damage to agricultural crops. Such analysis of damaged structures enables
investigators to determine the intensity of tornado winds since direct
measurements of tornado wind speeds are difficult and dangerous to obtain. Wind
speeds in the Enhanced Fujita (EF) Scale (the official U.S. measure of tornado
intensity) are currently based on only estimates and are in need of validation
or revision so that engineers can design structures that provide improved
safety, resilience, and economy. Acquisition of the laser scanner postures
faculty and students in the young, undergraduate engineering program for
increased roles in high-level (inter) national research efforts, aiding the goal
of WTAMU (an Eligible Institution under Title III Hispanic Serving Institution)
in broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in education and
research. Collaboration with other national and international hazards
researchers is facilitated by WTAMUs sharing of damage information through the
new NSF-sponsored NHERI DesignSafe-ci.org data repository. Interaction between
scientists at USDA-ARS Conservation and Production Research Laboratory with
undergraduate and graduate students and faculty in engineering and agricultural
sciences will additionally be enhanced with this new opportunity.

The laser scanner will be used to acquire comprehensive 3D models of tornado-
damaged structures. Measurements of structural member sizes and deformations
will be used along with finite-element modeling software to determine the
resistance of the structure and the associated wind pressure and wind speed
required to produce the observed damages. These results will provide necessary
validation or revisions for wind speeds in the EF Scale. The laser scanner will
allow investigators to similarly estimate the resistance of hurricane-damaged
structures thereby assisting investigators in expanding the EF Scale for use in
hurricanes by accounting for the increased resistance of structures along the
hurricane coast. Agricultural researchers will use the laser scanner to measure
plant growth, density, and canopy cover of multiple High Plains crops with such
various treatments as row spacing, water regimen, variety, and nutrient
application; the nonintrusive remote measurements allow for simplified and more
robust experimental designs. Using research plots at the USDA-ARS Conservation
and Production Research Laboratory (CPRL) at Bushland, TX, crop maturation and
growth efficiency measured with the scanner can be correlated with mass gain as
indicated by the large weighing lysimeters at CPRL It is often not feasible to
make actual field measurements of crop damage immediately following severe
weather; however noninvasive remote scanning may inform investigators of actual
storm damage conditions prior to plant deterioration, possibly leading to more
resilient genotypes. This approach is consistent with the general trend of
developing precision technology to more efficiently grow crops while at the same
time reducing adverse impacts on the environment.