* 1626501
* MRI:   Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) for a Diverse Range of Scientific Applications in Greater Saint Louis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Daniel Warren, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 74,308.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities Programs, Professor Paul Bracher from
Saint Louis University and colleagues Daniel Warren and Elizabeth Hasenmueller
have acquired an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-
OES). This instrument is a necessary analytical tool used to identify and
quantify metals in solutions. Consequently, it has broad use in applications
such as analysis of biological solutions, water supplies and watersheds, food
production and chemical reactions. The instrument is also used to train
undergraduate and graduate students in this basic tool. It enables hands-on
citizen-science activities such as analysis of local water supplies and is made
available to other researchers beyond the St. Louis University community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially by researchers at St. Louis university in areas such
as: (a) prospective roles of inorganic cations in the origin of life, (b) the
geochemistry of surface waters, shallow groundwaters, and soils, (c) ion-
exchange in mineralized tissue with physiological pH regulation, (d) earth
science to understand water transformations in the critical zone at the
interface between water, air, soil and rock, (e) transport of sodium
contamination from road salt, (f) wastewater contamination from sewer overflows
using tracers, and (g) how mineralized tissues buffer perturbations to acid-base
homeostasis in reptiles, amphibians and mammals.