* 1626201
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Chemical Mapping of Evolving Surfaces:  A Regional Instrument for Research and Teaching
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ian Harrison, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 745,636.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program and the
Division of Materials Research (DMR), the University of Virginia (UVa) will
acquire an X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) with integrated sample
preparation chambers. The instrument will be used to probe and understand
changes in material surfaces during chemical reactions. XPS quantitatively
determines the elemental/chemical composition, empirical formula, and electronic
state of elements within materials. The data from this analytical technique will
be used to explore evolving chemistry during surface reactions relevant for
catalysis, weathering, and advanced material systems. This knowledge will impact
our understanding of catalysis, astrochemistry, geochemistry, and materials
stability for use in extremely corrosive or high temperature reactive
environments. These scientific endeavors will impact such diverse topics as
synthesis of fuels and chemicals, our understanding of the solar system,
management of fracking, and development of improved materials for corrosion and
oxidation resistance. The award will also enhance the education and training of
students. A multi-level education plan will introduce the fundamentals of XPS
and its applications in courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels at
the University of Virginia. A web-based lecture series on XPS will be developed
which can be integrated into courses at other colleges and universities.
Outreach activities will involve middle school, high school, and community
college students in hands-on XPS activities. The instrument will also be used
throughout the Charlottesville region for research and teaching collaborations
with surrounding industries, colleges and universities through the UVa "XPS-
Hub".

The instrument will enhance research across disciplines, especially in areas
such as (a) understanding atomic scale mechanisms during oxide formation; (b)
tailoring catalyst surfaces to promote cascade reactions for synthesis of
chemicals; (c) understanding hydrocarbon bond-breaking for design of high
throughput alloy catalysts; (d) investigating aqueous alterations in minerals
representative of asteroids, meteorites, and lunar soils; (e) studying the
chemical formation of organic molecular species on mineral substrates of
importance for understanding the origin of life in the solar system; (f)
clarification of carbonation reactions to diminish risks associated with
hydraulic fracturing; (g) investigating preferential oxidation or volatilization
of multi-component material systems for improved stability at high temperatures;
(h) controlling surface microstructural and chemical heterogeneity to improve
aqueous corrosion resistance; and (i) developing laser-driven surface
modification methods for advanced manufacturing of high-performance metal
alloys.