* 1626546
* Investigation into Initial Population Movement into the New World
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Julie Esdale, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2022
* USD 397,986.00

The goal of this research is to study the impact of environmental change on
small-scale society in the far north during the Ice Age. Archaeology is
particularly well positioned to provide relevant insight because it can trace
past human behavioral responses to environmental change over long periods of
time, including centuries and millennia. Within this broader context, the
project will answer important research questions regarding the timing and
process of initial dispersal of modern humans to the Bering Land Bridge and the
peopling of the Americas. To date, not much is known regarding the earliest
archaeology in this critical region. This research will shed light on how
northern hunter-gatherers settled and adapted to an ever-changing northern
ecosystem. The project will also enhance the education of both graduate and
undergraduate students and provide important field and lab research
opportunities for them as well. Additionally it will give a young female
scientist, member of an underrepresented group in American Paleoindian studies,
the opportunity to manage a large research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kelly
Graf of Texas A&amp;M University together with colleagues in the US, Canada,
Great Britain and France will examine when and how humans first arrived in North
American Beringia, how they settled the region, and how they responded to
changing climate from the Ice Age to the recent. Research will be conducted at
the multicomponent archaeological site of McDonald Creek, located in the flats
of the Tanana river valley in central Alaska, an area not well understood and
geographically positioned to have provided a habitable place throughout the late
glacial period. Deposits at McDonald Creek are well preserved so the site's rich
assemblages will yield a plethora of opportunities for specialized analyses. A
combination of specialized molecular and micro-level techniques will be applied
to the study of sediment, lithic artifacts, osseous artifacts, fauna and flora.
Graf will lead the team of archaeologists, dating specialists, paleoecologists,
and geneticists to illuminate the region's changing cultural, ecological and
land use history from initial colonization through more recent occupation. This
interdisciplinary team will generate new comparative methods for the study of
hunter-gatherers in northern contexts, first Americans studies, and Alaskan
prehistory.