* 1626983
* Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2019
* USD 453,782.00

An Academies study will set forth a vision for the emerging discipline of data
science at the undergraduate level. It will emphasize core, underlying
principles, intellectual content, and pedagogical issues specific to data
science, including core concepts that distinguish it from neighboring
disciplines. It will not consider the practicalities of creating materials,
courses, or programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will develop this vision
considering applications of, and careers in, data science. The focus will be at
the undergraduate level, while addressing related issues at the middle school,
high school and community college levels, as appropriate, and drawing upon
experiences in creating Master's-level programs. It will consider opportunities
created by the emergence of this new STEM field to engage underrepresented
student populations and consider ways to reduce the "leakage" seen in existing
STEM pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information gathering will center around two
workshops, the first likely focused on principles and intellectual content, and
the second likely focused on pedagogy and implications for middle and high
schools and community colleges. To get material on the record quickly and spark
community feedback, a rapporteur-authored workshop summary report will be issued
following deliberations setting forth a vision for undergraduate education in
data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this study is that
it will articulate a vision for data science at the undergraduate level by
exploring the needs in this area across multiple sectors, and drawing upon
experiences to date on fashioning undergraduate programs. The study will draw on
the expertise and experience of the study committee, briefings and discussion at
workshops convened by the committee, and input received from the relevant
communities in response to the study's interim report. The study process is
expected to yield a consensus view of intellectual content and pedagogical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project and its reports will have broader
impact by providing and sharing valuable information for those designing and
implementing undergraduate data science programs at colleges and universities,
and by fostering the development of such programs and building data science
expertise in the workforce.