* 1626886
* Labor Market Insecurity and Perceived Employability
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Lindsey King, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2017
* USD 93,281.00

SES-1626886&lt;br/&gt;Arne Kalleberg&lt;br/&gt;Lindsey King&lt;br/&gt;University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As employment becomes more
precarious and uncertain, workers are consistently advised to keep themselves
sought-after in the labor market. Hence, perceived employability, or workers'
beliefs in their ability to find an acceptable job, emerges as a fundamental
issue for contemporary labor market research. Employed workers experience less
stress when they are confident they can find a new, comparable job if they lose
their present one. Unemployed workers who feel they are employable are more
motivated to keep searching for jobs. While perceived employability is
influenced by individuals' attributes, societal contexts also affect it. This
project examines how country differences in labor market institutions and public
policies are related to employed and unemployed workers' perceptions of their
employability. The investigators hypothesize that perceived employability is
bolstered by policies that promote labor market flexibility or help workers gain
marketable skills, net of economic conditions. Understanding how these
institutions and policies affect individuals' perceptions helps to comprehend
better how social contexts matter for people's psychological well-being and
career outcomes. This knowledge is essential for designing effective social and
economic policies intended to help individuals manage the risks associated with
the increasing uncertainty characterizing labor markets; it is also crucial for
informing individuals' decisions about educational and training alternatives
that are likely to help them to secure meaningful and rewarding jobs. Thus, the
researchers will share the results of the project with policy-makers as well as
both employed and unemployed individuals, in addition to scholars studying labor
markets, work, and inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do workers perceive
their ability to find work, and how do labor market policies shape this
evaluation? Existing research suggests that both economic and regulatory
conditions shape workers' evaluations of their employment prospects. Workers in
market-oriented economies tend to be more confident in their employability than
those in rigid labor markets, where labor market transitions from job to job or
unemployment to employment are more difficult. This pilot study examines the
relationship between labor market policies that facilitate transitions into new
jobs and workers' perceptions of their employability. The research has two main
objectives. First, the investigators use international survey data from Europe,
East Asia, North America, and Oceania to examine the links between policy and
perceived employability among both employed and unemployed workers. They
hypothesize that perceived employability will be greater when unemployment is
low, labor markets are flexible, and when countries provide support that helps
workers become re-employed. Second, the researchers use longitudinal panel data
from the United Kingdom to assess how employability perceptions impact the
likelihood of future employment among unemployed workers.