* 1626755
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Federal State-Making and Democratic Processes in Nepal
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 7,342.00

The number of democracies in the world continues to increase. Many of them are
organized as federal republics, like the U.S., with a division of powers between
a federal government and the governments of the individual constituent units,
often called states. However, new democracies have found that instituting these
arrangements -- defining the powers and delineating the units -- can lead to
violent contestation even though federalism is promoted as a broad-based
solution to managing ethnic-territorial civil conflicts, expediting national
economic development, and enhancing democracy. This raises questions about the
human dimensions of instituting federalism. How do citizens experience federal
change? How do citizens of different ethnicities and other affiliations come to
feel included or excluded at the local level? How do their feelings of local
attachment affect their attachment to the nation and the quality of the
democracy that results? These are important questions for understanding what
makes democracy work or not work in the world today. To investigate these
questions, Yale University anthropology graduate student, Amy Johnson, under the
supervision of Dr. Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, will undertake research in
Nepal. Nepal is currently transitioning to federal governance following the
conclusion of a ten-year civil conflict (1996-2006), making it an ideal location
for the research. By studying how a system of federal provinces is demarcated
and institutionalized as it is taking place, the research addresses fundamental
questions about the relationship between structures of governance, political
participation, and sentiments of national belonging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand how diverse regional and socio-economic groups engage with the
process of producing a federal system, Johnson will collect data at three
organizational levels: a multi-ethnic local community in a region that has seen
recent violence in response to the implementation of federalism; a district that
bridges the local and the national administrative relationships; and the
capital, where lawmakers and state-restructuring experts are designing Nepal's
federal provinces and accompanying administrative and legal policies. In each
locale, she will employ a mix of social science methods, including: ethnographic
participant observation, life history interviews with multiple stakeholders, and
archival research. Findings from this research will offer insight into how
federal arrangements are achieved within unique cultural contexts, expanding
understanding of federalism beyond its theorization as a technical-financial
system and toward greater knowledge of its human dimensions, wherever federalism
is found.