* 1626148
* IUSE:EHR:Collaborative Research:The Role of Non-Cognitive and Affective (NCA) Factors in Engineering and Computing Student Academic Performance
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 440,965.00

Engineering and computing education remains a critical ingredient for US
competitiveness, workforce development, and technological supremacy now and into
the future. Understanding the ways in which students succeed and fail in STEM
majors, and developing powerful ways to support them, will pay dividends for our
students, our institutions, and our nation. This project is completing the first
national, comprehensive study of the role of non-cognitive and affective (NCA)
factors, including personality, grit, identity, and many others, in student
academic performance in undergraduate engineering curricula. Understanding the
role of NCA factors allows the project to continue developing appropriate on-
campus resources for students in need of academic or personal support. This
project is demonstrating how NCA factors can indicate the kinds of support
resources with highest potential to help students in need, thus enabling their
continued academic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a mixed-
methods design to explore the role of NCA factors in undergraduate engineering
student academic success. Across the three partner institutions, which present
diverse student bodies in multiple settings, survey, interview, and intervention
data is being collected and correlated to academic performance as measured by
course grades using a variety of statistical techniques including regression and
topological data analysis. The project has important intellectual merit because
it is the first project to systematically examine student academic performance
in the face of specific obstacles as mediated by their NCA profile and cognitive
makeup. It demonstrates broader impact by operationalizing the
"same"intervention in multiple settings, and recognizing the role of local
context in the implementation and outcomes. The role of both traditionally-
defined and "latent" diversity in answering the research questions holds
important implications for the research and practitioner communities alike.