* 1626631
* Scaling an Effective Program for Recruiting and Retaining Women in Undergraduate Computing: NCWIT ES-UP at Scale
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Lecia Barker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 999,995.00

The "Scaling an Effective Program for Recruiting and Retaining Women in
Undergraduate Computing" is a pilot study conducted by the National Center for
Women &amp; Information Technology (NCWIT) that will gather evidence to support
a subsequent full-scale implementation of the Extension services for
Undergraduate Programs (ES-UP) program. The ES-UP program has been shown to be
successful in addressing gender imbalance in undergraduate computing. Rather
than preparing women to function in an educational system designed for men, ES-
UP advances sustained change to attract and retain men and women equally in
computing majors. Combined, the departments served by ES-UP over the past eight
years have sustained a 6% climb in graduations of women, while national figures
remain flat.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;"Learning Circles" consisting of one former
ES-UP client (Guide) and four committed departmental teams will be piloted to
determine their effectiveness in scaling the ES-UP to a national level. Learning
Circle members will meet regularly via online events throughout the year,
learning, sharing, and developing approaches, discussing lessons learned as they
implement their solutions, and building a sense of community. The project team
will collect data and conduct analysis to understand what works for Learning
Circles and how to extend the model more broadly. The team will publish and
present the results of the analyses. The result of this work will be a model
that will be used to accelerate large-scale reform in the national computing
community, leveraging the knowledge and experience of former ES-UP clients in a
"train-the-trainer" approach that integrates the critical components of the
model, which includes personalized advice, community, and peer knowledge
sharing, into an existing infrastructure of expert staff and consultants, tools,
and evidence-based resources.