* 1626100
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid/Supercritical Fluid Chromatoghraphy Mass Spectrometer for Energy and Environmental Research
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Melissa Galloway, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2019
* USD 399,999.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will fund the
acquisition of a liquid chromatography/supercritical fluid/mass spectrometer
(LC/SFC/MS) for both environmental and energy research at Lafayette College and
proximate universities. The LC/SFC/MS will enable the quantification and
identification of components in these systems. The enhanced understanding of
each system would allow for the development of strategies to mediate negative
implications and optimize for beneficial outcomes related to energy and
environmental applications. Additionally, the use of the LC/SFC/MS by
neighboring institutions will further these goals and provide outreach
opportunities for training in both the use of the instrument as well as green
chemistry and engineering. The instrumentation will be used by multiple groups
for research and provide educational experiences for undergraduate student
researchers. When appropriate this instrumentation will also serve as an
advanced teaching tool in multiple classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LC/SFC/MS
is a combined system that will transform the research capabilities at Lafayette
College. The instrument is capable of high definition and accurate analyses with
sufficient versatility for use in many applications. The unique combination of
LC and SFC will make both reverse- and normal-phase separations accessible to
our faculty and student researchers for a wide range of target analytes. MS
coupled to a chromatography system is a robust technique possessing the ability
to perform unknown molecule identification and compound isolation from complex
matrices while providing ample sensitivity for quantification and identification
of components with a wide spectrum of volatilities that range from polar to
nonpolar. This instrumentation will be used to advance high impact faculty-led
research relevant to energy and environmental applications with specific
projects as follows: 1) CO2 mediated reactions for selective and sustainable
biodiesel production, 2) Selective extraction and recycling of valuable co-
products from microalgae using green solvents, 3) Product identification and
mechanism elucidation of atmospheric aerosol growth pathways, and 4)
Understanding of the production and fate of thiols in freshwater systems.