* 1626124
* MRI:  Acquisition of an EEG-NIRs Bimodal Neural Signal Recording System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Xiaomu Song, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2017
* USD 91,500.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the
acquisition of a neural recording system that integrates electroencephalography
(EEG) and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRs) together to provide bimodal data
collection and analysis. The acquisition of this system enables faculty
researchers across Biomedical &amp; Electrical Engineering, Computer Science,
and Neuropsychology fields to work together and develop multidisciplinary
research and educational activities. Multiple research projects are proposed to
investigate fundamental challenges in EEG-NIRs bimodal signal acquisition and
its widespread applications in healthcare, medical instrument, and brain
computer interface. Graduate and undergraduate students, including minorities,
will participate in the proposed research projects. Widener University is
located in Chester, Pennsylvania, which has a large population from
underrepresented groups and undergoing significant economic depression in the
last decades. The researchers will work with two local educational programs to
involve a group of middle/high school students over 95% of whom are from
underrepresented groups, inspiring them to pursue college education in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this grant is to acquire a BrainVision EEG-NIRs bimodal neural recording
system that integrates a 32-channel BrainVision active channel amplifier EEG and
a 32-channel NIRScout NIRs together. EEG is widely used to measure neural
activity with a high temporal resolution but poor spatial specificity. NIRs is a
noninvasive optical imaging technique that measures concentration changes of
deoxygenated hemoglobin and oxygenated hemoglobin during brain activity in
superficial layers of the human cortex. NIRs can measure metabolic changes
associated with the neural activity with a higher spatial resolution than EEG,
and this has prompted the effort to combine NIRs and EEG together to explore
complementary information to each other. The bimodal system will be use for the
development of a bimodal brain computer interface, computer-aided diagnosis and
treatment of symptom recurrence after Chiari malformation surgery, and early
diagnosis of sports-related concussion. The NIRs device will also be used to
quantitatively evaluate a novel cooling device for targeted brain hypothermia,
and to develop novel techniques to measure the flow distribution of a new
hemodialysis machine. The system and associated research will advance our
understanding of potential benefits from the combination of EEG and NIRs on
different application fields. The study of data characteristics under the
individual and combined modalities will generate new findings of data
complexity, feature stationarity, and inter-modality interference. Novel data
processing methods will be developed to perform artifacts removal, information
fusion, adaptive learning and classification, and functional network mapping and
dynamic modeling. The research projects will generate quantitative results to
justify the expected improvement, and provide an extensible platform for future
development of multimodal neuroimaging systems.