* 1626525
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Multimaterial 3-D Bioplotter for Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Derrick Dean, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 271,535.00

Cutting-edge research at Alabama State University (ASU) is focused on developing
materials and structures that can aid in the regeneration of bone tissue, liver
replacements, and dental tissue. These materials are known as scaffolds. The
proposed 3-D bioprinter will enable researchers to build these scaffolds in a
very precise manner. The 3-D printer will be used to support research and
educate students in K-12, undergraduate and graduate school, including students
in underrepresented groups. It will benefit scientists and students at ASU in
Biomedical Engineering, Biology and Chemistry as well as other scientists across
the state. Faculty members, post-doctoral researchers and graduate students will
utilize the printer in their research. The printer will also be used by
approximately 25 undergraduate students involved in current projects at ASU
(e.g, the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates site (REU) and the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)), as well as the ASU Science
and Technology Honors Program, and in Senior Design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes the acquisition of a
multimaterial bioplotter to create a multiuser tissue scaffold fabrication
facility affiliated with the Alabama State University, ASU, College of Science,
Math and Technology and the Center for NanoBiotechnology. The facility will
support a number of multidisciplinary research and education activities
involving investigators from Biomedical Engineering, Biology, Chemistry and
Physics. Cutting-edge research at ASU is focused on nano and microstructured,
compositionally-graded, multiphase polymeric scaffolds for bone tissue, 3-D
porous scaffolds for liver replacement, and dental tissue applications. Progress
in the understanding of fundamental aspects of the, processing, structure and
function of these materials is contingent upon the ability to precisely
fabricate 3-dimensional scaffolds that more closely mimic the extracellular
matrix. This state-of-the-art bioplotter will be integral to research support
and also to the education of students in K-12, undergraduate school, and
graduate school, including students in underrepresented groups. The requested
instrument will support a number of funded NSF projects, and is necessary to
continue at ASU the work in the fundamental understanding of the fabrication,
structure and function issues for a variety of 3-dimensional biomaterials. At
least 3 graduate and undergraduate courses in Biomedical Engineering and Biology
will use the instrument. Additionally, approximately 20 faculty, post-docs and
graduate students will utilize the instrument. Approximately 25 undergraduate
students will utilize this instrument through funded research projects, the NSF
Research Experiences for Undergraduates site, Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation, LSAMP, ASU Science and Technology Honors Program, and in Senior
Design. The acquisition of this instrument will enhance demonstrations to be
offered in K-12 outreach programs, including ASU STEM Academy.