* 1626251
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Hybrid Computing Cluster to Advance Cyber-Enabled Science and Education at Penn State
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Eric Ford, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 920,688.00

Computers are now becoming the driving forces for ground-breaking discoveries
and are transforming the science and education in this new data-driven era. The
Cyber-Laboratory for Astronomy, Materials and Physics (CyberLAMP) at Penn State
will put together a cutting-edge supercomputer cluster that includes both
traditional central processing units (CPUs) and the latest hardware
accelerators, such as graphics processing units (GPUs), to advance
interdisciplinary research and education in cyberscience. Astronomers and
physicists will use this high-performance hybrid computer to analyze data from
revolutionary surveys and experiments and to perform state-of-the-art
simulations to unravel of the origin of our Universe. Material scientists will
run realistic, atomistic-scale, simulations to guide the design and development
of next-generation complex materials. Computer scientists will analyze these
science applications to inform the design of future computer architectures.
These advances in both data analysis and simulations will enable the CyberLAMP
members to shed new light on topics prioritized by national strategic plans,
such as National Research Council's 2010 Decadal Survey for astronomy and
astrophysics to search for habitable planets and to understand the fundamental
physics of the cosmos and the White House's Materials Genome Initiative to
expedite development of new materials. Furthermore, the CyberLAMP team will
employ this cluster to enhance a wide range of outreach programs including:
computational education to numerous students at The Pennsylvania State
University, including its Commonwealth campuses; summer workshops for
researchers and high-school teachers; and partnerships with industry to advance
materials research and the co-design of future hardware-software systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By expediting exploratory data analysis and simulations
and catalyzing cross-disciplinary collaboration in developing and prototyping
algorithms, the new hybrid cluster will enable the CyberLAMP team to deliver
transformative breakthroughs in a number of key research areas. This includes
state-of-the-art astrostatistics and astroinformatics for data analysis for
world-leading surveys in cosmology and exoplanets, as well as sophisticated
simulations to directly address the nature of dark matter and dark energy, and
the formation of planetary systems; an order-of-magnitude increase of speed for
reconstruction algorithms for the most ambitious astrophysical experiments
probing fundamental physics, which will enlarge the discovery space for cosmic
sources of neutrinos, gravity waves, and multi-messenger emitters, as well as
heighten sensitivity to the neutrino mass hierarchy; dramatic advances in
nanosecond-scale fully reactive molecular dynamics simulations for the
development of next-generation complex materials; and novel insights for
designing the next-generation of hardware accelerators in hybrid systems, highly
parallel algorithms and software interfaces which could revolutionize the way
hardware accelerators are used by data-intensive applications.