* 1626432
* MRI: Acquisition of SABER: Shared Analytics and Big-data Enterprise Resource
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,536.00

Computation continuous to grow across all scientific disciplines and research
education. Along with computationally-driven research, vast amounts of data are
originating from various sources such as particle colliders (e.g. Large Hadron
Collider), environmental sensors, social media and transportation systems, etc.
To handle this "Data Tsunami", Big-Data analysis is becoming pervasive across
both academia and industry. To harness the power of these vast datasets and
expedite scientific discovery through computation and analysis, institutions
need adequate resources to respond to emerging opportunities. This public
Minority-Serving Institution in the heart of the Chicago area, is the first to
use an open access cluster in the region. Thus SABER should have a significant
positive impact on research training for underrepresented groups. The
institution?s unique approach to utilizing existing technologies should set the
converging path for Big Data and HPC clusters nationally. SABER will greatly
encourage Big Data research across various scientific disciplines such as
engineering, natural sciences, urban planning, economics, manufacturing, and
others at institutions across Chicago region. Advances made in algorithm
development on parallel architectures and data mining techniques resulting from
this acquisition should initiate transformative advances for all other types of
computational research at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
acquiring a hybrid HPC (High Performance Computing) and Big-Data cluster, aims
to support more than 25 research projects from 9 colleges at UIC and IIT
(Illinois Institute of Technology) in a broad range of computational disciplines
such as fluid dynamics, physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics,
bioengineering, visualization, earth and environmental sciences, and material
sciences. This heterogeneous cluster, SABER (Shared Analytics and Big-data
Enterprise Resource) named SABER, has diskless nodes allowing on-demand research
cloud provisioning services, fat local storage nodes for MapReduce/Big-Data
analysis, petascale high capacity fast-scratch storage and large memory nodes
for High Throughput Computing, all connected over 56Gbps FDR Infiniband. SABER
complements UIC's existing private condo (for investors only) cluster, EXTREME,
by bridging the gap between available infrastructure and desired capabilities,
such as Big Data analysis, dual operating systems capability and a fee-for-
service model. SABER will be UIC's and IIT's first open access cluster (this
instrument does not currently exist at either institution), which will also
connect to Internet2 and Pacific Research Platform (PRP) over 100Gbps, thus
facilitating multi-site and multi-investigator research involving ultra-large
datasets. The primary use of SABER will not be for research with disease-related
goals. Traditionally silo clusters have been created for HPC and Big Data type
workloads. The SABER cluster will employ novel technical advances made in the
fast scratch Lustre environment by Intel to handle both HPC and Big Data
workloads on the same hardware, thus leading to greater economies of scale.
SABER connects to UIC's Electronic Visualization Laboratory over a high-speed
100Gbps channel to enable live visualization of real time computed data at
remote locations. SABER?s shared storage architecture allows researchers and
students to compute, analyze and visualize massive datasets without costly data
transfers. In addition, researchers will be able to cloud provision Windows and
Linux mini-clusters at run times that break the traditional environmental
constraints of HPC Linux, to allow greater adoption.