* 1626164
* MRI: Acquisition of an In-Situ/Operando Raman Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* S Sundaram, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 370,000.00

Raman spectroscopy is a critical tool used to study bonding between atoms, which
allows direct interrogation of both ordered and disordered systems. Such studies
often provide new understanding of the atomic-scale origins of the function and
properties of materials for next-generation applications. The proposed research,
largely within a materials science department, will focus on ceramics and
glasses used in energy storage and renewable energy, transportation, energy
conversion, health care and defense. Unique to the proposed research is the
ability to perform studies at the highest temperatures currently attainable -
and with positional resolution using 3-D mapping. By direct examination of
materials in-situ or under operating conditions, the research teams aim to
uncover new atomic scale processes that can in turn be used to make
transformational progress in materials discovery and design. In addition to the
research applications, the instrument will be used in graduate and undergraduate
laboratory courses, providing a range of baccalaureate and graduate students
with training and experience in state-of-the-art materials characterization.
With integration into the High Temperature Materials Testing Laboratory (HTMT)
and the new Advanced Manufacturing Laboratory (AML) at Alfred University, the
Raman spectrometer will be professionally marketed for use by industry and is
expected to draw additional corporate users. Alfred University's strong history
of industrially-funded research includes collaborations with 50 companies, and
these links are expected to draw a continuous stream of corporate Raman users,
with new users attracted to campus for Raman studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman
spectroscopy is a critical tool for uncovering the structural origins of
materials properties and processing dynamics, especially when performed under
conditions of controlled temperature or gaseous environment (in-situ) or under
operating conditions (operando). In the atmosphere of a materials science
department, high temperature Raman spectroscopy can be enabling in building
comprehensive models of cation or anion disorder, defects in 2-D oxide
nanosheets and related nanomaterials, glass devitrification, materials
degradation mechanisms, residual stress, and similar problems. The Raman
microprobe will be equipped with 3-D mapping and temperature-controlled chambers
to enable discovery of new mechanisms that may lead to transformational progress
in the fields of energy, environment and health care.