* 1626765
* IntroCS POGIL: Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning in Introductory Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Clifton Kussmaul, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,984,936.00

The significance of the proposed project is that it will establish the value of
Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) as an approach to teaching
computer science. The POGIL approach has been shown in other STEM disciplines to
increase student learning and retention, particularly for students from
underrepresented populations, including females and minorities. There has not
yet been a concerted effort to teach computer science using the POGIL approach.
The creation of a computer science POGIL community, which is a fundamental
aspect of this proposal, is a necessary step to providing an evaluation of the
effectiveness of POGIL in computer science education. Broader and more effective
use of strategies such as POGIL will improve the quality, quantity, and
diversity of students who complete STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this project is to study factors that most influence faculty to adopt
POGIL in introductory computer science courses and how the degree of POGIL
implementation impacts student learning and engagement. A secondary goal is to
make it significantly easier for computer science faculty to adopt POGIL, by
disseminating high quality instructional resources and enhancing current
professional development practices. The project theory of action is that
enhanced instructor support will improve faculty adoption of and persistence
with POGIL, which in turn will improve student outcomes. To assess the impact of
these and other factors, the project will collect and analyze multi-
institutional data including surveys, interviews, and student learning outcomes.