* 1626099
* MRI: Acquisition of A Low-Temperature Scanning Tunneling Microscope For Advanced Surface Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 463,400.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Five professors at Carnegie Mellon University
will acquire a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (LT-STM), through
the NSF MRI program. This instrument permits the mapping of atomic arrangements
on surfaces, at low temperatures and under high magnetic fields. Studies will
focus on "two-dimensional (2D) materials", that is, materials that are only one
layer of atoms thick. In such materials, electrons are confined to move within
the single atomic layer, and they thereby acquire certain novel properties that
do not occur for regular, three-dimensional materials. Additionally, in the
proposed work, different types of 2D layers will be stacked on top of another.
Such combinations of 2D materials possess properties that, again, are unlike any
found in regular, three-dimensional materials. For example, electrons are found
to move much faster in 2D materials than in 3D materials, permitting the
fabrication of novel types of electronic devices (useful for computers that are
faster and require less power). Additionally, the magnetic properties of
electrons in 2D are unlike anything that occurs in 3D, which also has potential
for new types of computing devices. The LT-STM will have impact not only for the
researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, but also more broadly for the
"Pittsburgh Quantum Institute", which includes about 50 faculty from University
of Pittsburgh, CMU, and Dusquesne University. The proposed LT-STM will serve as
a powerful characterization tool for research projects undertaken by members of
this Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Five
investigators from Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) propose to acquire a low-
temperature scanning tunneling microscope (LT-STM), including magnetic field
capability. Two-dimensional (2D) materials and heterostructures will be studied.
The 2D materials, which are only one or a few atomic layers thick, are formed by
"exfoliation" from bulk crystals, that is, peeling off one or a few atomic
layers from a bulk crystal and depositing those layer(s) on a suitable inert
substrate. Such 2D layers exhibit a host of exotic properties including massless
fermions, topologically protected states, superconductivity, and ferromagnetic
phases, all of which will be probed in the LT-STM. Additionally vertical
heterostructures will be formed by transferring one atomic layer atop the other;
a state-of-the-art facility for performing such fabrication exists at CMU.
Properties of the materials can be controlled in such heterostructures, since
the presence of one layer in proximity to another yields collective behavior
that differs from that of the individual layers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All of
the investigators are active in directing graduate and undergraduate research,
and the proposed LT-STM instrument will significantly enhance those activities.
Additionally, the facility will impact theoretical studies presently performed
at CMU related to the experimental work of the investigators. The instrument is
also expected to have significant impact on the "Center for 2D Materials and
Devices for Energy-Efficient Computing" at CMU, which four of the PIs are
members of. An operating plan for the LT-STM has been formulated that will
permit external users to have access to it. Four of the investigators are
members of the "Pittsburgh Quantum Institute", which includes about 50 faculty
from University of Pittsburgh, CMU, and Dusquesne University. The proposed LT-
STM will serve as a powerful characterization tool for research projects
undertaken by members of this Institute.