* 1626332
* MRI:   Acquisition of an AC Susceptibility Measurement System for Interdisciplinary Materials Research and STEM Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Pekarek, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 118,137.00

The acquisition of an AC susceptibility measurement system at the University of
North Florida (UNF) is expected to benefit the entire region, through research
and educational collaborations with primarily undergraduate institutions,
research universities, community colleges, and local high schools. This
acquisition enhances existing infrastructure, including four major research
instruments acquired through NSF support, and enables the team to explore new
research ventures. The team's research projects span many STEM disciplines,
including chemistry (inorganic/materials chemistry and chemical education),
condensed matter physics, and the general area of materials science and
engineering. The pedagogical impact of this instrument is also extensive because
of its incorporation in a) both the chemistry and physics undergraduate
curricula (i.e. in advanced labs and in various undergraduate research
projects), b) outreach activities both for the general public and for high
school students, and c) teachers' education events on the UNF campus. This NSF-
supported acquisition of an AC susceptibility measurement system constitutes
proof of the leading role of UNF as a research and education hub in Northeast
Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of AC susceptibility is critical in
the field of molecular magnetism, as it probes single-molecule and single-chain
magnetism, spin-glass behavior, as well as provides insight in the relaxation
mechanism of molecular magnetic systems. At UNF, the presence of a SQUID
magnetometer has allowed DC magnetic susceptibility measurements, and with the
addition of the AC capabilities a complete characterization suite will become
readily available. For solid-state materials AC measurements provide information
about spin-glass transitions, which is important information for
understanding/tweaking the materials' properties. Pressure-induced changes in
the materials' properties are probed with magnetometry under pressure, with
applications in macroscopic post-synthetic properties manipulation in materials.
As such, the team and its collaborators use AC susceptibility in
interdisciplinary investigations of a) molecular magnets (single-molecule,
single-chain, and organic radical-based magnets), b) polynuclear transition
metal and lanthanide/actinide clusters, c) magnetic and correlated materials, d)
high temperature superconductors, and e) environmentally friendly materials for
water remediation. Enhancement of these interdisciplinary efforts is expected
from the AC capabilities of the SQUID, as well as from the acquisition of
different pressure cells for magnetometry at pressures up to 20 GPa.
Incorporation of these techniques in the chemistry and physics curricula and
through undergraduate research is expected to enrich the experiential learning
opportunities offered to UNF undergraduates and expose them to modern materials
research. This facility is projected to benefit a number of research groups in
the field of molecular magnetism, through research and educational
collaborations with at least one primarily undergraduate institution and four
research universities in the US, Canada, and Cyprus. Furthermore, the pressure
capabilities make the UNF team a leader in high-pressure science in the state
and the nation, dovetailing Raman spectroscopy and single-crystal x-ray
diffraction under extreme pressures already available at UNF. Additionally,
incorporation of SQUID magnetometry in teachers' education events and field
trips to UNF is poised to expose local high school teachers and students to
cutting edge research and strengthen UNF's bonds to the community. Acquisition
of this measurement system constitutes the cornerstone for institutional growth
for STEM at UNF by enriching its research and education portfolio and
exemplifying its leadership role in the region.