* 1626365
* A Research+Practice Collaboratory
* EHR,DRL
* 11/16/2015,10/31/2020
* Philip Bell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 10/31/2020
* USD 2,772,727.00

The University of Washington, the Exploratorium, the Education Development
Center, Inverness Research, and the University of Colorado - Boulder have come
together to form a Research+Practice (R+P) Collaboratory. The Collaboratory
seeks to address and reframe the gap between research and practice in K-12 STEM
education. This gap persists despite decades of work by many leading
organizations, associations, and individuals. Attempts to close the gap have
generally focused on creating resources and mechanisms that first explain or
illustrate "what research says" and then invite educators to access and
integrate findings into practice. Recently, however, attention has turned to the
ways in which the medical sciences are addressing the gap between research and
clinical practice through the developing field of "translational research." In
medicine, the strategy has been to shift the focus from adoption to adaptation
of research into practice. Implicit in the notion of adaptation is a bi-
directional process of cultural exchange in which both researchers and
practitioners come to understand how the knowledge products of each field can
strengthen the professional activities in the other. Along these lines, the R+P
Collaboratory is working with leading professional associations and STEM
improvement efforts to leverage their existing knowledge and experience and to
build sustainable strategies for closing the gap. Activities include:

- Collecting, creating and synthesizing translational research resources to
expand STEM educators' and educational leaders' access and awareness to current
relevant research. - Supporting multiple opportunities for cross-sector
(research and practice; education and social sciences; formal and informal)
meetings to foster critical engagement and cultural exchange. - Testing,
documenting and innovating new resources and mechanisms at Adaptation Sites and
disseminating both products and results through the R+P Resource Center.

The R+P Collaboratory is developing an online 'Go-To' Resource Center website
that houses the resources collected, created, and curated by the Collaboratory.
The Resource Center also has significant 'Take-Out' features, with all materials
meta-tagged so that they can be automatically uploaded, reformatted, and
integrated into the existing communication and professional development
mechanisms (e.g., newsletters, digests, conferences, and websites) of a dozen
leading professional associations within a Professional Association Partner
Network.

In light of new and emerging standards in the STEM disciplines, the
Collaboratory is focusing its work on four salient and timely bodies of
research: (a) STEM Practices, (b) Formative Assessment, (c) Cyberlearning, and
(d) Learning as a Cross-Setting Phenomenon. Special emphasis is being placed on
research and practice that focuses on the learning of children and youth from
communities historically underrepresented in STEM fields.

The work of the R+P Collaboratory includes research and evaluation of its own
efforts through studies aimed at answering the following questions: - How are
Collaboratory resources and engagement activities accessed, experienced and
leveraged by participants? - What resources, mechanisms and learning contexts
support cultural exchange among STEM education researchers and practitioners? -
What new kinds of practices result when research-based evidence is adapted into
evidence-based practices, and how does it change learning opportunities for K-12
aged children? - How can effective strategies, mechanisms and resources of the
Collaboratory be scaled and adapted to new contexts?