* 1626477
* An Examination of Social Support Figures as Prepared Safety Stimuli
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Naomi Eisenberger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 603,151.00

It is crucial that people develop the ability to identify and respond to threats
as they navigate the world. Yet, the process by which people learn about
threatening cues is inexact, often producing excessive fears, disruptive fear
responses, and anxiety. Based on the importance that close social ties have for
survival, this research examines social support figures as stimuli that promote
survival. Such 'prepared safety stimuli' promote feelings of safety and may
reduce threat responses. This is in contrast to 'prepared fear stimuli' that
have historically threatened human survival (e.g., snakes, spiders).
Considerable research has focused on prepared fear stimuli, but little prior
work has examined prepared safety stimuli. This research will develop an
understanding of these unique safety signals and the beneficial role they might
play in both preventing people from learning new fears and aiding people in
extinguishing old ones. This research will also help to develop a deeper
understanding of the role of social support figures as prepared safety stimuli.
In addition, this research may illuminate avenues for improving current
interventions targeted at reducing maladaptive fears and anxiety, thereby
improving well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will bridge
the social support and fear learning literatures, employing a combination of
fear conditioning, social buffering, and neuroimaging methods. In a series of
studies, Dr. Naomi Eisenberger at the University of California, Los Angeles,
will define prepared safety stimuli and test whether social support figures
fulfill those parameters. The proposed studies will further the examination of
social support figures as prepared safety stimuli by examining: 1) whether
social support figures, but not other familiar or rewarding stimuli (which are
not turned to for social support), serve as prepared safety stimuli, 2) whether
ambivalent support figures, who are sources of both positivity (support) and
negativity (stress/negative affect), can serve as prepared safety stimuli, 3)
whether stimuli historically associated with the presence of social support
(warmth, softness) act as prepared safety stimuli, 4) the neural regions that
underlie the safety effects of social support figures, and 5) whether support
figures inhibit fear learning and enhance fear extinction to other stimuli.
Given the prevalence of anxiety and fear-related disorders in the United States,
understanding the unique functions of prepared safety stimuli and the role they
might play in preventing fear learning or extinguishing learned fears has the
potential to pave the way for new interventions targeted at reducing maladaptive
fear and anxiety.