* 1626378
* MRI:   Acquisition of a High Resolution Atomic Force Microscope for Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Research and Education at Fordham University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Petr Shibayev, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 113,350.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities Programs, Professor Ipsita Banerjee from
Fordham University and colleagues John McMahon, Stephen Holler, Petr Shibayev
and Christopher Koenigsmann have acquired a high resolution atomic force
microscope (AFM). An AFM, unlike an optical microscope, does not use light to
create an image. An AFM employs a microscopic probe (needle-like device) that
passes over a surface. As the probe moves across the surface it generates
electrical signals which describe the properties of the surface (hardness,
roughness, cracks, wettability, elasticity, etc.). In this way, it produces an
image of the surface. This information is important for visually characterizing
the surface. AFM is useful for understanding why a chemical reaction may occur
on the surface, or why the surface is unreactive (inert). In general, an AFM has
three major abilities: force measurement, imaging, and manipulation. An AFM is
an important tool in the development of novel materials for fuel cell catalysis,
enhanced solar panels, and for very small nanoparticle sensors, all of which
rely on specific surface properties and morphology. AFM is used to characterize
biological tissue, viruses and drug delivery materials. The instrument is
employed in undergraduate research projects training these students in the use
of this technique and preparing them for future technological careers in the
workplace and advanced degrees in science, engineering and medical fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as (a) studying tissue scaffolds, protein
dynamics and viral nanoparticles, (b) studying microcavity photonics, (c)
analyzing nanomaterials for catalysis and fuel cells, (d) examining the role of
iodine in the photocatalysis of oxygen reduction at a silver/silver iodide
(Ag/AgI) fuel cell cathode and (e) studying stimuli-responsive liquid crystals
and liquid crystalline polymers.