* 1626618
* MRI:  Empowering Plant Science Research at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden with High Resolution and Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscopy Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Lucinda McDade, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 165,049.00

An award is made to Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden (RSABG) to acquire modern
instrumentation and analytical capacity for the Scanning Electron Microscopy
(SEM) laboratory. SEM is one of the principal methods for examination of
detailed surface structure (micromorphology) of biological materials. This
instrument is of fundamental importance to research and training at RSABG, the
largest botanic garden dedicated to California native plants and an important
research center for plant comparative biology. Specifically, RSABG will acquire
a Hitachi SU3500S Variable Pressure SEM, together with specimen preparation
equipment and SEM-image analysis software. Vastly improved SEM capabilities will
support research by RSABG faculty, staff scientists and students to further our
understanding of the evolution of plant diversity through integrating
comparative morphological and anatomical research on plants with cutting-edge
molecular methods and phylogenetic analysis. The enhanced view of meristems,
surfaces of leaves and stems, floral structures, seeds and pollen grains enabled
by SEM imaging expands our knowledge of plant form and function. Notably, for
many plant groups, SEM photomicrographs of pollen grains are essential
components of species descriptions. In addition, quality SEM micrographs are an
important means of effective and exciting visual communication, both in
scientific presentations and in formal and informal education. SEM imagery from
the Hitachi SEM will enhance our work in plant conservation through enhancing
our ability to observe reproduction in rare plants. It will also contribute to
public and formal education by providing images that are both beautiful and
information-packed to support programming for K-6 and college students, as well
as other visitors to RSABG through use of such images in exhibits. The facility
will also augment microscopy capabilities available to researchers at the
Claremont Colleges.

The SU3500S Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope, the Cressington 108
Auto Sputter Coater with an MTM-20 high resolution thickness controller and
MountainsMap Universal software represent significant improvements to and
expansion of research infrastructure at RSABG. This integrated system will
dramatically improve our conventional (i.e., high vacuum) SEM capabilities and
also significantly expand our research tool chest by adding (1) higher
resolution and magnification than currently achievable, (2) low vacuum capacity
and a Peltier cooling stage for observing hydrated, living tissue and (3)
sophisticated image analysis software. The low vacuum capabilities of the
instrument will expand considerably the research questions that we can address
while also ensuring that observations made are accurate. The image analysis
software that is a vital part of the package will transform our analytical power
to gather data from SEM images: to characterize, quantify and analyze 2D and 3D
structure, and to integrate these morphometric data with comparative
phylogenetic analyses to advance our knowledge of the patterns of plant
evolution.