* 1626088
* MRI: Acquisition of an NMR Spectrometer to Sustain Excellence in Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Spring Knapp, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 343,697.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Paul Bonvallet from College of Wooster and colleagues Judith Amburgey-Peters,
Mark Snider, Sarah Sobeck and Spring Knapp have acquired a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer equipped with a broadband probe. This spectrometer allows research
in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as the study of biologically relevant
species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the
most powerful tools available to chemists for the study of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. The results
from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry, forensics and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students via
independent student research and traditional academic
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in: (a) synthesizing small-
molecule analogues of the phospholipid phosphatidylserine; (b) designing
supramolecular chemistry of light-activated molecular containers, (c) studying
dehydrogenative coupling reactions to improve atom economy in organic synthesis,
(d) studying diastereoselective syntheses using multi-component reactions, (e)
elucidating enzymatic mechanisms in nicotinate biodegradation by aerobic
bacteria, and (f) probing the influence of the molecular environment on the
photochemistry of ultraviolet absorbers.