* 1626217
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared High Performance Computational (HPC) Cluster for Research, Training and Institutional Use
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Sergei Nazarenko, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2020
* USD 622,986.00

The University of Southern Mississippi (USM) will acquire a supercomputer to
support research and training in computational and data-enabled science and
engineering (CDS&amp;E) in a variety of Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. With this supercomputer, computational resources
will be made available to students, staff, and faculty at both USM and regional
community colleges and high schools, thereby providing enhanced capabilities for
training and education. This instrumentation will also include an institutional
repository for archiving data sets and scholarly output, and disseminating these
resources to the scientific community and to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation will establish critical
cyberinfrastructure needed to facilitate student learning and research in four
main thrusts whose common denominator is computing: (i) Materials Science, (ii)
Biological Sciences, (iii) Coastal and Marine Sciences, and (iv) Data Mining,
Bioinformatics, and Geoinformatics. The instrumentation will comprise standard
compute nodes, high-core compute nodes, large memory nodes, and nodes equipped
with graphics processing units (GPUs). The instrumentation will enable
academicians, researchers, and students to pursue research and education in
areas of national and international importance, such as climate change, coastal
hazard mitigation and resilience building efforts, advanced manufacturing,
natural resource management, the materials genome initiative, and big data
science. The instrumentation will reduce researchers' reliance on external
cyberinfrastructure, and will aid their transition to national user facilities
such as the NSF's eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE).