* 1626466
* Along-shelf Transport and Cross-shelf Exchange Driven by Surface Waves on the Inner Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Thomas Connolly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 125,618.00

Exchange across the inner shelf influences the distribution of nutrients,
harmful algal blooms, pollutants, larvae and sediment. It is not yet fully
understood how surface waves influence this exchange. Recent advances have been
made in the numerical modeling of wave-current interactions, but so far these
modeling studies have focused on the surf zone. This study will extend these
modeling capabilities to the inner shelf by testing model results in the context
of laboratory and field observations. This research will drive further
development of wave-current coupling in a modeling system that is freely
available to the scientific community. The insight into wave-current interaction
processes gained during this investigation will improve the development of
realistic models used in practical sediment transport applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most studies of inner-shelf circulation have focused on
the role of wind stress. Surface waves have only recently been recognized as an
important forcing mechanism over the inner shelf. Present understanding of the
wave-driven inner-shelf circulation is based on analytical models with
restrictive assumptions, such as constant turbulent mixing throughout the water
column, and no spatial variations across the shelf. The model experiments in
this study will allow for more realistic representations of turbulent mixing,
and will include the effects of stratification, a sloping bottom and advection
of momentum from the surf zone, where breaking waves generate strong along-shelf
currents. Few previous studies have quantified the importance of momentum
advection on the inner shelf, but it is potentially important near the boundary
of the surf zone and will also be assessed in observations. Based on the model
experiments, the relative importance of the hypothesized mechanisms under
different environmental conditions will be scaled so that results can be applied
generally at many locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to
identify the key processes that determine the observed spatial structure of the
circulation driven by surface waves on the inner shelf, which is located
offshore of the breaking surf. Previous observations have identified a surface-
intensified offshore flow associated with surface waves over the inner shelf. In
the direction parallel to shore, new observational analysis shows a complex
response to wave forcing that varies with water depth. Two alternative
hypotheses are formulated to account for these observations: one in which the
Earth's rotation is necessary, and another that involves strong turbulent mixing
and transport of momentum from the surf zone. Numerical modeling experiments,
with complex physics but idealized geometry, will be carried out to determine
the relative contribution of these two mechanisms to the observed wave-driven
circulation during different forcing and environmental conditions. A new
parameterization for the critical process of "wave streaming" near the bottom
will be tested against field and laboratory observations. Model experiments, in
combination with new analysis of existing observations, will identify processes
that generate exchange between the surf zone and inner shelf during combined
wind and wave forcing.