* 1626056
* Collaborative Research: The Embeddedness of Indirect and Generalized Reciprocity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Brent Simpson, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 170,055.00

SES-1626023 David Melamed Ohio State University

SES-1626056 Brent Simpson University of South Carolina Columbia

Generalized exchange systems are those where material, social, or other forms of
support flow unilaterally between three or more actors (individuals,
organizations, and nations). Researchers have noted that generalized exchange
systems are the basis for the evolution of human morality and widespread social
solidarity. This is because, unlike direct exchange relationships, which tend to
set those involved apart from a broader group or network, generalized exchange
embeds actors in a much larger structure of relations.

Prior research has identified two primary bases for generalized exchange
systems: Generalized reciprocity occurs when an actor who receives benefits or
help "pays it forward" by helping a third party (you help her because I helped
you) while indirect reciprocity occurs when an actor who provides benefits to
another is subsequently helped by a third party (he helps me because I helped
you). Either type could form the basis of generalized exchange systems but they
are based on very different mechanisms, with generalized reciprocity stemming
from the gratitude that one experiences as a consequence of receiving help and
indirect reciprocity based on the prospect of maintaining a good, or "prosocial"
reputation.

Importantly, almost all prior work has addressed these two processes
independently. As a consequence, there is a lack answers to a range of
fundamental questions: Which, if either process, is a stronger basis of
cooperation in generalized exchange systems? How does each type of structure
promote (or undermine) prosocial motivations of actors embedded within them? How
does each type of structure impact trust towards - and cooperation with - those
within the generalized exchange system versus those outside the system, i.e.,
strangers? And how do the processes combine to impact prosociality and
solidarity in the real world? These questions are of great societal importance
(as they focus on prosociality both with "neighbors" and strangers) and of broad
relevance (with potential applications from the smallest groups to global
communities). Insights from the research could therefore yield actionable
prescriptions for increasing prosociality as well as facilitating integration,
cohesion, and solidarity among members of an increasingly differentiated
population.

The research seeks to accomplish five broad research objectives: i) Outline
arguments and two controlled experiments designed to test the relative and
interactive power of generalized and indirect reciprocity for supporting
cooperation in generalized exchange systems, ii) Outline arguments and an
experimental test of the relative power of generalized versus indirect
reciprocity systems in promoting prosocial motivations and behaviors towards
strangers, i.e., towards those outside of the generalized exchange system, iii)
Use controlled laboratory experiments and agent-based models to establish that,
in contrast to prior work that has viewed generalized and indirect reciprocity
as separate systems, the two processes are more accurately (and fruitfully)
viewed as parts of an integrated system, iv) Examine how different social
network structures affect prosocial behaviors in generalized exchange systems,
and v) Test predictions from our arguments with a large dataset on the flow of
aid between nation-states. Thus, the overarching goal of this research is to
tackle a fundamental research problem, of broad interdisciplinary importance,
using multiple methods, including laboratory experiments, agent-based models,
and macro-level data on international aid.