* 1626516
* MRI: Acquisition of the Lawrence Supercomputer to Advance Multidisciplinary Research in South Dakota
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Douglas Jennewein, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 504,911.00

The University of South Dakota (USD) will acquire, deploy, and maintain a
cluster supercomputer to be named after Nobel Laureate and USD alumnus E. O.
Lawrence. As a campus-wide resource available to all USD faculty, staff,
postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates as well as researchers across
South Dakota, the Lawrence Cluster's key objectives are to 1) Accelerate
scientific progress and reduce time to discovery, 2) Enable and accelerate
scientific results not previously possible, and 3) Increase student engagement
in computationally assisted research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the
Lawrence Cluster will support 12 STEM projects across 7 departments at 3
institutions in North and South Dakota, including 21 faculty, 26 postdocs, and
307 students. The system will support multidisciplinary research and research
training in scientific domains such as high energy physics, the human brain,
renewable energy, and materials science. It will help answer questions of
considerable public interest and societal value, including the nature of dark
matter, and the elusive links between the human brain and human behavior.
Moreover, advances in both optical properties of nanomaterials and in design of
organic functional materials are relevant to a broad range of material science
and engineering problems. Results will help lay the foundation for the efficient
fabrication of novel materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lawrence Cluster will
have a peak theoretical performance of more than 60 TFLOPS. The system
architecture includes an XSEDE-compatible software stack, general-purpose
compute nodes, large memory nodes, GPU-accelerated nodes, interactive
visualization nodes, a high speed InfiniBand interconnect, and a high-capacity
parallel filesystem. In additional to a traditional command line interface, the
Lawrence Cluster will also include a browser-based user portal for job
submission and management.