* 1627925
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Organic Semiconductors by Computationally-Accelerated Refinement (OSCAR)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Oana Jurchescu, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 576,498.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The performance of materials in a wide array of
device types - light-emitting materials for displays, semiconducting compounds
for transistors, light-absorbing materials for solar cells - is directly related
to the way the atoms or molecules are arranged in the solid-state. A major
hurdle to the discovery of new molecules for these applications is the complete
lack of metrics to correlate the structure of a molecule with its likely solid-
state order. This highly collaborative project, combining researchers with
expertise in chemistry, engineering, and physics, will accelerate the
development of new electronic and energy materials by developing computational
models to predict solid-state order for a common class of high-performance
materials. With this model in hand, new molecular structures with optimal
electronic and optical properties will be predicted and prepared, eliminating
the wasted time, effort, hazards, and waste-generation associated with current
synthesis and screening protocols. This interdisciplinary project will provide
training to graduate and undergraduate researchers in a wide array of marketable
skills, ranging from computation through synthesis to electronic device
fabrication. As the computational models develop, 3-D printing technologies will
be used to provide hands-on models of the molecular packing arrangements studied
in this project as demonstrators for industrial and academic facility tour
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Silylethyne-functionalized
aromatics are common soluble organic semiconductors used in transistors,
photovoltaics, sensors, and diodes. Very subtle changes to the alkyl groups of
the silylethyne substituent can yield substantial improvement in performance by
their manipulation of solid-state order, but the current Edisonian approach to
this type of tuning is time-consuming and wasteful. The OSCAR program will
develop a robust computational model to predict solid-state order as a function
of alkyne functionalization for this successful class of molecular
semiconductors. Coupling structural predictions with computational evaluation of
properties, such as charge-transfer integrals, will yield an iterative model
capable of predicting the ideal molecular substitution for optimum solid-state
charge-carrier mobility. The computational model will be validated by synthesis,
structural analysis, and device characterization and measurement. Feedback from
experimental studies will further strengthen the computational models. Final
validation of the approach will involve application of the silylethyne
functionalization strategy to previously un-studied chromophores, to yield a
robust structure-predicting package to be made available to the scientific
community at large.