* 1627520
* Doctoral Disseration Research: Conventionalization of Homesign Systems in Guatemala: Lexical and Morpho-phonological Dimensions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Laura Horton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 17,839.00

The term "emergence" is sometimes used for the process by which children acquire
their first language because all children create language, even as they acquire
it. This project addresses how much communicative input children require to
eventually develop adult-like language proficiency. It will examine whether the
source of the communicative input affects eventual fluency to determine if child
learners benefit more from an adult language model or the model provided by
same-aged peers. This project also will examine whether the emergence of a new
language in a community of speakers or signers parallels or diverges from
emergence in a single child who is isolated from users of a fully established
sign language. The findings from this study may inform educational policy and
pedagogy for the deaf.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These issues will be addressed by
studying the gestural communication strategies invented by deaf children and
adults who live in Guatemala. Because of their deafness, the participants in
this study do not have access to the spoken language in their community, and
there is not an established sign language in use in their town. The systems that
deaf individuals create under such circumstances are called "homesign systems."
Language-like features in these systems emerged in the absence of a language
model. Thus the participants in this study lack language input, but they do have
a model in the form of other homesign systems created by the other deaf
individuals with whom they interact. Under the direction of Dr. Brentari, Ms.
Horton will work with families with multiple generations of deafness as well as
with deaf children who attend school together. The homesign input that a deaf
child receives from a deaf adult relative is construed as a vertical form of
transmission, whereas the homesign contact that deaf children attending school
together experience is construed as horizontal transmission. The project will
analyze the signs that each participant from a different social context produces
to understand whether horizontal or vertical transmission accelerates the
consistency of the forms and the grammar in each homesign system. Results from
this study will be compared to datasets from other homesigners who have had
little or no contact with deaf people as well as to native signers who use a
more established sign language like American Sign Language.