* 1627083
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An ethnographic study of cross-cultural perceptions and experiences of disability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Dimitra Varvarezou, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 9,749.00

Researchers have shown that one's pereceptions and experiences of one's physical
self are affected by language, culture, and ethnicity. The question the research
funded by this award is asking is, what happens when people from different
cultural and ethnic backgrounds must interact in relation to their biologies?
How do those differences get negotiated and with what result? While this can be
seen as an interesting theroetical question, it also has important practical
implications, such as when a provider of healthcare services comes from one
cultural group and the recipient comes from another. Arizona State University
anthropology doctoral student, Ms. Dimitra Mari Varvarezou, with the guidance of
Dr. Elizabeth A. Brandt and Dr. Jonathan Maupin, will investigate the problem
through the lens of of disability. She will focus on how indigenous
epistemologies affect Diné (Navajo) adults' experience of physical disabilities,
as well as the understandings of Diné individuals who care for them; examine the
epistemologies and understandings of physical disabilities held by Anglo service
providers and healthcare professionals; and determine what happens, and why,
when the two groups come together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be
conducted in the Phoenix Metropolitan Area and in off-Reservation locations.
Varvarezou will employ a mixed methods design, including participant
observation; free lists and cultural consensus analysis to determine cultural
models of physical disability, symptoms, causes, and treatment; and focused
semi-structured interviews. The researcher will also assess the patterns of
agreement and degree of variation in relation to disability perceptions among
the Diné, among Anglo healthcare workers, and between the two cultural groups.
Findings from this research will promote a better understanding of the role that
social perceptions play in cross-cultural healthcare. Findings will also
contribute to theorization of cultural negotiations in cross-cultural
situations.