* 1627494
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of tongue position in voicing contrasts in cross-linguistic contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Lisa Davidson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2017
* USD 11,872.00

There are many factors that cause speakers of multiple languages to be in
contact in the United States. Many Americans are natively bilingual or
multilingual speakers and many others study various languages as a second
language. Also, speakers of different languages from other countries learn
English when they come to the US. An important component of learning and using
multiple languages is establishing the sound categories that are appropriate to
each of the languages. Many languages use similar sounds, but how they are
actually pronounced varies from language to language. This research will
contribute to our understanding of how speakers of different languages
facilitate their language's sound contrasts through dynamic tongue movement. By
understanding the difference in tongue dynamics across languages, second
language learners, instructors, and speech therapists can have a more detailed
understanding of the phonetic differences between one's native language and
target language, even when the two seem phonologically
similar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on how similar sounds across
languages are articulated differently. For example, the consonant at the
beginning of the word 'dog' in English ('d'), is similar to 'd' in Portuguese
(e.g. 'dados'), but differences in the production of 'd' emerge when the two
languages are examined closely. Portuguese 'd' is phonated, which means the
vocal folds are vibrating while the tongue is constricted in the mouth to
produce this sound, whereas English 'd' is often not phonated during tongue
constriction. While the vibration of the vocal folds can be inferred through
acoustic analysis, this current research asks what articulatory adjustments may
be used in order to produce the acoustic differences that distinguish the
production of similar sounds across languages. Articulations in the mouth can be
observed using ultrasound imaging, revealing how the tongue moves to adjust the
shape of the mouth. For example, we can see how the tongue position of English
'd' is different from that of Portuguese 'd', which may help us understand how
phonation is achieved within this dynamic system. This study first focuses on
how the phonetic target of voiced stops (such as the 'd' of English or
Portuguese) in different languages compares acoustically and articulatorily, and
second, how tongue position reflects different systems of voicing contrast by
comparing six different languages: English, German, (Brazilian) Portuguese,
Korean, Hindi, and Thai. The articulatory, acoustic and theoretical methods used
to address this issue can be extended beyond the six languages covered in this
study. The collective results in different languages can be applied to second
language learning, with a more detailed account of consonant articulation across
languages.