* 1627993
* NSF/SBE-BSF: Neural patterns underlying the development of planning in action production and anticipation in action perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Karen Adolph, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 293,783.00

A remarkable aspect of motor skill is the ability to plan actions flexibly and
purposefully using a variety of objects. We achieve this by planning our initial
contact with the object with the end goal in mind, even when the end goal
requires multiple steps to be achieved. Thus, the process of action planning
involves integration of perception, cognition, and motor behavior. Presumably, a
similar integrative process occurs when we anticipate other people's goals while
observing them perform actions. Previous work shows that action planning begins
in infancy and improves with age, but little is known about the accompanying
brain activity that underlies these age-related improvements. This
interdisciplinary study combines concepts, methods, and analytic techniques from
developmental psychology, neuroscience, and computer science to understand age-
related changes in action planning while children 1) perform an action with
multiple steps to the goal and 2) while they observe someone else perform the
action. The research uses a novel combination of recording methods for children:
Video, eye tracking, motion tracking, and electroencephalography (EEG) will be
recorded simultaneously. The methods and data will advance the field through
open sharing of the research videos and physiological data in the Databrary
repository. Algorithms and analysis techniques will be shared in the Open
Science Framework.

The investigators combine behavioral measures, neural activity recordings, and
machine-learning techniques in order to understand how children and adults 1)
perform complex motor tasks that involve anticipation of the end-goal and 2)
passively observe others performing tasks that involve multi-step action
planning in anticipation of the end-goal. Analyses of action performance will
focus on the neural correlates of behavior at different stages of planning and
will assess whether neural activity prior to beginning a movement can predict
trial-to-trial behavioral variability in young children's ability to plan.
Analyses of action observation will investigate age differences in neural
activity while observing others performing actions that do, or do not, show
evidence of long-range planning. The investigators will also compare the
neurophysiological signatures of anticipation during passive action observation
and during action performance. These findings will inform our understanding of
the development of action planning across childhood. The multi-modal recording
methods and the advanced multivariate analytic techniques will pave the way for
research in STEM and other disciplines to explore developmental changes in
children's brain and behavior.

This award is made as part of the NSF/BSF Opportunity for Collaborations in
Economics and Psychology.