* 1627413
* Collaborative Research: Using the Web to Study Congressional Campaigns and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Parkin, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 76,357.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electoral campaigns are a defining feature
of democratic polities. Yet studying electoral campaigns and their effects has
been difficult. With the support of prior National Science Foundation grants,
the investigators have developed a theory of campaign communication and tested
expectations using data from congressional campaign and members' official
websites. The investigators extend their data collection to include the 2016
campaign and the 2015 and 2017 legislative sessions. A key component of the
project is that it brings together campaign and legislative data. The PIs
construct a publicly available dataset that includes coding of approximately
3,000 House and Senate campaign websites and roughly 300 official congressional
websites, over sixteen points in time. These data include extensive information
on candidates' backgrounds, districts, and campaigns, as well as data on
television advertisements and media coverage. Extending the data is critical for
further understanding how the public's growing technological sophistication
affects what candidates and representatives present online. This project also
provides opportunities to study campaigns and their effects on legislation and
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electoral campaigns are a defining feature of
democratic polities. Yet studying electoral campaigns and their effects has been
difficult. In recent work, the investigators have developed a theory of campaign
communication and tested expectations using data from congressional campaign
websites and members' official websites. The investigators have amassed a data
set consisting of more than 2,500 website codings, from 2002 through 2014. These
data have been used in scholarly projects by the PIs and many other political
science investigators. The PIs will extend their data collection to include the
2016 campaign and the 2015 and 2017 legislative sessions. They will code sites
over the course of the campaign, archive sites, implement surveys of campaign
and official website designers, and code official member websites approximately
one year after the campaigns. A major broader impact of the project is that the
team of coders include only undergraduate students. These students gain valuable
experience with empirical social science research. In the end, the investigators
will construct a publicly available data set that includes coding of more than
3,000 web sites over multiple years. This project provides opportunities to
study campaigns and their effects on legislation and representation.