* 1627339
* Asylum Seeker and Refugee Integration in Europe
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Dominik Hangartner, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 393,633.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to establish which
policies are best suited to promote the social and economic integration of
refugees. Despite the importance of this question, extant research fails to
inform policy, as it tends to rely on highly aggregated national models that
differentiate countries based on whether they espouse assimilationist or
multicultural policies. The PIs of this study focus on localities in three
countries - Germany, France, and Switzerland - and for each, evaluate the
effects of specific policies on integration success. In particular, they focus
on four key elements of policy: 1) bureaucratic protocols that affect the length
of time it takes for asylum claims to be processed, 2) the geographic allocation
of refugees 3) policies that structure refugees' access to public benefits and
the labor market, and 4) the returns to government investments in state-run
courses in citizenship, and whether these are consequential for immigrant
success in the host country. The study leverages identification strategies to
identify causally the impact of various policies on subsequent integration
outcomes, which is a crucial concern for all European and North American
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
systematic evaluation of the impact of refugee integration policies provides
important contributions to existing immigration research by (1) applying
advanced econometric and experimental methods to a new policy area in order to
produce internally-valid evidence; and 2) advancing understanding of integration
outcomes beyond economic success by directly measuring political and social
outcomes for highly vulnerable populations. Methodologically, the PIs leverage
detailed data on refugee outcomes provided by administrative and survey data to
focus on identifying the effect of four factors: (i) policy measures that affect
the length of time it takes for asylum claims to be processed; (ii) geographic
allocation of refugees; (iii) policies that structure refugees' access to
governmental benefits and the labor market; and (iv) regulations that govern
integration course requirements (such as language, civic, or job market
training).