* 1627042
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Ethnic Differences in Naive Listener Prominence Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Tyler Kendall, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,265.00

The goal of this dissertation project is to explore how naïve listeners perceive
prominence in African American English (AAE) versus European American English
(EAE) speech, with a focus on the role that patterns of rhythm and intonation
play. Prosody has been named as one of the cues that listeners use to identify
the ethnicity of speakers based on voice alone. This research project is an
important step toward understanding what linguistic factors are relevant in
ethnic profiling. The research has important implications for all social
settings where AAE and EAE speakers interact, including educational settings,
police-citizen interactions, political and legal discourse, and interactions in
the context of employment. For example, previous research has linked ethnic
identification of voices with societal issues such as denying housing or
employment to minority speakers. Differences in prosody have also been shown to
contribute to how AAE speaking children are misinterpreted in the classroom by
mainstream American English speaking teachers; insights from this research could
thus be used in training teachers about prosodic differences between ethnic
varieties, thus improving the quality of education for AAE speaking children in
the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African American English has been the source
of much public and academic debate and remains among the most studied language
varieties in the United States. Much sociolinguistic research has focused on the
sound segments and syntactic structure of AAE, but only sporadic research has
investigated its prosody, which includes patterns of rhythm and intonation.
Prior research has suggested that some varieties of AAE exhibit different
prosodic patterns than other varieties of English. This project uses
psycholinguistic tasks to investigate how naïve listeners perceive prosodic
prominence: words that listeners hear as "highlighted by the speaker" and that
stand out from other, non-prominent words. In a series of experiments, listeners
representing different social and regional backgrounds will rate the prosodic
prominence of words in speech from speakers of both African American and
Caucasian ethnicities. The results of this study will help uncover the phonetic
cues that listeners use to perceive prosodic prominence and the role that the
ethnicity of the speaker and listener plays in such perception.