* 1627658
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment CY16
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Jon Swallow, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2019
* USD 6,400.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment for the R/V
Hugh R Sharp, a 146 foot Regional research vessel operated by the University of
Delaware as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Hugh R Sharp is a state-
of-the-art, coastal research vessel that is owned and operated by the University
of Delaware. The vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to
eighteen days in duration, and supports projects from all disciplines of
oceanography. The vessel is a regional asset, serving researchers from many
institutions throughout the mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the
coastal waters from Long Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as
well as the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. Projects occasionally require the
vessel to work as far north as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as Florida, and
as far offshore as Bermuda. In 2015, the R/V Hugh R Sharp completed 185 days at
sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 16% of the total sailing schedule (29
days). In 2016, R/V Hugh R Sharp is scheduled for174 days with NSF days
accounting for 14% (24 days) of the total sailing
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment requested
in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mooring winch upgrade
$228,180&lt;br/&gt;DGPS upgrades $27,776&lt;br/&gt;AIS upgrade $6,400&lt;br/&gt;
$262,356&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.