* 1627433
* RUI:   Can Brief Social Interactions Undermine System Variable Protections Against False Eyewitness Identifications?
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Amy Douglass, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 127,858.00

Eyewitness identification research has examined the extent to which controllable
aspects of the justice system can be modified to reduce identification errors
and has generated recommendations for lineups and photospreads that reduce the
rate of false identifications. Even when recommended procedures are used,
however, eyewitnesses still identify innocent people. In the proposed research,
we explore whether these eyewitness identification errors are shaped by brief
social interactions, defined as any exchange of information between a witness
and a co-witness or between a witness and a photospread administrator before the
identification procedure begins. Determining whether and the extent to which
brief social interactions affect eyewitness decisions -- even when recommended
procedures are used -- advances our understanding of how eyewitness decisions
are made and contributes to a knowledge base from which specific recommendations
will emerge. These might include automated photospread procedures whereby social
interactions are minimized or eliminated, and alternative methods of collecting
memory information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brief social interactions may affect
eyewitness choosing behavior through manipulation of the witness's decision
criterion so that more (or less) of a match between a suspect's appearance and
the witness's memory is required by the witness before he or she is willing to
make a positive identification. The critical feature of the proposed research is
that we hypothesize that the decision criterion is malleable as a function of
brief social interactions and even when recommended procedures are in place. Two
phases of experiments are proposed. In the first phase, manipulations to co-
witness behavior are tested, including the apparent ease of a co-witness's
identification and the speed of a co-witness's identification. The final
experiment in this phase tests if witnesses can accurately report whether brief
social interactions have affected their identification decision. This is
accomplished through the manipulation of counterfactual instructions. In the
second phase of experiments, manipulations to photospread administrators are
tested, including comments about the difficulty of the identification task and
pressure to make an identification. As in the co-witness phase, the final
experiment manipulates counterfactual instructions to determine whether
witnesses recognize that social cues have affected their identification
decision.