* 1627876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forced Migration, Displacement, and Community in Contested Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Sarah Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 24,973.00

This project investigates the conditions under which displaced people construct
their lives in a politically disputed borderland. The recent refugee crisis in
Europe has revealed that various states, not only unstable states, have stakes
in people's movements, and has urged deeper reflection on existing legal
categories and rights, their ambivalence, and what these categories do to people
in need of urgent help. At a time when issues of displacement gain broader
visibility, this project, which trains a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of conducting empirically grounded scientific fieldwork, aims to
understand how displaced people find new ways to maintain their social ties and
practices in contexts of political insecurity. By providing a longitudinal
assessment of how such relationships are maintained, this project will provide
data useful to other contexts where displacement is having a significant social
and geopolitical impact. Findings of this research will contribute to a more
nuanced perception of forced migration, and to policy and practice in conflict
management and building sustainable peace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;George
Washington University student Gorkem Aydemir Kundakci (under the direction of
Dr. Sarah Wagner) will examine how displaced communities forge durable social
relationships in contexts of political instability and uncertainty. The research
will take place in a displaced community in the de facto Georgia-Abkhazia
borderland, which provides a rich site for longitudinal exploration. During the
Georgian-Abkhaz war in 1992-1993, after the collapse of Soviet Union, Georgian
residents of Abkhazia were forced to flee into Georgia proper; and the ceasefire
line created between parties soon turned into a contested borderland where three
polities - Abkhazia, Georgia, and Russia - perform their sovereignty projects in
uncertain ways. To this day, members of the displaced community in the
borderland maintain their ties with both sides of the border, and navigate this
ambivalent region in unexpected forms. To understand how the displaced
experience this zone and challenge the categorical distinctions like
"displaced," "at home," and "returnee," the researcher will conduct ethnographic
research, by (1) tracing the political and legal context that constitutes the
borderline and trans-border movements of the displaced, (2) exploring legal,
social, and material aspects of border crossings, and (3) understanding the
transformations in people's relations to the border and in modes of crossings
over years. In doing so, the project will contribute to research on the issues
of migration, ideas of homeland, and legal and political construction of
borderlands in liminal zones. It will also increase public knowledge of
contemporary dynamics of displacement and new information on the South Caucasus,
a region anthropologically understudied. The research will rely on an innovative
methodological design that will involve object biographies and maps of people's
movements narrated through storytelling, and also make use of conventional
methods of ethnographic data collection, including participant observation and
semi-structured interviews.