* 1627066
* Re-aligning Archival Practice and Researcher Needs to Improve Data Discovery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joshua Bell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 301,611.00

Scientific archives collect and maintain materials created through research.
Anthropological archives document human diversity in the past and present. These
data, which result from major private and public investments of time and
resources, continue to be relevant to research today. They are used by
scientists, citizens, and source community members to help answer questions that
range from the communal to the global. However, this material is not being fully
utilized because outdated and inappropriate archival descriptive practices make
it impossible for researchers to locate and access collections. Despite
increasingly robust online databases and search tools, valuable archival data
remain hidden, often discovered only by chance. The research project funded by
this award, led by Dr. Gabriela Pérez Báez and Dr. Joshua A. Bell (National
Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution), will address this problem by
investigating anthropological needs and data-gathering practices to inform
improved standards for archiving anthropological materials. The project will
improve understanding of the role of anthropological archives in preserving
data, facilitate access and discovery in anthropological archives, and help
ensure that this material is both available to and usable by future researchers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out by a post-doctoral fellow
based at the Smithsonian Institution's National Anthropological Archives (NAA).
The NAA is the nation's largest anthropological archive and is an ideal location
to carry out this research. As well as having extensive collections of different
media from more than 130 anthropologists relating to some 2,000 cultures from
around the globe, the NAA is contacted by hundreds of researchers each year,
which provides a large study population. The fellow will be mentored by linguist
Pérez Baez and cultural anthropologist Bell, with support from archivist Gina
Rappaport. During this three-year project, the research team will survey archive
users to determine who they are, how they obtain access to these collections,
and what impediments limit their use of collections. Results from this survey
will then feed into the implementation of new cataloguing terms and metadata
fields that will ensure the discoverability of materials. An initial set of
three case studies will be developed to test these cataloguing techniques.
Working with scholars and communities who have vested interests in these
materials, this work will be refined, and the ethics involved in making this
material accessible explored. Because of the increase in "born digital" data,
the research team will also explore how to effectively bridge archival digital
and analogue gaps. Results will be disseminated through participation in
professional conferences, a workshop at the Smithsonian, and publications. This
grant will result in: 1) training of new archival leadership, 2) better access
to anthropological data, and 3) development of a model that can be applied to
anthropological archives throughout the United States. Ultimately, the goal is
to facilitate better use of already-collected anthropological materials wherever
they are housed, now and in the future.