* 1627693
* The Boston Reentry Study: Analysis and Preparation of Public Use Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Bruce Western, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2017
* USD 161,346.00

NSF 1627693 Bruce Western Harvard University

In an era of historically high US incarceration rates, the transition from
prison to the community of released prisoners has had far-reaching effects on
the population and poverty dynamics of neighborhoods of concentrated
disadvantage. Despite a large body of research studying the effects of
incarceration, relatively few studies have analyzed in detail the process of
leaving prison and entering a community. In this context, this project extends
prior research by offering innovative new analyses of data and the creation of
publicly available data files from the Boston Reentry Study (BRS), a
longitudinal study of 122 Massachusetts state prisoners newly-released to the
Boston area that yielded an unparalleled response rate of 94 percent through 4
waves of follow-up in the year after prison release. The current project will
thus provide a unique data set, including rich quantitative and qualitative
information for the analysis of community return for a sample of newly-released
prisoners under contemporary conditions of mass incarceration. The current
project---including new analysis and data dissemination---will greatly expand
the scope of the study's influence by informing policy debates on programs for
transitional employment after prison, social supports for families that do much
of the caring work immediately after incarceration, and for recidivism
reduction, identifying key vulnerabilities in the year after prison release. The
research will also play an important role in the academic development of
students with interests in poverty and incarceration by involving them in the
analysis of data and preparation of papers.

The current project will broaden understanding of the connection of a highly
marginal population to mainstream social institutions, allowing in particular
new analyses of family relationships, employment, and recidivism. The project
comprises two main parts. First, new data analysis will capitalize on a variety
of unique features of the BRS data. Income data are available monthly and
include measures of wages, public assistance, support from families and illegal
earnings. Data on families and children includes all sources of family support
including the parents of released prisoners, and all children, allowing a
complete mapping of multiple partner fertility. The analysis of recidivism will
combine quantitative criminal record information with qualitative accounts
including re-incarceration interviews yielding a new understanding of the social
process of returning to custody, particularly for those who are relapsing to
addiction or violating the conditions of community supervision. Second, archival
work on the BRS will involve the preparation of a public-use data set,
restricted-use data files including criminal records and other sensitive data,
and qualitative materials including interview transcripts or audio tapes. The
dissemination of these data will allow a wide variety of analyses of the process
of social integration after incarceration, will promote mixed methods research
that combines statistical analysis with the interpretative analysis of recorded
and transcribed interviews and will contribute a unique public good to the
community of scholars working on the problems of incarceration and poverty.