* 1627432
* Air Pollution Externalities: Evidence from  U.S. Electricity Generation over the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Edson Severnini, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2020
* USD 238,235.00

This project examines the effect that expansion of electricity generation had on
health and other outcomes over the twentieth century. By digitizing new data on
power plant-level consumption of bituminous coal and generation of electricity,
it becomes possible to address two important issues. The first is how the health
effects of air pollution have changed over time with changes in income,
nutrition, access to health services, and medical care. This research can then
help policymakers understand how future changes in these measures will affect
the health of effects of air pollution. The second is the extent to which air
pollution makes influenza pandemics more severe. New experimental evidence
suggests that air pollution exacerbates the health effects of influenza in mice.
The analysis will examine the Spanish Influenza pandemic of 1918-1919 and later
pandemics in 1957-1958, 1968-1969, 1977 (in children), and 2008-2009 to provide
new evidence on the extent to which pollution exacerbates the health effects of
infectious disease in humans. Influenza pandemics are unpredictable but
recurring events that create substantial economic disruption and pose a major
threat to U.S. and global health. Even with modern antiviral and antibacterial
drugs, a pandemic virus with similar pathogenicity to the 1918 virus would
quickly overwhelm the existing medical infrastructure, and would likely kill
more than 100 million people worldwide. Thus, preventative strategies and
targeted distribution of medical resources are likely to be critical in
mitigating the severity of an outbreak in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the sector?s reliance on bituminous
coal, electricity was an important contributor to air pollution over the
twentieth century. The proposed project will improve knowledge about the
externalities of air pollution by studying it at a level of detail that has not
previously been possible. A key aspect of the project is the expansion of a new
detailed electric power plant-level dataset on capacity, generation, fuel
consumption, and other production expenses for 1963-1993. Data for 1915 and
1938-1962 have been digitized, and beginning in 1994, these data are available
in digital form. This project uses the new dataset to advance knowledge in two
main areas of inquiry. First, how have the marginal health effects of air
pollution varied over time and as a function of environmental characteristics
such as access to electricity and levels of pollution? Existing studies often
examine short time frames that have little variation in access to electricity or
levels of pollution. The proposed research overcomes this limitation by using
power-level data on openings and coal consumption. Monitor data do not become
available until 1953, the network of monitors remained sparse into the 1960s,
and even today the network is not very dense. Using power-plant level data
permits advances in two dimensions. It makes it possible to examine the period
prior to the collection of monitor data. Further, it makes it possible to
examine the effects of air pollution for a much bigger geographic area. This
research allows the PIs to better understand the shape of the pollution-infant
mortality concentration-response function and how it varies with levels of
pollution, and shifts in the concentration-response function over time due to
income, changes in nutrition, access to health services, and advances in medical
care. Second, new experimental evidence suggests that air pollution exacerbates
the health effects of influenza in mice. Are humans affected in a similar way?
This research will provide new evidence from the Spanish Influenza pandemic of
1918-1919 and later pandemics on the extent to which pollution exacerbates the
health effects of infectious disease in humans. Understanding such effects is
important for three reasons. The current benefits of pollution reduction are
understated, because they do not account for the effects on deaths from
infectious disease. Pollution abatement becomes a long run and possibly a short
run (emergency shutdowns) tool for addressing pandemics and infectious disease
more broadly. Finally, during pandemics it may be efficient for polluted
locations to receive more prevention and treatment resources than less polluted
locations.