* 1627483
* EAGER: How predictable is the evolving genomic architecture of speciation?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Samuel Flaxman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,749.00

Modern DNA-sequencing technologies are producing amounts and types of data that,
even just 20 years ago, seemed impossible to achieve. Currently, one of the
biggest challenges is analyzing the data in ways that reliably extract signals
from noise. Specifically, genome sequences from individuals in a population
contain information that can be used to unravel the biological history of the
population and to discover which genes are adaptive, deleterious, or just along
for the ride. However, extracting this information and using it to draw such
conclusions is a far from trivial undertaking due to the massive scale of modern
datasets and due to the many complex and interrelated factors that affect how
populations change over time. The proposed research will develop new
computational methods for inference from population genomic data. The
development of these new methods aims to improve scientists' abilities to use
population genomic data to answer a variety of questions, such as: What are the
genetic changes associated with adaptation? How repeatable and predictable are
the genetic changes associated with the diversification of an ancestral species
into a variety of modern species (i.e., an "adaptive radiation")? The new
methods will be applied to two independent examples of adaptive radiations
involving butterflies commonly found in North and Central America because a
wealth of excellent data and technical resources already exist for these
species. Beyond making inferences about these particular groups of species, the
proposed research will have broader impacts in two main ways. First, the novel
computational methods and software developed in this proposal will be widely
applicable to genetic analysis in a variety of basic and applied scientific
disciplines. This open-source software will be freely disseminated. Second, the
results will form the basis for constructing educational museum exhibits on
genomics and the tree of life.

Natural selection and speciation are the fundamental evolutionary processes
responsible for life's fantastic diversity, yet the genes and specific genetic
changes responsible for adaptive traits and the genetic mechanisms that cause
speciation are largely unknown. Emerging molecular and analytical methods offer
great promise to address these issues, but studies of speciation are generally
limited by at least two factors. First, studies of a single example of
divergence (e.g., in one hybrid zone) suffer from the "n=1" problem: without
replication of divergence, the generalities from a single species pair are
unclear. Second, a priori quantitative predictions from multiple, contrasting
hypotheses are rarely developed; indeed, there is often little consensus about
the patterns expected under a given verbal hypothesis about evolutionary
processes. The proposed research will address both issues by using existing
empirical data and development of novel theoretical methods to investigate how
the species boundary evolves over space and time using multiple species pairs in
two independent examples of adaptive diversification among hybridizing lineages
of mimetic butterflies: Heliconius and Limenitis. Specifically, researchers
will: 1) collaborate to statistically characterize the empirical systems and 2)
develop population genomic theory and test quantitative predictions about the
accumulation of genomic divergence across the species boundary continuum. The
results of this project will provide a uniquely comprehensive portrait of the
evolving species boundary in a comparative framework, and will thereby provide a
powerful examination of questions about the generalities of evolutionary
processes and genomic patterns that characterize speciation at multiple points
along the continuum of divergence. These questions include: How porous is the
species boundary among hybridizing species? How does divergent selection shape
genomic variation among hybridizing lineages? How predictable is the evolving
genomic architecture of speciation? In addition to answering these questions,
the work will yield broadly applicable computational methods for quantitatively
testing hypotheses about the genomic signatures of multiple evolutionary
processes acting alone or in concert.