* 1627883
* What's Happened with American Adult Understanding of Science Knowledge and Process: 1979-2014
* SBE,NCSE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Susan Losh, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 07/31/2019
* USD 179,999.00

What's Happened with American Adult Understanding of Science Knowledge and
Process? 1979-2016 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What do we know about American's public
understanding of science and technology over time? In industrial and post-
industrial democracies, citizens often participate in science and technology
(S&amp;T) decision-making and implementation. Civic science and technology
literacy, or public understanding, among the adult general public is tacitly
understood to help create a climate that facilitates intelligent policy
discussions, supports the "science enterprise," and enhances quality of life.
Overall, the general public may resist some developments, e.g., genetically
modified foods, while adopting others, e.g., the Internet. In addition, many
stakeholders--parents, educators, legislators, and employers--are concerned that
the United States is "falling behind" in science education or failing to develop
sufficient numbers of S&amp;T professionals. Given engagement in and reaction to
science and technology, it is imperative to periodically gauge S&amp;T knowledge
among the general public, as well as their understanding of how science is
conducted. Examining S&amp;T knowledge and attitudes among adults can help
educators plan more effective coursework; it also may help encourage greater
diversity in science and technology fields. For example, comparing engineer and
scientist stereotypes may provide insight into young adult choices of more
applied versus more theoretical research careers. Examining how general public
adults perceive concordance among scientists (e.g., about global warming) may
suggest how to communicate what is--or is not--controversial in science, helping
citizens to evaluate more accurately information from diverse experts. The
project addresses several of these concerns, by examining how gender, ethnicity,
and dimensions of education, relate to civic science and technology literacy
over time and by generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project analyzes data from
The National Science Foundation Surveys of Public Understanding of Science and
Technology (The NSF Surveys), 1979 -2016. The NSF Surveys examine repeated
cross-sectional probability surveys of American adults. Initially (1981-2001)
most were random digit dial telephone interviews. More recently (2006-2016) the
General Social Survey (GSS) has conducted in-person interviews. Questions
address science knowledge and attitudes, understanding science inquiry,
information technology access, stereotypes about scientists and engineers,
perceptions of scientists' activities, and extensive demographic information,
especially about education. Several analyses center on how basic S&amp;T
knowledge links to science inquiry understanding, and how both relate to
background variables, and changes over time and by generation. For example, some
current analyses of older adults' use of information technology confound age,
time period, and generation, and thus may contribute to covert age
discrimination among employers who want "tech-savvy" workers. Such analyses
require updating a data archive spanning 1979-2006, amalgamating it with newer
GSS surveys from 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016. A second database
incorporates in-depth items on adult understanding of science processes, making
possible comparisons with responses from youth on the National Assessment of
Educational Progress. Statistical analyses on this project include regression,
analysis of variance, Confirmatory Factor Analysis, structural equation models,
Multiple Classification Analysis, and loglinear models, including mediators and
moderators. Results are disseminated through professional channels and also in
reports more accessible to general audiences.