* 1627793
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Property, Law, and Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Nathan Coben, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 19,812.00

This project examines how markets in a post-financial crisis economy are remade
through legal interventions and how, when mortgages are the key object for
intervening, local understandings of property impact those interventions. The
project focuses on property repossessions, examining, in particular, the role of
local courts. Courts are a key local stage where new property relations are
contested and authorized. While lenders may take courts for granted as rubber
stamps for repossessions, judges and registrars may hesitate to repossess homes.
Exploring emerging practices and theories of law and economy in the context of
property repossessions, the research asks how formal legal institutions and
players define property, property rights, and legal responsibility. The project
also examines lay understandings of property, asking how homeowners and business
owners define property and respond to repossessions. In addition to advancing
knowledge on the interplay between law, markets, courts, and the economy, this
project has broader impacts that include graduate student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rural Irish border region serves as the site
for the research project. The Irish border counties, where formal law and
markets have often had to coexist with significant shadow organizations and
economies, have become a dynamic area where North American hedge fund investors
have bought thousands of defaulting mortgages from Ireland?s weakened financial
institutions, and where rural homeowners contest them in the courts with
defenses that appeal to "sovereign citizen" discourse. The research will use
ethnographic field methods of participant observation, direct observation, semi-
structured interviews, and archival research to analyze how the economic
recovery practically unwinds at the local level and in the context of
bureaucratic registration, court proceedings, and actual repossessions.