* 1627464
* Collaborative Research: Sub-national Analysis of Repression Project
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Christopher Fariss, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 140,660.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do we observe different levels of
respect for human rights in different regions of the same country? Furthermore,
why are citizens? human rights generally uniformly protected (or abused) within
the borders of some countries while within other countries these rights are
generally upheld in some locations and severely restricted in others? Prior
research investigating patterns of human rights protection and violation has
typically treated states as centralized decision-makers and examined state
respect for human rights as a single, countrywide phenomenon. This approach
masks important variations in the actors perpetrating abuses, motives for the
abuse, targets of the abuse, and severity of abuse. The PIs propose that cross-
national human rights researchers must break their focus on the country as the
unit of analysis and look at the sub-national characteristics of repressive
behaviors. The PIs focus on three major factors: 1) antigovernment activity, 2)
government decentralization, and 3) local government capacity. They argue that
antigovernment dissent encourages government agents to respond with high levels
of repression. However, this response is particularly likely when government
power is highly decentralized, when the dissent takes place far from the
national capital, and when the local government is largely incapable of
controlling its repressive agents. The PIs collect the first dataset to document
the level of repression at the subnational level for a global sample of
countries. These data are likely to be used by government agencies,
international organizations, non-governmental organizations, and others to
engage in evidence-based policy and advocacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While levels of state repression and the frequency,
severity, and targets of human rights abuses vary spatially within states, most
previous studies of these topics have only considered repression in the
aggregate. This is problematic because it ignores variation in institutional
structures and decision-making processes within countries. The PIs explain this
subnational variation of repression within states. In particular, they focus on
three major factors: antigovernment activity, government decentralization, and
local state capacity. They develop a global dataset that captures violations of
physical integrity rights by state agents at the level of the sub-national unit.
For this project, the PIs rely on a mix of expert coding, theoretically informed
measurement models, and computational techniques, which are capable of coding
and then linking together the diverse information drawn from a set of primary
source documents. Using this information, they generate standards-based measures
for each of several specific types of physical integrity violations (arbitrary
detention, torture, disappearances, and extrajudicial execution) as well as a
combined indicator for these abuses for each first-order subnational
administrative unit within a state. This level of analysis brings scholarship
closer to the level at which most citizens encounter the government's legal,
political, and bureaucratic authority.