* 1627157
* Social cognition for competition versus cooperation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Adam Waytz, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 382,643.00

Moral judgment depends on an assessment of internal mental states such as
beliefs, intentions, and motivations, and not just external, observable actions.
Thus, forming moral judgments of other people and interacting with them requires
reasoning about their minds--a capacity known as theory of mind. For example,
judging the morality of an action requires questions such as "Did she INTEND to
poison his coffee, or did she THINK it was sugar?" Prior work has examined the
role of theory of mind for moral judgment for some contexts, such as
distinguishing intentional from accidental harms when people make judgments
regarding third-party interactions. However, people are not mere observers.
People are active participants in the social world; they consider the minds of
their social partners with whom they are interacting. Theory of mind processes
may differ in important ways for an active participant in an interaction.
Understanding theory of mind in contexts where individuals' goals involve social
connection and coordination versus strife and social distance may be of
particular societal importance. For example, in a process called dehumanization,
individuals distance themselves from being aware of others as thinking, feeling
agents with intentions and minds. Research suggests people may dehumanize the
enemy to justify their own aggression, either before aggressing or after the
fact. Thus existing research reveals the importance of theory of mind for moral
judgment, and it also provides clues that theory of mind might be modulated by
social context. The current work addresses a key gap in theory of mind research,
by examining systematically how theory of mind is deployed for social
interaction in two distinct motivational contexts--competition and cooperation.
This project uses methodological and theoretical approaches from social,
cognitive and developmental psychology and neuroscience. Investigating the early
emergence of differences in social cognition for competition versus cooperation
and the underlying neural mechanisms will provide insight for scholars and
policy makers into the scale and nature of the problems at hand. Ultimately,
understanding social cognition across motivational contexts will shed light on
societal problems, from political disagreement to ethnic
discord.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators consider three fundamental
questions about the role of theory of mind in social interaction across
motivational contexts. First, do distinct neural mechanisms support theory of
mind for competition versus cooperation? Second, do distinct developmental
trajectories underlie theory of mind across these contexts? Third, what are the
social consequences of these differences for intergroup conflict, such as
whether people support diplomatic efforts? The research will use functional
magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the neural processes in typically
developing adults and adults with autism, a neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by difficulties with social interaction. To track the
developmental trajectories, the research will apply novel paradigms to typically
developing children between 3 and 5 years of age, an age group associated with
emerging theory of mind capacities. To investigate the social consequences of
possible differences in theory of mind processes and to test the impact of an
intervention, the research will examine existing groups in society with a
history of conflict. By integrating social psychological, developmental, and
cognitive neuroscientific methods, the project aims to provide a comprehensive
account of how theory of mind operates in real and consequential contexts of
social interaction. In addition, testing whether cognitive impairments are
associated with an inability to distinguish between these contexts will also
advance our understanding of the cognitive capacities that enable most people to
be able to make such distinctions. Finally, the research may provide preliminary
guidance on how situations of potential intergroup conflict may be reduced via
theory of mind processes.