* 1627691
* NSF/SBE-BSF: Ideological Differences in Emotion Regulation Processes in Interpersonal and Intergroup Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* John Jost, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 488,973.00

In social science, journalism, and popular culture we hear a lot about
ideological differences in everyday domains such as life satisfaction, empathy,
and intergroup relations. At the heart of these issues are the emotional
experiences and reactions of individuals in their daily lives. Some research has
examined ideological differences in emotional reactions and attitudes toward
outgroups. This project examines more complex, deliberative processes namely,
the ways in which individuals attempt to control or regulate their emotions in
various domains of life. Understanding the various ways in which people regulate
their emotions has implications not only for understanding ideological
differences in fundamental emotional processes, but also for the outcomes of
these processes. Furthermore, an appreciation of the different types of emotion
regulation strategies that work best may hold the key to developing
interventions designed to improve personal well-being as well as relations among
various groups in society.

The proposed research involves three phases designed to illuminate ideological
differences in emotion regulation processes in these two domains of life,
explain these differences, and to develop catered interventions based on these
differences. In 11 studies conducted in two countries (the United States and
Israel, the latter of which is supported by the Israeli government), Dr. John
Jost from New York University and his Israeli collaborator, Dr. Eran Halperin,
will combine different methodologies to meet all three objectives. The first
phase examines and maps how ideology shapes emotion regulation in the two
domains using large-scale surveys, experience sampling, and EEG. In the second
stage they examine four possible mechanisms that may drive ideological
differences in emotion regulation through experimental manipulation of these
mechanisms. Finally, in the third stage, they develop emotion regulation-based
psychological interventions and test their effectiveness in improving well-being
and intergroup relations.