* 1627358
* Collaborative Research: Legislative Audiences and Dear Colleague Letters
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Janet Box-Steffensmeier, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 182,984.00

General Summary Democratic representation is based on the ideal that elected
leaders represent the values of the electorate. This view has informed much of
the study of Congress as a collection of independent members concerned with
their electoral fortunes, yet it does not account for the relationships that
members must maintain with competing audiences beyond the voters. This project
advances our understanding of congressional behavior by examining how members of
Congress balance the expectations of six distinctive audiences: voters, parties,
colleagues, contributors, interest groups, and the media. Viewing Congress as
part of a larger network of the legislature and its audiences leads to a fuller
understanding of the behavior of members that better reflects the realities of
the 21st century Congress, while also addressing pluralist and elitist
perspectives on interest groups and Congress. Through the creation of a new
measure of policy collaboration and a data set of congressional communications,
this project provides new insights into the relationships between members, with
interest groups, and how they set priorities within the constraints of the
contemporary legislature. The results of this research will provide a more
comprehensive understanding of how relationships inside and outside of the
legislative environment affect policy outcomes, the functioning of the
legislature, and our understanding of democratic representation. Technical
Summary This project offers a new theoretical explanation of legislative
behavior based on the audiences that members of legislature must appease and the
actions that they take to do so. We address important questions of how members
of Congress use interest groups to advance their own agenda, how members benefit
from collaboration with their colleagues, and how members choose to prioritize
and promote different types of legislation. The PIs apply recent innovations in
text analysis and network methods to create a new measure of collaboration in
Congress based on Dear Colleague letters. These letters provide unprecedented
insight into the political objectives and coalition strategies of members of
Congress that will be of use to scholars studying each of the branches of
government. Quantitative analyses are supplemented by interviews with
congressional staff to provide a richer perspective on the motivations and
strategies of members of Congress. Ultimately, the results of this research will
allow us to move beyond the traditional understanding of Congress to account for
the relationships that members must maintain within a complex network of the
legislature and its audiences and provide a clearer picture of how these
relationships affect the policies produced by Congress.