* 1627850
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography/ROGER REVELLE Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2017
* USD 221,599.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the R/V Roger
Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel. The vessel is operated by Scripps
Institution of Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. R/V Roger Revelle is a Global vessel
owned by the Navy. She supports multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all
of the world?s ocean basins.

In 2015, R/V Roger Revelle completed 306 days, 178 (58%) of which were for NSF.
The schedule for 2016 shows Revelle with 314 total days with 150 (48%) of them
for NSF. Oceanographic Instrumentation in this proposal includes requests for:
1) 24-Place Rosette R/V Roger Revelle $32,800 2) Sea-Bird SBE32 24-Place
Carousel $18,490 3) CTD Equipment Packages $170,309 4) Precision Salinometer
$77,713 $299,312

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.