* 1627554
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Native Chinese Listeners and Second-Language Chinese Learners Process Tones in Word Recognition: An Eye-tracking Study
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Jie Zhang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,037.00

Chinese is becoming an increasingly important language on the international
scene. Accordingly, it has become a commonly taught language in foreign language
programs in the United States, and thus an increasingly large number of native
English speakers are learning Chinese. Importantly, Chinese and English differ
in the types of information they use to convey meaning in words: unlike English,
Chinese uses lexical tones (i.e., pitch movement) to contrast word meanings
(e.g., in Chinese, the word "ma" can mean mother, hemp, horse, or scold
depending on its lexical tone). This difference between Chinese and English
poses word recognition difficulties for English-speaking learners of Chinese.
This doctoral dissertation project examines how native Chinese listeners and
proficient adult English-speaking learners of Chinese use tonal information in
word recognition as the speech signal unfolds in time.

Two visual-world eye-tracking experiments will be conducted to investigate three
potential differences between native Chinese listeners and English learners of
Chinese in their use of tonal information in word recognition: (i) their
potentially different sensitivities to the early pitch height of the tone (high
vs. low); (ii) their potentially different sensitivities to fine-grained
variability in this early pitch height; and (iii) their potentially different
abilities to use the complete pitch contour of the tone. It is hypothesized that
the time course of use of tonal information will differ between Chinese and
English listeners, with English listeners showing more sensitivity to fine-
grained early pitch height information than Chinese listeners (suggesting less
categorical perception of lexical tones) but ultimately having more difficulty
in using pitch contour information in word recognition. The findings of this
research will make an important contribution to the understanding of how tonal
information modulates word recognition in native Chinese listeners and English-
speaking learners of Chinese, and it will have pedagogical implications for the
teaching of Chinese.