* 1627271
* Collaborative Research:  Violence, Non-Violence and the Effects of Human Rights Laws
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Geoffrey Wallace, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 67,362.00

This project studies the relationship between human rights law, human rights
violations, and public opinion. How do legal rules affect whether publics
approve of human rights violations? To what extent does public opinion depend on
whether opposition movements and governments use non-violent or violent tactics?
The answers to these questions have important implications for our understanding
of governance and the relationship between state and society. By studying these
relationships, this project will have substantial intellectual, social, policy,
and educational impacts. It will provide policy makers, practitioners, and the
human rights community with a better understanding of the conditions under which
human rights law can affect public opinion toward governments. The project
results will aid the actors and institutions involved in the design,
implementation, and advocacy for compliance with human rights law. The project
will allow practitioners to better anticipate the impacts of violent crises and
to determine the conditions under which legal institutions and legal rhetoric
can be used more effectively to constrain governments and prevent additional
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses these questions through the
use of survey experiments. Although the fields of political science and law have
developed important theories about the human rights abuses and their
relationship to international law, these theories rely on untested assumptions
about public opinion. We know very little about how publics respond to human
rights abuses. In many situations, publics are opposed to such activities, but
in certain contexts publics seem to favor these activities. The survey
experiments will consist of randomly administered hypothetical fact patterns. We
will conduct the surveys in several countries. These experimental tools will
allow us to systematically assess the underlying causal relationships and causal
mechanisms. We will identify the extent to which and the conditions under which
violations of human rights law have causal effects on public opinion. In
addition, the project will identify how law has such effects by systematically
testing against each other the main pathways through which legal principles may
affect public opinion.