* 1627005
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Household Response To Changing Environmental, Demographic And Social Conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Jenna Santy, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 25,195.00

Researchers wish to understand the processes by which societies become
"complex"; that is, under what kind of conditions a group came to be
differentiated and/or stratified. However, many existing models for studying
incipient social complexity overlook crucial variation in societies whose
changing social-political order cannot readily be characterized as more or less
hierarchical (e.g., when communities seem to be changing in composition, but not
with evidence of increasing inequality.) Additionally, climatic instability and
a changing resource base are frequently identified as factors contributing to
social upheaval and reorganization. These issues have relevance to our own
society, and examination can contribute to an understanding of the ways in which
individuals in a society can react to and gird against dramatic ecological and
environmental changes. How does resource scarcity or unpredictability affect
community organization? And why does social inequality, as in this particular
case study, not arise where we might expect it to? Archaeology in general, and
this project specifically, is uniquely positioned to address these questions.
Excavations for this project will be conducted at a site that has been subject
to looting; this project will illustrate that looted sites can still be
informative to researchers and should remain subject to protection. Community
outreach in the form of talks and presentations to emphasize the importance of
respecting and protecting local archaeological resources are a key part of this
project.

Dr. Gregory D. Wilson and Jenna K. Santy, of the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB), will investigate changes in social organization during two
periods of pre-Columbian occupation in Owens Valley, in eastern California.
During a time period when known changes occurred (such as the introduction of
the bow and arrow, the introduction and spread of pottery, dramatic shifts in
food resources, and increasing climatic instability), how was small-scale,
village-level social organization changing as well? Using household-level data,
obtained by excavation supported by NSF but also from existing, un-analyzed
collections, this project will investigate how individual household subsistence
strategies compared to neighboring households, and will assess how space was
used and organized differently. Spatial analyses include a method using
chemical-isotopic levels in soil as a proxy for activity areas, as certain
activities (such as eating and food processing) leave traces in soil visible
long after the activities occurred. This project will also assess where certain
features of village life were located: where were cooking and storage activities
taking place? Inside the house, away from the eyes of others in the village? Or
in open space, suggesting a communal orientation? Excavation will be carried out
by undergraduate and graduate student volunteers, who will be trained in field
methods as part of this project.