* 1627971
* Choosing to learn: Investigating the factors that drive preschoolers' exploration
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Elizabeth Bonawitz, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 651,328.00

Children in the earliest stages of life behave like intuitive scientists -
observing the world, forming theories about how the world works, predicting
possible consequences of their theories, and intervening to test their
predictions. What is not clear is how these "intuitive scientists" go about
deciding when and which exploration opportunities to pursue. This research
investigates whether children are motivated to explore when there is high
expectation in "Information Gain" i.e., "the degree to which a learner can
expect to update her beliefs" and examines whether exploration is sensitive to
variation in factors that will influence information gain. Identifying the
factors that influence efficient active learning in early childhood is important
because it could lead to understanding broader developmental differences in
drive for learning, with direct consequences for the development of informal and
formal educational practices. Extending these findings to under-represented
populations may help us to develop early interventions that improve the lives of
these populations.&lt;br/&gt;Several sets of studies are planned. One set will
examine whether children track probability information and are able to use
expected reward to drive decisions. The second set of studies investigate
whether children are motivated to explore an object longer and more variably
when they believe learning about it will be more difficult (have higher
information gain). The remaining experiments examine children's choices between
two uncertain outcomes. One set of studies assess whether children consider the
effects of evidence prior to exploring events with potential information gain.
The second set of studies looks at information gain in the context of children's
beliefs - specifically, whether children who are transitioning between beliefs
are more motivated (as compared to children who are more confidently rooted in
their current beliefs) to seek information that will help them learn.