* 1627179
* Workshop: Designing Systems to Address Global Challenges; Corvallis, Oregon; April 1-4, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Irem Tumer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop brings together educators and researchers in the fields of
Engineering Design and Systems Engineering to assess the state of the art in
these fields with the objective of addressing global, real-world challenges that
impact people, our planet, and the economy. The workshop attendees will work
together to identify promising directions for future research, exploit the
synergies between the two fields, and strengthen the design and innovation
capabilities of practitioners. Additionally, current NSF grantees from both ESD
and SYS programs (Engineering and Systems Design; Systems Science) will be able
to present posters explaining their work and get feedback from their colleagues
and the program director. Participants will identify and discuss past
contributions that have had a strong impact on education and practice. and
discuss their domains of applicability, their limitations, and what needs to be
done to strengthen their future potential and impact. Junior faculty will be
given an opportunity to do 'elevator pitches' to help them network with
established researchers in the Engineering Design and Systems Engineering
communities.

The main objective of the workshop is to enable the engineering design and
systems engineering communities to exchange ideas and find synergies. The
workshop will bring together about 150 researchers and divide them in small
groups of ten to discuss three specific topics. The workshop will have
significant impact on the research conducted in engineering design and systems
engineering because of the unique challenges and opportunities of designing
systems that address global challenges. Such systems require designers to work
in a context in which the artifact being "designed" is no longer under their
control, but rather evolves through interactions between multiple/many
stakeholders, effectively resulting in complex adaptive systems. This unique
context will have an impact on the choice and characteristics of design methods
because, rather than making decisions about the artifact, one would need to
worry about how to influence other stakeholders so that they make choices that
as a whole lead to desirable outcomes. To address this objective, the workshop
will conduct discussions on three topics: (1) What are the greatest and unique
research challenges and roadblocks? (2) What constitutes good research & good
research methods? (3) What are the gaps and unique opportunities for developing
synergistic methods between engineering design and systems engineering
communities?