* 1627479
* Understanding Changing Inequality within Families in the United States, 1960-2015
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Joseph Whitmeyer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 203,966.00

SES-1627479 Stephanie Moller Joseph Whitmeyer University of North Carolina at
Charlotte

Family income inequality in the United States has increased since the latter
half of the twentieth century, reflecting a reversal of a long period of
declining income inequality. In explaining this upswing, many researchers have
focused on a shrinking middle class and polarization of income. Yet, this
explanation is most relevant for White, two parent families. Changes in income
inequality have unfolded differently for other family types, a pattern that is
often overlooked in the extant literature. As a result, researchers do not yet
know whether factors that shape aggregate patterns of inequality apply to
changes in income inequality for sub-segments of families by race and family
structure. This is an important gap in the literature as the United States is a
diverse society. The proposed research will assess the extent that economic,
demographic, and political shifts since the 1960s affect household income
inequality among diverse families. This research will contribute to data
infrastructure by developing two comprehensive, historical datasets: The
Comparative U.S. Counties Dataset which will include decennial data 1960-2010
and the Comparative U.S. States Dataset which will include annual data
1960-2015. These data will be combined with household data from the Census
Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics to examine the extent that predictors
of aggregate changes in inequality explain within-group inequality. The datasets
will be distributed to other researchers, and the findings will be distributed
through research articles and policy briefs. This project provides invaluable
training for a graduate research assistant and opportunities for other graduate
students to utilize these data for thesis and dissertation research. The
investigators will examine income inequality among subgroups of families,
dividing them by race and family structure. The proposed study will include two
sets of analyses. First, utilizing decennial census data (1960-2010), the
investigators will assign families with children to quintiles of the family
income distribution. They will then create county-level measures of the
percentage of each family type in each quintile of the income distribution. The
investigators will also create a summary measure of inequality within each
group. A hierarchical repeated measures model will allow the investigators to
assess the extent that theories that help explain changes in aggregate income
inequality over time apply to sub-segments of families. In the second set of
analyses, the investigators will analyze family income data from the Current
Population Survey (1967 to 2015). Families will be disaggregated by race and
family structure. Hierarchical quantile regression will assess the extent that
economic and labor market, sociodemographic, and political variables explain
family income at different locations in the income distribution. These analyses
will clarify whether macro level associations identified in the previous step
simply reflect different families? exposure to macro shifts (such as part-year
employment associated with the rise in precarious work) or if the aggregate
patterns predict families? locations in income distributions independent of
individual-level demographics, employment and education.