* 1627972
* Cognitive characteristics of the leaders of language change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Meredith Tamminga, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2020
* USD 126,408.00

The goal of this research project is to deepen our understanding of how dialect
features spread across social groups. A person's accent often provides clues
about their identity, such where they grew up or how old they are. A regional
accent can also influence whether a person is perceived as well-educated,
friendly, ignorant, or stuck-up, meaning accents have real consequences in
people's lives. Linguists have learned a lot about how accent features spread
across social groups through cities and regions, eventually turning into new
languages entirely. But the questions of how accent changes get started in the
first place and then spread from person to person remain unanswered. Whose
accent catches on? Who picks up features of other people's speech?

This project looks at several ongoing changes in the Philadelphia accent with
the goal of identifying what types of people drive these changes forward. The
Philadelphia accent is one of the best-studied accents in the world thanks to
research done in the city since the 1970s, allowing for comparison to older
forms of the accent. In this project researchers record casual conversations
between pairs of Philadelphian friends and conduct acoustic analysis of their
speech in order to identify individuals who have particularly innovative Philly
accents. The same participants then complete a series of experiments and surveys
that provide data about their information processing style, linguistic awareness
and flexibility, and personality. These participant traits are then correlated
with the speech data in order to test hypotheses about what kinds of people are
at the forefront of language change. The results will not only provide a very
fine-grained picture of how language changes over time, but also bring new
evidence to bear on the feedback loop between the characteristics of the human
mind and properties of human social behavior in groups.