* 1627454
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Firm-Level Analysis of the Occupational Effects on Southern U.S. English
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Robin Dodsworth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 16,888.00

Sociolinguists have traditionally found strong correlations between occupation
and linguistic variables. Some approaches rest on the assumption that
occupational effects arise from the differential social needs and goals that
speakers have in different occupations. However, this perspective has never been
investigated using large-scale, quantitative data within a single workplace. The
current study is an analysis of the use of six Southern vowels by speakers in a
range of occupations within a single firm. The current study will address: 1)
whether required job skills correlate with Southern features 2) which features
individuals manipulate on the job versus in casual settings 3) experiences of
linguistic discrimination within the workplace.

This work investigates the use of Southern features among workers at a single
technology firm, providing a more nuanced picture of the relationship between
occupation and linguistic features. Individuals may show linguistic grouping
based on different job skills illustrating the role of the workplace in sorting
individuals into the groups seen in the aggregate. With the addition of
stylistic data from casual, work, and interview settings, this study can more
accurately pinpoint which Southern features speakers avoid for workplace
situations. Lastly, speakers' recounting of experiences of linguistic
discrimination within the workplace will highlight the social consequences that
Southern speakers may face on the job.

This study will further our understanding of how linguistic discrimination
operates within the workplace, and it will specifically identify which features
of the Southern Vowel Shift receive the greatest degree of stigma. The specific
experiences of linguistic discrimination will help to bring awareness to the
importance of language in promoting subconscious discriminatory practices,
allowing for public policy that directly addresses these issues. Direct evidence
tying the use of stigmatized dialect features with negative social outcomes will
provide the foundation for legal protections for workers who speak with non-
standard dialects.