* 1627861
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Designing Voice Analysis Technologies for Mental Health Applications in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Graham Jones, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 28,796.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific research, asks how new, artificial intelligence
(AI)-enabled technologies reshape not only the future of mental health care in
the United States, but also basic assumptions about the relationship between
language, mind, and brain. This research explores these questions through an
ethnographic study of interdisciplinary research teams at three U.S.
universities that are seeking to develop computer-assisted speech analysis
technologies for mental health applications. In the research teams that this
study focuses on, neuroscientists, psychiatrists, psychologists and engineers
are working together to develop technology that can be used to diagnose and
track mental illness by analyzing the formal, acoustic properties of speech
(such as pitch, timbre, intonation, and speed), bypassing its semantic content
(what the words mean) altogether. The project will have implications for the
mental health researchers themselves as they move into uncharted ethical domains
in regards to privacy, surveillance, and the increased diagnostic reliance on
experimental technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beth Semel, under the
supervision of Dr. Graham Jones at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
explores how experts across disciplinary boundaries collaborate to design,
develop and test artificial intelligence-enabled technologies when they appear
to hold very different assumptions about the relationship between language and
inner, psychological states. The researcher hypothesizes that collaborations
surrounding the development of these technologies not only enact fundamental
tensions within dominant views about how language works, but also reflect a re-
working of claims of authority and expertise within U.S. mental health care.
Increasingly, mental health researchers are eschewing traditional techniques of
psychiatric diagnosis, which depend upon patients' subjective, verbal accounts
of their psychological states and clinicians' observational and interpretive
skills. Instead, they are enlisting the expertise of computer engineers who use
AI techniques of pattern recognition to decipher the biomedical significance of
behavioral symptoms. Using ethnographic participant observation, the researcher
will collect data about how psychiatrists, psychologists, neuroscientists and
engineers work together to design, test, and develop voice analysis
technologies. Focusing on teams situated at the confluence of academic,
commercial, and military arenas, this study explores the variety of ways in
which mental illness is conceptualized in terms of scientific, public health,
and national security concerns. By exploring how listening practices can shape
assumptions about speech, and how the production of new listening techniques and
technologies can reshape such assumptions, this research contributes to ongoing
debates in linguistic anthropology about how culture affects understandings of
the way language works.