* 1627382
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effect of rural-urban mobility on livelihood strategies and governance of conservation areas
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Lucy Miller, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2016
* USD 4,410.00

The research supported by this award addresses the question: What role can be
played by smallholder farmers in conservation efforts, given current global
trends of rural livelihood diversification and rapid urbanization? The question
is important because while many smallholder farmers live in areas significant
for conservation, they also often suffer from high levels of poverty, which may
lead them to shift away from strictly agricultural-based modes of living.
Environmentally sustainable efforts to increase good land stewardship and
governance of protected territories over generations may thus be confounded by
increased circulation between rural-urban spaces and changing expectations and
desires. Understanding the effects of urbanization and inter-generational
changes at the local scale is crucial for broader discussions on the role of
smallholder farming in protected areas in our nation's future.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To investigate these issues, Indiana University anthropology graduate
student Lucy Miller, who is supervised by Dr. Eduardo S. Brondizio, will travel
the Gurupá-Melgaço extractive reserve, a protected area of the Brazilian Amazon.
She has chosen this region because it is home to extensive protected areas as
well as to many impoverished smallholder farmers. This combination makes the
conflicts between the two more apparent and easier to study than they would be
in a more developed context. The global trends of rapid urbanization and
processes of rural livelihood diversification are reflected in increasing
reliance on cash income from public sector jobs and government welfare programs
in urban centers. In this context, the researchers will investigate what impact
rural-urban mobility has on livelihood strategies, resource governance across
generations, and rural identity formation. The researcher will gather data
through a combination of social scientific methods, including semi-structured
and in-depth interviews, documentation of the types of rules and social norms in
three of the reserve's communities, and household interviews in each community
to ascertain intra-community variation and the role of mobility in collective
action, rule compliance, contestation, and conflicts. Analysis of this
information will allow the investigators to assess how rapid social change
affects reserve residents' relationships with each other and their environment,
and what implications these evolving relationships have for collective resource
governance. Findings from the research will be of use to policymakers in the
United States who are concerned with improving rural livelihoods while also
promoting environmental conservation. The data will also contribute to improved
social science inter-scalar theory dealing with the relationship between meso-
scale collective governance and local-level household subsistence strategies.