* 1627660
* Three Projects in Econometric Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ulrich Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,260.00

Most empirical methods in economics and the social sciences derive their
validity from the thought experiment on how they would perform in very large
samples. The implicit hope is that ensuring good performance in large samples
leads to acceptable performance in moderately small data sets as well. For some
inference problems, however, it is known that the standard large sample
approximation is too inaccurate to be a reliable guide for the sample sized
typically encountered in empirical work. As a constructive remedy, it is
sometimes possible to embed the original problem in an alternative large sample
approximation that better captures the small sample features. This project aims
at developing such alternative large sample approximations in three empirically
relevant econometric problems: How to conduct inference with persistent time
series; how to account for the presence of a large number of control variates in
a linear regression; and how to conduct inference about the probability and
properties of extreme events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
econometric theory often consider sequences of parameter or tuning parameter
values that lead to a different form of large sample approximations. Prominent
examples include weak instrument asymptotics, local-to-unity time series
asymptotics where the largest autoregressive root takes on values ever closer to
one, and heteroskedasticity and autocorrelations robust inference with a
bandwidth equal to a fixed fraction of the sample size. This research develops
similar alternative asymptotics in three distinct inference problems: The first
project generalizes the local-to-unity model by letting p autoregressive roots,
as well as p-1 MA roots, converge to unity at the appropriate rate. The second
project studies inference about a linear regression coefficient in the presence
of a large number of potential controls, where the control coefficients are
known to satisfy a particular L_2 bound that can be interpreted as a bound on
the R^2 in a regression of the outcome on the controls. The third project
concerns the problem of inference about tail properties based on an i.i.d.
sample, under the sole assumption that extreme value theory to hold for the
largest k observations, for a given and fixed k.