* 1627930
* Collaborative Research: Helium-isotope Systematics Along Seismic Profiles in Tibet to Study Geometry of Indian and Tibetan Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 84,498.00

Himalaya-Tibet is Earth's type example of active continent-continent collision,
between India and Asia, yet the plate-scale geometry remains controversial.
Researchers from Stanford University and the University of New Mexico will
sample and analyze fluids from hot-springs, which are tracers of deeper
structure, in the Himalaya and Tibet to locate the northern limit of the Indian
lithosphere (and southern limit of the Asian lithosphere), hence the northern
limit to which India has been forced (or underthrust) beneath Asia. This effort
will improve scientists' ability to draw accurate cross-sections through the
Himalaya and Tibet to greater depths than previously possible. This new
understanding of Earth?s most dramatic mountain belt and plateau enhances public
interest in science, and offers a natural opportunity to integrate earth science
into high-school curricula. To this end, a new video about the research project
and associated curricular materials designed to meet the Next Generation science
Standards will be produced.

The lithospheric geometry of continental collision remains controversial. There
is no agreement on a single orogenic cross-section in which Indian crust and
mantle penetrate a certain distance northwards beneath Tibet. Instead, growing
seismological opinion supports models with large changes from west-to-east, from
crustal underthrusting to lithospheric delamination (subduction roll-back) to
de-blobbing. Stanford has helped acquire and interpret data from multiple
seismic transects across Himalaya/Tibet. The interpretations of deep reflectors
and converters from these and other published profiles provide testable models
for the geometry of Indian and Tibetan lithospheres as it varies from west to
east across Tibet. Pilot measurements of 3He/4He ratios in hot springs show
significant, and spatially variable, mantle degassing across the Lhasa block in
Chinese Tibet (Xizang and Qinghai). The research team will sample geothermal and
carbonic fluids and associated travertines at up to 60 new locations in Tibet
during two field seasons along several transects chosen for their accessibility,
availability of seismic data, and tectonic/geologic setting. The team will
analyze 3He/4He, 22Ne, 36Ar, delta13C, delta18O, deltaD, 87Sr/86Sr, major and
trace elements to constrain fluid sources (mantle, crustal, atmospheric,
sedimentary, organic), to understand fluid mixing and pathways, and to calculate
reservoir temperatures using multi-component chemical geothermometry. Seismic
data, both broadband teleseismic and near-vertical reflection data, will be re-
analyzed to better understand the source regions and transport pathways of the
sampled fluids. The data will constrain the boundary between Indian cratonic
mantle lithosphere and Tibetan incipiently melting mantle and help define the
mantle suture beneath Tibet.