* 1627272
* Dating Couple Aggression: Using Mobile Technology to Assess Emotions, Vocalizations, and Physiology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 443,232.00

Aggression between dating partners is a serious societal, health, and criminal
justice problem that affects many persons, particularly adolescents and young
adults. Although often understood as a phenomenon that is transmitted across
generations, growing up in an aggressive household does not necessarily lead to
aggressive romantic relationships. Identifying factors associated with
resilience versus risk for young adult dating aggression is an important step
for developing effective and targeted educational and intervention programs.
Much of the prior research focuses on static individual characteristics to
identify who is at risk for dating aggression. However, this study focuses on
the dynamic interplay between individual, contextual and emotion regulation
processes as they unfold in real time. Conflict sensitization theories, which
guide this study, propose that conflict can be escalated when individuals
experience both heightened physiological arousal and behavioral and emotional
sensitivity. Young adult dating couples are relatively unfamiliar with the
challenges of handling conflict in romantic relationships. Therefore they offer
a prime opportunity for understanding how conflict is triggered in everyday
interactions and for linking conflict patterns to earlier family relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study advances science by taking the study of dating
aggression out of the laboratory and into real-world, ecologically-valid home
environments. The study examines everyday interactions between dating partners,
and how individuals adjust and adapt, a process called "self-regulation," via
behavioral, physiological, emotional, and vocal processes. Such processes will
vary in dating couples' home environments as a function of naturally-occurring
changes in relationship stress. These measures capture regulatory processes that
will be time-linked to couple irritation and conflict, allowing for the
assessment of the beginning phases of negative escalation cycles. Smartphone
technology is used to capture momentary assessment of partners' activities,
emotions, spoken words, vocally encoded arousal, and physical proximity. Mobile
health technologies assess physiological arousal through measurements of skin
conductance and heart rate. Using multi-modal cutting-edge methodologies for
data collection in couples' naturalistic environment, this research may provide
new insights into how regulatory systems are linked in real time within and
across partners. The research will also yield new insights about how aggression
affects regulatory processes, and how dating aggression can be reduced.