* 1627583
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: A Blueprint for Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Mapping Multidimensional Compositional Space to Simultaneously Optimize Thermodynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Louis Piper, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 372,925.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Sunlight is a vast source of renewable energy but its
intermittent nature means that its utilization requires a means of storing this
energy. One attractive approach for solar energy storage is to harness the
energy of sunlight to split water into hydrogen and oxygen i.e. solar generated
fuels. The solar generated fuels can be combusted to release energy efficiently
with water as the only by-product. As a result, this approach avoids the
deleterious consequences of greenhouse emissions that accompany the combustion
of conventional fossil fuels. The complex cascade of reactions required to
harvest sunlight and split water into hydrogen and oxygen present a formidable
scientific challenge. The project seeks to develop hybrid materials as the
catalyst for water splitting, such that individual components are assembled and
function synergistically. The project further works towards employing components
that are highly tunable in terms of their energy levels, thereby providing a
versatile platform that can be optimized for converting sunlight and water into
fuel. Employing a judicious mix of calculations from supercomputers and
selective experiments accelerates the rationally design of materials for
efficient solar energy storage within chemical bonds. The project team mentors
young scientists from underrepresented groups and engages K-12 students and
teachers in activities that emphasize the opportunities made available by big
data and solar energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The project
explores the design of programmable heterostructured platforms for
photocatalytic water splitting based on interfacing ternary vanadium oxide
bronzes with semiconductor quantum dots. In the former compounds, metal cations
are intercalated within a variety of open vanadium oxide frameworks, enabling a
multitude of compositional possibilities and considerable energy level tuning.
Moreover, the energy levels of quantum dots can also be tuned as a function of
composition as well as size and the presence of cores. Photocatalytic water
splitting requires not just the appropriate alignment of energy levels but also
precise control of charge transfer dynamics. Interfacing two versatile and
tunable components yields a rich multidimensional space for identification of
effective photocatalytic architectures for water oxidation that yield holes at
potentials only minimally positive to the water oxidation potential, thereby
allowing for efficient conversion of sunlight to solar fuels. The
multidimensional parameter space is mapped through a closely integrated and
iterative combination of first-principles structure prediction, electronic
structure calculations, diversified materials synthesis, detailed spectroscopy,
high-throughput screening, and big data analytics. The activity involves
development of an open-source platform for statistical analysis and mining of
spectroscopic data. A summer research activity engages undergraduates from
diverse backgrounds.