* 1627041
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The production and perception of breathy voice during nasal sounds
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Marc Garellek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 5,423.00

Language users often adjust or enhance their speech to be better understood in
different contexts, such as when speaking in a loud room, or to a person with an
accent, or when speaking on the phone. The study of speech enhancement
strategies addresses important questions about human language, including how
language is perceived by listeners and represented in the mind. Answering these
questions is also vital to both speech therapy and speech technology. For speech
therapy, this understanding can improve methods used in diagnosis and treatment
of disordered speech. For speech technology, this understanding can improve
speech recognition and synthesis, which are both used daily by the public, such
as when calling a company's customer service. Knowledge of the way we enhance
speech also helps researchers understand how and why languages change over time.
This understanding is crucial for educating the public on linguistic diversity,
change, and preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand
what enhancements occur when making nasal sounds, which are found in almost all
languages of the world, including American English. Nasality is a common feature
associated with an individual's voice: in any language, some speakers sound more
nasal than others. This research focuses on how the voice is used to make sounds
nasal. First, the researchers investigate whether speakers of American English
and Brazilian Portuguese produce nasals with voice adjustments from the larynx.
Second, they investigate how the perception of voice influences the perception
of nasal sounds. These two languages differ in their use of nasal sounds, and so
together they provide a better understanding of how different types of nasal
sounds are made in different languages. This knowledge will help clarify how
this particular type of sound is produced and perceived, which has the potential
to improve techniques used to treat disordered speech as well as software used
in speech recognition and synthesis.