* 1627309
* SCHOLARS AWARD: Belief and Communication in the Social Worlds of Adolescents with Severe and Profound Intellectual Disabilities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Danilyn Rutherford, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2018
* USD 31,318.00

Communication is always a leap of faith. But this is particularly the case for
people who work with adolescents with severe and profound intellectual
disabilities. Their interactions with others challenge our understanding of what
a social relationship is and could be. For typically developing children,
language begins with what researchers call the "basic affiliative need" -- the
emotional need for connection -- that compels infants to imitate others and
interpret their intentions in increasingly effective ways. This observation
raises intriguing questions when it comes to interactions involving individuals
who neither imitate nor use conventional signs. What are the effects of the
"basic affiliative need" felt by the family members, aids, therapists, and
teachers who live and work in close proximity with adolescents with severe and
profound intellectual disabilities? How do cultural norms and institutional
constraints influence how they treat adolescents in their midst? How do they
learn to connect with their loved ones, clients, and students across what might
appear to be an unbridgeable gulf? What new social worlds emerge as a result?

This Cultural Anthropology Scholars award supports research-specific training to
prepare cultural anthropologist Dr. Danilyn Rutherford to address these
questions. With guidance from colleagues in the University of California Santa
Cruz Department of Psychology, Rutherford will master methods suited to the
collection of data on the interactions that occur between disabled adolescents
and those who work with them. She will also undertake coursework in speech and
language pathology and special education at San Jose State University to learn
the methods and techniques used with individuals with complex communicative
needs. This is not usual training for cultural anthropologists but it will allow
Rutherford to to carry apply anthropology's traditional methods of ethnographic
fieldwork and participant observation to entirely new domains: speech therapy
sessions with disabled adolescents and informal interactions at school and at
home. The training undertaken through this grant will provide a model for
interdisciplinary collaboration. Rutherford's work will enhance anthropology by
demonstrating what anthropologists can can learn from fields that make general
claims about human development. At the same time, her work will demonstrate how
the intensive methods of cultural anthropology enlarge understanding of human
development and inter-personal communication. Findings from the research enabled
by this training also will benefit members of the special needs population by
helping policy makers and practitioners tailor services more closely to
students' abilities and needs; and it will showcase the creativity of members of
a long stigmatized population and of those who work with them.