* 1627551
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Global Policy, National Law, and Local Economies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Julia Corwin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 15,700.00

What happens when internationally heralded policy approaches to problems
conceived as 'global' problems with 'global' solutions are launched at the
national and local levels? How do international law and global governance
practices play out through particular practices, institutions, and different
levels of government? Do hybrid processes emerge when global regulations are
inserted into already functioning and yet functionally different systems? As a
governing consensus takes shape around the world in particular policy areas,
this project asks how policies that follow this consensus impact local places
and marginalized people, and how, in turn, various actors in these places
respond. It does so by examining global regulations seeking to sustainably
manage electronic waste. E-waste has attracted international attention for the
rapidly growing quantities of electronic devices -- from computers and cell
phones to washing machines -- reaching their end-of-life across the world, and
their management in informal or 'backyard' recycling processes in developing
countries. Since e-waste has been broadly conceived as a global problem, with
regulation focusing on preventing the hazardous processes used by informal
recyclers, this research undertakes a significant re-examination of e-waste as
embedded in wider reuse and repair industries. The project seeks to explain how
two systems -- that of the established unregulated industry and a new
government-authorized corporate sector -- co-exist and potentially even
reinforce each other, and how we understand regulation when its implementation
plays out in unpredictable and potentially contradictory ways. In addition to
advancing theory on the complex relationship between global governance, local
practice, and informality, the findings have policy relevance for regulatory
interventions that target the informal sector in the Global
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the above questions by
examining how e-waste regulation is produced and implemented in India through 17
months of research on used, repair and scrap electronics markets in the National
Capital Region of India, which includes Delhi and its environs. Using primarily
ethnographic methodologies, this research examines the evolution of a hybrid
e-waste management system in India produced by adaptations to the new
regulations and their uncomfortable fit with pre-existing informal industries.
Semi-structured interviews are conducted with a wide range of participants in
Delhi's used electronics markets, including small-scale scrap collectors,
recyclers, IT maintenance experts and international electronics traders, as well
as interviews with policy makers and government officials.