* 1627463
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The role of infrastructure in rural political engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2018
* Nada El-Kouny, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2018
* USD 22,050.00

In recent years, social scientists have devoted increasing attention to
understanding the causes and consequences of grassroots political mobilization
and changing notions of citizenship. However, most of their research has been
conducted in urban locations, often emphasizing the role played by the
experience of urban living and access to global connections in fostering
political engagement. The research supported by this award seeks to answer a
complementary question: If urbanism and globalism are so important, why is it
that rural communities also produce politically active citizens? It is an
important question whose answer will help to better understand the functioning
of participatory democracies throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address this question, Rutgers University anthropology doctoral student, Nada
El-Kouny, with the supervision of Dr. Becky Schulties, will undertake 12 months
of multi-sited research in a rural hamlet and nearby town in Egypt, a country
well-known for political activism and thus a particularly appropriate site for
investigating these issues. The researcher will focus on infrastructure
provisioning as a primary avenue through which rural areas are connected to
often faraway government offices and officials. El-Kouny will use a mix of
social science methods to gather data, including archival research to
investigate the study hamlet's history and government interactions, such as road
building projects, school construction, the coming of electricity, and improved
access to water. She also will map hamlet social, kin, and mobility networks;
conduct a hamlet census; and hold focus groups. In the town, she will interview
key informants to learn more of the town's history. Findings from this research
will improve understanding of citizenship and political activism of rural people
through the lens of the mundane infrastructure through which politics is
experienced in daily life. Findings will also be of interest to policy makers
concerned to explain political mobilization wherever it may occur.