* 1627705
* I-Corps: 3D Curvature-Defined Microenvironments for Cell and Tissue Culturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Shengyuan Yang, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Cell engineering (stem cell technology and cell sorting) has been receiving
increased attention due to its wide and promising applications in disease
diagnosis and treatment, tissue engineering, and regenerative medicine. The
behavioral responses of cells to three-dimensional (3D) micromechanical
environments are of special interest in recent years because the environments of
cells in vivo are 3D in nature. 3D micromechanical environments are much more
challenging to design, fabricate, characterize, and apply for fruitful cell
studies and applications compared with the corresponding two-dimensional (2D)
ones. The curvature of a 3D substrate on which a cell will be growing is one of
the major geometrical parameters of this substrate, and therefore, creating
curvature-defined 3D cell culture substrates is crucial for 3D cell
mechanobiology and bioengineering. This team has invented a first-ever unique
and powerful class of 3D curvature-defined cell culture substrates - micro glass
ball embedded gels. This technology opens up countless opportunities for the
field of cell and tissue engineering and its biomedical applications. The
objective of this NSF I-Corps Teams project is to start the process to promote
and commercialize this newly-invented and patented
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class of cell culture substrates, micro
glass ball embedded gels, introduced in this NSF I-Corps Teams project provides
a unique and useful tool for studying cell and tissue mechanobiological
responses to substrate curvatures and local stiffness, and for other related
cell and tissue engineering researches and biomedical applications.
Specifically, this technology provides the first-ever cell culture substrates
with defined curvatures. The effect of substrate curvature is one of the
fundamental aspects in the currently cutting-edge and very hot area of research:
cell and tissue mechanobiology and bioengineering. This technology also provides
the first-ever cell culture substrates with defined nanometer to micrometer
scale stiffness patterns. These substrates and the similar ones
prepared/fabricated by the same strategy can be used in or extended to any other
studies involving micro- and nanocomposites and interfacial phenomena. The
method, introduced in this project, to prepare/fabricate micro glass ball
embedded gels, opens a new strategy and is transformative for micro- and
nanofabrication of even or uneven regular or irregular shaped (substrate)
surfaces or arrays or patterns or composites.