* 1627439
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Environmental Risk on the Development and Maintenance of Cooperation and Community Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Lee Cronk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 16,300.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, asks whether natural disasters bring
people together or drive them apart. Research on the evolution of human behavior
suggests that the human capacity for cooperation may be partially a result of
our earliest ancestors' need to cope with variable climates and resource
scarcity. This issue is of particular importance in the present when even the
world's most remote populations are affected by both global economic integration
and the effects of climate change. Cooperation often provides a viable solution
for both communities and national governments to mitigate the negative effects
of risks such as economic crises, transnational resource conflicts, and threats
to national security. However, efforts at cooperation are often stymied by
resource shortages, conflict, and the competing goals of populations and
interest groups. The proposed research will focus on the individual and
community-level responses to natural disasters among a small group of nomadic
herders that are highly susceptible to severe weather.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Conte, under the supervision of Dr. Lee Cronk of
Rutgers University, will explore what impact environmental risk has on the
development and maintenance of cooperation and community resilience. The
research will be conducted among two communities of nomadic livestock herders
living in sub-arctic northern Mongolia. This site is selected for exploration as
it is highly susceptible to severe winter disaster conditions (known as zud in
Mongolian) in which severely cold temperatures or blizzard conditions cause
widespread livestock mortality. In the most severe cases, winter disasters can
lead to the loss of families' entire herds and millions of livestock deaths on a
national scale. Thus, they represent a major contributor to rural poverty in the
region. Given that northern Mongolia is distant from major urban centers,
herders must rely on their own efforts to both prepare for and recover from
winter disasters, and these efforts often come in the form of cooperation with
other herding families. The researchers will assess how livestock herders
respond to natural disasters by analyzing herders' social networks of labor
exchange, interviewing families regarding their efforts to prepare for and
recover from natural disasters, and comparing individuals' willingness to
cooperate with others during disasters in an experimental economic scenario.
This research will employ semi-structured interviews, social network analysis,
and experimental economic games. Findings from this research will provide
greater insight on how environmental risk affects the development and
maintenance of cooperation in small-scale societies. In addition, research
findings can also inform future policy directions on how community-based
decision making and cooperation can increase communities' resilience to natural
disasters both in Mongolia and the United States.