* 1627442
* CAREER: Algorithms for single molecule sequence analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Michael Schatz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,196,855.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is awarded a CAREER grant for the PI Michael
Schatz to develop new computational methods for processing DNA sequencing data
from the latest high-throughput sequencing technologies. DNA sequencing costs
and throughput have improved by orders of magnitudes over the last three
decades, although many questions remain unsolved, especially because of the
short sequence lengths currently available. Emerging "third generation"
sequencing technology from Pacific Biosciences, Moleculo, Oxford Nanopore, and
other companies are poised to revolutionize genomics by enabling the sequencing
of long, individual molecules of DNA and RNA. The sequence lengths with these
technologies can reach up to tens of thousands of nucleotides, however few or no
analysis packages are capable of dealing with these types of genetic sequence
data. This project will overcome these limitations by developing several novel
analysis algorithms specifically for long read single molecule sequencing and
their associated complex error models. The outcomes will help answer biological
questions of profound significance to all of society, such as: What were the
genetic implications of the domestication of rice? What genes and regulatory
elements give rise to the incredible regenerative properties of the flatworm?
or, What can be understood from assembling reference genomes of sugarcane and
pineapple towards breeding more robust plant crops and
biofuels?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the research include
working towards assembling entire plant and animal chromosomes into complete,
haplotype-phased sequences; identifying fusion genes and complex alternative
splicing patterns responsible for diseases or adaptability; and searching for
structural variations associated with improved crop yield or human diseases such
as cancer or autism. Even if some future technology is capable of directly
reading entire transcripts or entire genomes, this research will remain
necessary to examine the higher level relationships across populations of
genomes or in measuring the dynamics of gene expression and
splicing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will tightly integrate research and
education, promoting opportunities at high school through postdoctoral levels
with the development of new course materials, hands-on research opportunities,
and one-on-one mentoring experiences. This effort will specifically target the
intersection of computer science and biology, promoting interdisciplinary
education, and ensuring the next generation of scientists are ready for the
complexities of quantitative and digital biology. To engage the widest possible
audience, Dr Schatz will also develop novel online teaching materials made
available through a yearly bioinformatics contest. The first round of the
contest reached nearly 1000 students around the world and at all levels of
education, engaging students far beyond our physical limits. The products of the
research will be made available as open-source software, and installed into the
graphical iPlant Discovery Environment making them easily accessible to the
large community of plant researcher around the world.