* 1627109
* OTREC: Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2019
* USD 21,435.00

This award funds planning and organizational activity for a field campaign
titled Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection (OTREC). By making the
award NSF encourages the PI and his collaborators to submit a set of proposals
requesting support for each of the various campaign activities, which are
reviewed collectively at a later date. This second round of reviews determines
whether the campaign goes to the field and what elements of the campaign are
supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of OTREC is to understand the
formation and development of tropical convective clouds and their associated
heavy rainfall in the adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial
Pacific and the southwest Caribbean. The sea surface temperature (SST) in the
eastern equatorial Pacific has a strong north-south temperature contrast, with
temperatures increasing northward from the "cold tongue" produced by the
upwelling of deep water along the equator. Winds near the surface generally blow
in the direction from colder to warmer SST until they reach the intertropical
convergence zone (ITCZ), roughly between four and twelve degrees north of the
equator. The ITCZ is a narrow region of cloudiness and convection which is
generally regarded as a consequence of wind convergence near the surface. But
the PI hypothesizes that other factors are required to produce deep, organized
convection and heavy precipitation found in the eastern Pacific ITCZ. These
other factors include atmospheric stability, mid-tropospheric vorticity (a term
which combines rotation and horizontal shear of the wind), and moist
thermodynamics, combined in a theory developed by the PI and others (see for
example AGS-1546698).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, the southwest Caribbean
is a region of uniform SSTs which do not favor low-level wind convergence, and
air at mid-tropospheric levels tends to be quite dry. These conditions are
unfavorable for convection yet convection forms regardless, and the campaign
seeks to understand the mechanisms through which the obstacles to convection are
surmounted. One possible mechanism involves atmospheric motions forced by the
adjacent Central American landmass, either by the diurnal cycle of solar heating
or the blocking effects of topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further issue to
be addressed is the formation mechanisms of easterly waves, which are the most
frequent weather disturbances in the tropical east Pacific and in the SW
Caribbean. Easterly waves are westward-moving atmospheric disturbances with
wavelengths of roughly 2,000km which appear on a weekly basis and sometimes
develop into hurricanes. Easterly waves over the Atlantic and Caribbean
generally originate over Africa (see for example AGS-1433764), but the formation
mechanisms for easterly waves in the eastern equatorial Pacific are unclear.
OTREC campaign data would be used to determine the relative contributions of
mechanical and thermodynamic mechanisms to the formation and intensification of
these waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OTREC would use the Gulfstream V (GV) research
aircraft maintained by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) as its primary observing platform. The GV would be
based in Costa Rica, allowing easy access to the east Pacific and southwest
Caribbean. Observations of winds, pressure, temperature and humidity would be
taken using dropsondes, which use essentially the same instrument package as
standard weather balloons only dropped from the aircraft with a small parachute.
Additional cloud measurements would be taken with a W-band radar mounted in a
wing pod, and ground-based observations are also proposed for the campaign. A
key objective of the campaign is to determine the convective mass flux
associated with tropical convection, as this quantity plays a central role in
the theory of convective cloud development which the campaign seeks to
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical convection plays an important role in
weather and climate, as it can produce extreme precipitation and develop into
hurricanes with damaging impacts. It can also perturb atmospheric circulation in
ways that affect weather and climate over long distances, as can be seen for
example in the effects of El Nino events on the continental US. Thus research on
tropical convection is of societal as well as scientific interest, as better
understanding of tropical convection can lead to improvements in models used to
forecast daily weather and anticipate climate variability and change. The
campaign would also have broader impacts through the development of
international scientific partnerships with researchers in Central America, and
would provide a valuable educational opportunity for graduate students in
atmospheric science.