* 1627757
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Effective Data Tracking in the Regulation of Food Supply Chains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 13,667.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific research, explores the factors that influence
effective data tracking in the regulation of food supply chains. The ever more
prevalent outbreaks of food-borne illnesses have caused consternation across the
world over the safety of our food. For example, in 2014, the European Union (EU)
alone issued 3,792 food recall alerts, ranging from dangerous bacteria to
defective packaging. These threats of food contaminants have pushed the World
Health Organization and the United Nations to incorporate food traceability -
the ability to track a food product's origins - into their initiatives for
assuring a secure global food supply. Public health officials view documentation
about food's origins and pathways as a necessary component of controlling risk
within the supply chain. In practice, however, food traceability regulation
often does not take the values of safety, quality, and knowledge of food
producers into account. Understanding how the local conditions of food
production conflict with food safety regulation is critical for developing
better policies to protect all Americans from the dangers of food contaminants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Gregory Kohler, under the supervision of
Dr. Keith Murphy of the University of California at Irvine, will investigate the
dynamics of data collection and regulation of food supply chains. Through an
ethnographic study of a dairy cooperative, Mr. Kohler will examine how food
traceability operates both as a tool for knowledge production and as a mechanism
of governance by looking at the ways food traceability has expanded outside the
realm of health into supply chain management more generally. The methods include
participant observation in the dairy cooperative headquarters and member farms,
interviews with farmers, managers, inspectors, and regulators, video-based
linguistic anthropological data collection and analysis, and behavioral
experiments involving the collaborative analysis of video and audio data with
informants. Besides increasing scientific knowledge of the societal effects of
food regulation on farming communities, findings from this research will inform
debates surrounding the role of data tracking in constructing knowledge across
various issues, including food, national security, and quality control.