* 1627068
* Neural measures of social reward and information value in infants
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Rebecca Saxe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Infants' limited ability to communicate makes it difficult to know what they are
thinking. Researchers often measure babies' visual attention as a way to infer
their understanding and interest. However, knowing that infants prefer to look
at one display versus another does not necessarily indicate why they prefer it.
Some attentional preferences are driven by how much the infant seems to like the
stimulus, referred to as its reward value. Other preferences are driven by
infants' desire to take in new information and learn more about the world. The
goal of the proposed research is to study different patterns in babies' brain
activity to determine which of these two reasons, reward value or information
value, explains their attentional preferences.

The proposed experiments will use functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
to measure hemodynamic responses to neural activity in medial and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex while infants watch and listen to two different speakers. In
some experiments, the speakers will differ in how friendly and infant-directed
their speech is (i.e., social reward), while in others they will differ in how
richly structured the content of their speech is (i.e., information value). All
experiments will end by testing to which speaker the infants prefer to attend
and/or how much they have learned about the presented speech patterns. These
experiments will test the hypotheses that activation in medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) is associated with social reward value and activation in dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is associated with information value. Moreover, they
will assess the extent to which activation in MPFC and DLPFC during stimulus
presentation predict subsequent social preference and statistical learning,
respectively. The project will also involve scientific training of students from
underrepresented groups and underprivileged backgrounds, and conducting
information sessions for new parents about infant brain development.