* 1628832
* I-Corps:  VeriSight CPS: Enhancing the Design and Operation of Cyber-Physical Systems with Verified Insight
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Sanjit Seshia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) tightly integrate computation with physical
processes. Examples include modern automobiles, medical devices, toys, drones,
robots, smart thermostat and HVAC systems and many more. The commercial
potential of these systems has been recognized with the growing buzz around the
"Internet of Things (IoT)." As the design of CPS/IoT systems goes mainstream,
from a research, hobbyist, and niche industrial activity to a mainstream, large-
scale industry, the design challenges are mounting. A primary challenge is to
help designers and users gain better insight into their systems: what behaviors
the systems must and must not have, why they exhibit certain desired/undesired
behaviors, and how to design and implement them to achieve desired behavior.
This project proposes to create a software toolkit, VeriSight CPS, and
investigate its capabilities to meet this challenge. VeriSight can be used to
answer queries about a system at various phases of the design and operation of a
system. Industrial impact of the VeriSight toolkit is anticipated in several
areas, including transportation, robotics, and medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this project are to develop
a software toolkit to assist in the specification, design, verification,
debugging,optimization, and maintenance of cyber-physical systems, and to
investigate its effectiveness in a focused set of applications of high impact.
The underlying theory is a novel blend of formal methods for design automation
and machine learning. Unlike mainstream machine learning and data analytics
techniques, VeriSight CPS involves the use of verification technology to analyze
models and to answer queries. The envisioned contributions of the project
include a general software architecture for VeriSight CPS applicable to multiple
application domains, the investigation of various user interaction models, and
an exploration of industrial applications in key CPS domains including
transportation, medical devices, and robotics. A key part of this Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) project will be to interview potential customers, e.g., those
from the categories listed above, and determine which options will be the most
fruitful.