* 1628566
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Free Trade Agreements on Supply Chain Logistics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* William Kelly, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 867.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific research, asks how people, corporations, and
environments are affected by intensifying free trade agreements. In 2015, the
United States, Japan, and ten other Pacific nations finalized negotiations over
the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), heralded as the centerpiece of U.S. trade
policy's "pivot towards Asia." Free trade removes trade barriers such as tariffs
and quotas, opening up local industries to international competition. These
developments in economic policy impact the lives and livelihoods of agricultural
producers and everyday consumers around the globe, in both developed and
developing worlds. They determine the kinds of products that are available to
consumers, shape the ways that corporations operate and relate to each other,
and dictate agricultural practices on the ground. Often this can have
significant agricultural ramifications. Free trade deals promote large-scale
plantation industries, which have the dual effect of making affordable food more
widely available, while promoting a culture of monocropping (the practice of
growing a single crop on a very large scale, often with the intensive
application of herbicides and pesticides). Monocultures also amplify the genetic
narrowing of plant species, creating crops that are biologically more vulnerable
to disease and commercial extinction. The data from this research will aid
organizations, officials, and scientists engaged in identifying environmentally
sustainable models for supply chain management in food production.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Alyssa Paredes, under the supervision of Dr. William Kelly of Yale
University, will explore how alternative supply chains evolve effective and
scalable organizational structures and logistics in response to changes in free
trade agreements. In recent decades, fair trade schemes, community-supported
agriculture, organic farming, food co-ops and the like have strived to support
local industries and preserve agro-biodiversity in the face of changes in trade
and agriculture. In the United States and other industrial nations, however,
these efforts have struggled to scale up, remaining dependent on niche markets
and catering mostly to higher social classes. This project will investigate
these questions through research conducted on a successful alternative trade
model between the Philippines and Japan. It will focus on a wild Cavendish
banana supply chain, which supports agrobiodiversity in landscapes dominated by
monocropped plantations, and encourages civic participation for all the
stakeholders involved. In order to understand supply chain management and
logistics from the ground up, it will involve immersive research at sites for
production, processing, packaging and transport in the Philippines, to sites for
distribution, marketing and consumption in Tokyo and Fukuoka, Japan. It will pay
particular attention to how stakeholders maneuver recent changes in trade
policy, such as TPP. To analyze the impacts associated with each node of the
supply chain, this project will use Life Cycle Assessment (ISO140140), a
framework for the quantitative and qualitative assessment of inputs and outputs
of the commodity system.