* 1628879
* The Distributional Impact of Price Changes over the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrei Levchenko, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 433,484.00

The PIs plan to use data on retail prices and consumer expenditures to evaluate
how retail prices change in response to business cycle shocks. They seek to
determine whether or not goods that are consumed in large quantities by low-
income households respond in a different way than goods consumed primarily by
high-income households. We know from previous research that the composition of a
household's consumption varies with income. In other words, we know that poor
households consume more of some goods, while higher income households consume
more of so-called 'luxury' goods. Understanding how prices of these goods change
with macroeconomic shocks is important. If goods consumed by low income
households become relatively more expensive under inflation, then inflation
increases inequality; high income households see a smaller relative increase in
the prices of the goods they buy. The results of this research are important for
understanding the causes of inequality. They are also important for monetary
policymakers; the results will help clarify the distributional effects of
monetary policy and also help to explain how a monetary shock passes through a
closed economy. The PIs will also train graduate students in the necessary data
analysis methods through work as research assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs study these distributional consequences over the business cycle by using
barcode level retail price data and consumer expenditure data. The first part
studies the distributional implications of large exchange rate devaluations
using price and consumer expenditure data from Mexico. This part of the project
cannot be completed with U.S. data because the dollar has not seen large and
unexpected devaluations. This work is relevant for understanding the effects of
policies like Grexit and Brexit that carry significant implications for exchange
rates. The second part of the project uses barcode level data from the US to
study relative price dynamics over the business cycle and their differential
impact across households of different incomes. In particular, the PIs will
consider whether the relative prices of items consumed disproportionately by the
poor increase during economic downturns and whether the poor consume goods whose
prices are less sticky and are therefore more sensitive to monetary policy.