* 1628643
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cultural-Biological Research on Stress and Gestational Age
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Melissa Cheyney, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2018
* USD 25,623.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the relationship between
culture and biology through the lens of maternal stress and pregnancy outcomes,
particularly pre-terms births. Previous research has shown that some of the
variability in rates of premature birth and thus the health of newborn babies
can be attributed to social and cultural factors. However, little is known about
the mechanisms that connect poverty, racism, and other social determinants with
gestational age at delivery. Oregon State University anthropology doctoral
student, Holly Horan, with the supervision of Dr. Melissa Cheyney, will
investigate the possibility that maternal stress may be one linking factor. This
is an important problem because globally, an estimated 15 million infants are
born preterm each year. Preterm delivery, defined as a live-birth before 37
weeks gestational age, is a leading cause of death among children under five
years of age, and is associated with lifelong, chronic health issues for those
children who survive delivery.

The research will be carried out in Puerto Rico which has the highest rate of
preterm birth in the entire U.S. jurisdiction. Furthermore, the most common
epidemiological variables linked to preterm birth (such as maternal age,
smoking, maternal education, first trimester pre-natal care, and lacking health
insurance) in other places do not account for the rate in Puerto Rico. Recently,
however, researchers have suggested a new avenue of inquiry: a possible
relationship between maternal stress and early delivery, although to date,
findings from these studies have been equivocal due to methodological
constraints. Therefore, Horan will refine stress research methods in order to
more reliably characterize and examine relationships between cultural and
biological factors. She will collect data with a mix of social and biological
methods, including: participant observation; administering the Puerto Rican
version of the Cohen Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and the Revised Prenatal
Distress Questionnaire (RPDQ); hair cortisol concentration (HCC) sampling; and
semi-structured postpartum exit interviews. She will identify cultural models of
maternal stress using exploratory, semi-structured interviews with an initial 25
participants. The PSS, RPDQ, and HCCs will be assessed at three points during
gestation (10 to 12 weeks, 22 to 24 weeks, and 34 to 36 weeks) in an additional
100 women in order to identify trends in stress experiences and hormones by
trimester. An exit interview will be conducted between four to eight weeks
postpartum and a fourth and final hair cortisol sample will be collected from
these 100 participants. Hair cortisol concentrations (HCCs) will be used to
investigate the utility of a simple, non-invasive cortisol measure as a
longitudinal, biological proxy of maternal stress experiences. This study has
the potential to result in a more comprehensive understanding of the social and
structural etiologies associated with maternal stress and poor maternal and
infant health outcomes. These findings will be of interest to policy makers as
well as to researchers who seek to understand the connections between society,
culture, and biology.