* 1628245
* I-Corps: Araknitek - Synthetic Spider Silk Adhesives
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Justin Jones, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Spider silk has long been sought after for its combination of robust fiber
properties and biocompatibility. Until recently, mechanisms did not exist to
explore recombinant spider silks (rSSp) in formats other than fibers. A recent
development to solubilize rSSp in water alone has led to the discovery that
these proteins are also capable of performing as adhesives. To date silicone,
Teflon, polyurethane, stainless steel and wood have been adhered with rSSp. The
testing results were impressive. Not only did rSSp adhere the substrates
together, it did so with remarkable strength. In the case of wood, the wood
would often fail before the adhered joint. Recombinant spider silk adhesive
outperformed both Elmer's wood glue and Gorilla glue. When silicone is coated
with rSSp, taking advantage of its adhesive quality, the coating did not
separate from the silicone when severely bent. With these characteristics, there
are a number of potential product fields that rSSp as an adhesive could satisfy.
This I-Corps team hypothesizes that the biomedical market will be the best fit
for the proposed technology with potential applications as surgical glue,
coatings and others. The team also potentially views certain industrial
applications where an all-natural green adhesive could be favorably received.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's goal of participating in the I-Corps program is
to receive and implement the training necessary to interview as many potential
end users, key partners, as well as points along the value chain, to understand
critical pain points in the adhesives market. The end result of these
discussions will be a definition of our minimal viable product based upon our
business model canvas. Through this analysis, the decision will made to proceed
with commercialization or to go back to the laboratory and refine the product.
The scope of the proposal is to validate commercialization hypotheses by
conducting interviews as described above, over the course of the I-Corps cohort.
The Araknitek team will be conducting over 100 customer interviews over the 7
week period. The team has already identified a number of adhesive product
companies in the Atlanta area and is currently actively soliciting interviews to
be conducted on the first day of the program. Araknitek?s participation in this
I-Corps cohort will culminate in a clear understanding of what is necessary to
make an economic impact with the proposed spider silk technology.