* 1628477
* Credit Markets, Evaluative Technologies, and Social Stratification
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Marion Fourcade, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,998.00

SES-1628477&lt;br/&gt;Marion Fourcade &lt;br/&gt;Kieran
Healy&lt;br/&gt;University of California-Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates how credit markets measure and classify people and
households. Over the past thirty years, access to credit has expanded greatly in
the United States. Middle-class families borrow more, and lower income and
minority families have become incorporated into the banking system. At the same
time, the variety of available credit products has increased, the tools used to
measure and assess creditworthiness have become more sophisticated, and these
tools are increasingly used in new ways that go well beyond their original
purposes. It is important to understand how these tools and their application
affect people's chances for economic prosperity, social mobility, and successful
incorporation into American society. To study how credit markets classify
individuals, researchers need data that combines demographic information with
people's credit market behavior. This project will make use of an original
dataset with these unique features on a scale that goes beyond previous
research. Using detailed anonymous data on individual credit histories in
conjunction with Census data, the project will investigate how scoring
techniques in the credit market are related to demographic patterns and
processes in markets. It will help us better understand the relationship between
credit scoring methods, adverse credit events like debt default, bankruptcy, and
foreclosure, and other socioeconomic factors like employment and household
wealth. It will also help explain why demographic inequality in credit
classification persists even though credit reporting agencies cannot collect or
use demographic data about individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Credit scores are
meant to measure the behavior of individuals as they spend their money. Earlier
research suggests that, in addition to people?s preferences and wants, this
behavior is shaped by various environmental factors such as the local supply of
education and employment, the density of alternative financial services, the
financial resources available to people through their networks, and the credit
market behavior of one's peers. For example, if there is a wave of foreclosures
in one's neighborhood, that may decrease one's own home equity in a way that is
independent of one's individual financial choices. This may in turn affect one's
ability to refinance one's mortgage or make other financial decisions. The
project will investigate the existence and scope of the contextual forces that
affect individual credit and financial security, and contribute new results to
current social-scientific and policy debates about the role of consumer credit
in the economy. The project will also explore other social features of credit
markets and credit scoring. In particular, there is an ongoing debate about
whether the process of monitoring credit and assigning credit scores simply
reflects events in the market or itself exerts some independent effect in that
market. The project?s rich data on credit behavior over long periods of time
will allow the investigation of this question in more detail than has been
possible before now.