* 1628612
* I-Corps: Mining satellite data streams for commercial applications in natural resource monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* John R. Townshend, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Earth's human population has risen over seven-fold, from one to 7.3 billion
people, in the last century and is expected to reach 9 billion by 2050. While
droughts, floods, and other climatological extremes are increasing in frequency
and severity, human population growth and increasing affluence are exerting
unprecedented demands on Earth's ecosystems for food, water, and other
resources. Threats of volatility have resulted in a growing demand for timely,
accurate monitoring of renewable natural resources. Similar to the development
of weather satellites in the past, terrestrial-observing satellites are now
capable of providing consistent, long-term records of past, current, and
projected future resources. There are two principal markets for this
information. Managers of crop, range, forest, and wild lands require timely
geospatial monitoring of land condition in order to plan stocking, treatment,
and harvest levels. Meanwhile, financial entities must monitor these same
ecosystems in order to predict yields, set commodity prices and insurance
premiums, and to price instruments such as catastrophe bonds. To do this, data
analysts in financial (e.g., investment, insurance) and natural-resource
management sectors currently rely on indirect or coarsely scaled information
such as regional tables for their analyses. This I-Corps team has developed a
technology to provide high-resolution monitoring from satellite data streams
that will enable more responsive land management and will increase liquidity and
efficiency in resource and rural land markets. When paired with desktop and
mobile visualization tools, these data have the potential to give resource
managers real-time access to the "pulse of the planet" at local, regional, and
global scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals of this project are to: (1)
validate the value proposition through customer discovery, (2) build a minimum
viable product to demonstrate to potential partners and customers, and (3)
conduct beta tests with early adopters. Based on these goals and the interviews
to be conducted through the NSF I-Corps Teams program, this team will focus its
efforts on specific resource (e.g., agriculture, forestry, urban development)
and business (management, finance, insurance) sectors. The team will then refine
its minimum viable product based on the results of these interviews and develop
customer relationships. The team plans to have its first customer for geospatial
data products. At the end of the I-Corps Teams program, this team will decide
upon the commercial viability of products and services; and if deciding to move
forward, the team will provide a transition plan to do so and a demonstration of
the technology for potential partners.