* 1628874
* The International Price System: Macro and Micro Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Gita Gopinath, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 274,680.00

What is the impact of changes in the U.S. dollar exchange rate for households
and firms around the globe? How do these changes impact inflation and trade
competitiveness? What are the implications for optimal monetary policy and
international spillovers of policy? This project provides new models and new
empirical evidence to answer these questions. First, the PI will collect and
compile data from a large sample of countries on two different issues. First,
the extent to which firms in each country use the U.S. dollar vs other
currencies for invoicing. Second, export and import price indices each country.
The resulting data will demonstrate how the dominance of the US dollar in trade
invoicing creates differences across countries in how exchange rate fluctuations
affect national economies. Graduate students assisting in this project will gain
important skills in analyzing international economic data. The PI and
collaborators will also use unusually detailed data to examine how changes in
the value of the dollar affect individual exporting and importing firms in one
U.S. trading partner country (Columbia). The project will model different
factors that determine how firms respond to exchange rates and how those
responses in turn help to determine exchange rates. Finally, the PI will draw
conclusions about how US monetary policy affects other countries and the
competitiveness of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundations of
international macroeconomics as a science rely on a deep understanding of the
interconnectedness between a country's exchange rate, its trade competitiveness,
its inflation rate, and the economic welfare of its residents and firms. The
project advances knowledge on this topic with novel macroeconomic evidence on
the relationship between the currency of invoicing of a country's imports and
exports and pass-through of its exchange rate to inflation and to its terms of
trade. The second project employs a novel micro data set on Columbian firms that
combines customs data with production and balance sheet information. These
unusually detailed data allow the PI and her team to explore the expenditure
switching, imported input costs and balance sheet channels through which
exchange rate fluctuations impact firms.