* 1628241
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alternative Models of Care for Refugees Seeking Political Asylum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Carla Hung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 18,756.00

The project explores how refugees and caregivers negotiate institutions that are
severely strained administratively during emergency contexts. As the arrival of
a record-breaking number of African and Middle Eastern migrants in Europe
demonstrates, refugee crises seriously strain political asylum systems. Many
nations that receive refugees frequently rely on the humanitarian efforts of
non-state actors that provide care and assistance to these communities.
Religious institutions have increasingly played such a role, provisioning
medical and other forms of assistance to asylum seekers. Such institutions
relieve some of the strain on state facilities, but create new challenges for
the governance and administrative management of asylum claims as asylum seekers
move between state and non-state systems of care. This project, which trains a
graduate student in the methods of conducting empirically-grounded scientific
research, investigates how asylum seekers navigate between these two
institutions of care and draws from their experience to think about alternative
models of care for asylum seekers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Duke University
doctoral student Carla Hung, supervised by Prof. Engseng Ho, will undertake 12
months of ethnographic field research to investigate the impact of church-state
negotiations on the lives of refugees seeking political asylum in Rome, Italy.
Italy is one of the main receiving countries in Europe and the Italian state
deals with this emergency situation by letting Catholic charities help with the
asylum and refugee care process. The inclusion of Catholic charities into
Italy's political asylum system requires church and state actors to negotiate
their different care practices and muddies the separation between church and
state in Italy. Hung will focus on the experience of asylum seekers and care
providers at two sites in Rome: 1) the San Gallicano Hospital - where both a
state-run medical clinic (INMP) and a Catholic aid organization (Community of
Sant'Egidio) collaborate to care for asylum seekers and 2) Salaam Palace - an
autonomous migrant housing occupation where Catholic charity workers assist new
asylum seekers. Research methods will include participant observation of
political asylum care practices, supplemented with content analyses of policy
and activist materials; and extensive interviewing of the medical and social
work staff at the San Gallicano Hospital, the clergy and volunteers of the
Community of Sant'Egidio, and asylum seekers who live or seek services at these
sites. Analysis of this information will seek to answer the following research
questions: 1) How does access to Catholic aid affect whether migrants decide to
seek asylum in Italy? 2) How do church and state actors negotiate to define the
kinds of care available to asylum seekers and how do they determine who is
responsible to provide that care? 3) What does studying the way that asylum
seekers navigate the care practices of these two institutions reveal about how
asylum seekers experience and conceptualize care, asylum, trauma, and charity?
This project will shed light on the impact of Catholic aid in Italy's political
asylum system as experienced by asylum seekers in Italy today. The findings from
this research could contribute to policy considerations on alternative models of
care for asylum seekers in Europe.