* 1628023
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Factors Influencing the Validity of Documentary Evidence in Post-Conflict Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Sarah Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,691.00

This project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, asks how the process of documentation in post-
conflict contexts is impacted by socially based presuppositions about what
evidence is, how it is created, and what makes it credible. In long-term
conflicts around the world, non-combatant women and men are often caught fatally
in the crossfire. Scientific researchers have established that official
estimates of combatant and civilian fatalities are not always accurate, for
myriad reasons. In certain cases, in the interest of inflating body counts to
satisfy recordkeeping and productivity incentives, some state actors have been
shown to falsely - but officially - document civilian deaths as combat kills.
This presents a significant challenge for post-conflict resolution and
transitional justice. This project explores the post-conflict contexts where
such official estimates are contested, and how documentary evidence is produced
and circulated to counter those claims. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations
interested in issues of human rights and post-conflict
reconciliation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sarah Richardson, under the supervision of
Dr. Sarah Wagner of the George Washington University, will explore how cross-
purposed documentation of victims of state violence is examined to shed light on
how knowledge is produced and how documentary evidence come to be invested with
value and meaning in situations of long-term conflict. This ethnographic
investigation will be conducted in Colombia, where over 4000 so-called false
positives (civilians killed and then posthumously dressed up, photographed, and
counted system-wide as guerrilla combatants) have been identified by the state's
own prosecutors. This project proposes that two forms of documentation - by
military personnel and by victims' families - can shed light on how people make
and interpret evidence, establish or damage social relationships, and depict
social experience. The investigation is designed to engage with impacted
families and their documents (through interviews, life histories, and
participant observation) as well as with military documentation (of which an
extensive amount has been presented in court in over 800 prosecutions). The
project's research questions are organized around three aspects of
documentation: how documents reveal or obscure information; how documentation
can serve to materialize what is absent; and how documentation reconfigures
social and symbolic relationships. The research is particularly timely because
Colombia is on the verge of a negotiated peace, ending the Western hemisphere's
longest continuous military conflict of the modern era. As the country
transitions to peace, documentation will continue to play a critical role in how
victims make claims for reparation and restitution, how missing persons are
accounted for, and how justice is both imagined and administered. A detailed
study of documentation in Colombia can also help identify obstacles or
inconsistencies in how people use, understand, or mistrust documents and thus
could be of use to a range of local and international organizations.