* 1628929
* XPS: EXPL: Enabling An Ecosystem of Parallel Programming Abstractions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Eric Van Wyk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2021
* USD 359,821.00

All modern computers, from smart phones to supercomputers, have multiple
processing units. Since writing programs that effectively use these resources is
notoriously difficult, many programming languages, displaying a wide variety of
linguistic abstractions, have been created. The "right" set of abstractions
depends on many factors, ranging from the nature of the application at hand, the
sophistication of the programmer, and the degree of performance desired and
effort required to achieve it. For this research, the intellectual merits are in
the creation of tools and language specifications that support an ecosystem of
parallel programming language abstractions. These are to be developed by
independent parties and safely and automatically imported into a programmer's
compiler so that programmers can pick and choose the language features that they
feel best meet their needs. The project's broader significance and importance
are in a transformative methodology and supporting tools for writing parallel
programs, one which dramatically simplifies the development of new parallel
programming and domain-specific language features because it allows researchers
to focus their efforts on the design and implementation of new abstractions. By
making it easier for programmers to use and experiment with new features,
distributed as composeable language extensions, they can write performant and
correct parallel programs with less effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach will use a specification of the C programming language based on context
free grammars (for specifying concrete syntax) and attribute grammars (for
specifying semantic analysis, optimization, and code generation). This defines
the host language into which parallel programming language extensions are
imported. Language extensions are also specified in these formalisms as they
easily compose with the host language and other extensions. Modular analyses of
the language extensions ensure that the composition of the programmer's chosen
extensions will be successful and result in a working compiler that will not
terminate abnormally. Of interest is the degree to which new and existing
language abstractions can be realized in this composable approach to language
extension.