* 1628237
* EAGER Germination: From 0 to 2
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Tom Fisher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 92,953.00

The University of Wisconsin proposes to build a prototype for an online, open
Crowdsourcing Innovation Platform to develop roadmaps for the solution of
pressing societal issues through articulation of long-term goals and germination
of transformative research ideas and questions. A diverse group of doctoral
students and postdocs will participate in a year-long workshop course, further
developing their skills gained in a Summer Institute, learning about how the
U.S. sets research priorities, and developing an innovative environment. In this
environment, problem definition and rapid prototyping alternate, and groups of
researchers and stakeholders constructively critique approaches. The platform
will be a ?living network? that links ideas and people in a dynamic way to keep
people intellectually and socially engaged. Through the process, a complex
problem will continue to be divided into smaller sub-problems until they are
amenable to solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation (the
'millennials') has already embraced that the future of scientific research will
need to be more open, accessible, and democratic and that solutions to the
pressing societal issues will come from making many small contributions to big
projects collaboratively. This pilot project tests the hypothesis that
crowdsourcing pressing societal problems to the global research community and
stakeholders (i) meshes well with the value system of the next generation of
researchers; (ii) lets us look at the problems simultaneously from different
angles, and thus, in essence, increases the number of potential pathways to
solutions, and (iii) increases the willingness to take risks and pursue novel
research paths as large, complex problems are subdivided into smaller, more
manageable problems by a group connected within a social network. If successful,
it will provide a novel way to find solutions to the pressing societal problems
of today's society. Additionally, through jointly exploring problem posing, the
teams will gain confidence and the skills to tackle complex problems and uncover
barriers to collaborating on complex, interdisciplinary problems that are of
national and international importance. The potential for scalability and the
transferability of this approach into other domains could contribute to a long-
term change in how the research community interacts with itself and stakeholders
to build pathways to solutions that respect social and behavioral constraints.