* 1628256
* I-Corps:  FogKicker: An Anti-Fogging Coating Based on Sustainable Materials
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Carter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Fogging is a very common problem that everyone has encountered, whether it?s on
bathroom mirrors, windshields, sports and safety goggles, or military visors.
Upon a sudden change of temperature or humidity, fog can form on any surface as
a result of condensed tiny water droplets which prevent the passing through of
light. Fogging is not only frustrating when it appears on mirrors, glasses, and
windows, but also presents a very dangerous yet persistent concern, especially
for vehicle operators, sports participants, and workers with safety goggles. The
I-Corps project, ?Fogkicker?, at the University of Massachusetts will build upon
fundamental NSF-sponsored research originating in the Carter research group. New
anti-fogging technologies and materials have been discovered and the goal of
this I-Corps team will be to bring these scientific innovations closer to
products and processes that will benefit society. This project will contribute
to sustainable development and application of nanocellulose materials, targeting
at reducing the use of non-degradable petroleum chemical based materials and
protecting the environment. The mentoring and funding provided by the I-Corps
program will accelerate the development of this new antifogging technology and
help attract new third-party funding. The outcomes of the program will be a
clear go or no-go decision regarding the commercialization of the anti-fogging
technology, a transition plan for the project, and a technology demonstration
for potential partners.

The I-Corps project, "Fogkicker," at the University of Massachusetts will build
upon fundamental NSF-sponsored research originating in the Carter research
group. New anti-fogging technologies and materials have been discovered and the
goal of this I-Corps team will be to bring these scientific innovations closer
to products and processes that will benefit society. FogKicker is made from
nanocellulose, a natural nanomaterial that can be extracted from waste paper,
wood, or plants. Nanocellulose is an extremely hydrophilic material, which
readily and efficiently absorbs water. To make FogKicker, nanocellulose is added
to a dilute aqueous solution, which allows the solution to be applied to a
variety of surfaces. When FogKicker dries, it creates a hydrophilic coating on
the surface it is applied to. This hydrophilic coating absorbs moisture,
preventing fog from condensing where the coating is applied; this is how
FogKicker prevents the formation of fog on any surface. To formulate the
FogKicker solution, the team has also developed a novel process for the
extraction of nanocellulose, which has broad applications in automotive,
aerospace, packaging, and construction. The mentoring and funding provided by
the I-Corps program will accelerate the development of this new antifogging
technology and help attract new third-party funding. The outcomes of the program
will be a clear go or no-go decision regarding the commercialization of the
anti-fogging technology, a transition plan for the project, and a technology
demonstration for potential partners.