* 1628682
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Factors Influencing Informal Market Sector Emergence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Grace Zhou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,815.00

This project investigates what variables contribute to the emergence and new
informal economic sectors, and what socioeconomic impacts these sectors have on
trade and exchange. Industrial labor and formal, waged employment has declined
in many countries across the world, accompanied by the shrinking of state-
sponsored social security. Informal, precarious, and temporary modes of making a
living have risen in their place. In many parts of the world, this arrangement
is a harbinger of an economic future where ethnic, religious, and kinship
relations figure more prominently in socioeconomic stability and access to
resources. This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of
conducting empirically-grounded scientific research, explores the factors that
contribute to the emergence and durability of new informal sectors. The project
has important implications for analyzing market behavior in critically
understudied economic zones, where current economic policies are often unable to
account for robust, yet unquantifiable "informal" sectors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Grace Zhou, under the supervision of Dr. Sylvia Yanagisako of
Stanford University, will explore the implications of inequalities of
privatization and liberalization in the economic sphere, which often produce
unexpected solidarities that have the power to challenge existing hierarchies.
Nowhere is the emergence and dominance of informal economies more apparent than
in post-Soviet Central Asia, where the Soviet developmental state left behind
few employment and government supports after its retreat. The research will take
place in Osh, Kyrgyzstan, a major trading city between China and Russia, where
the growing prominence of informal markets in the economic, social and physical
landscape has become a symbol of the ineffective state. With little public trust
in state institutions, amidst increasing dependence on the market's uneven
distributive functions, marginalized communities are forging alternative routes
for the distribution of resources and services. Research methods include
interviews, participant observation, and social network analysis of individuals
working in the informal sector. In conducting research on marginal groups in a
key market hub of the region, this project will shed light on important new
formations arising out of a tumultuous global economy. Exploring livelihoods
that are based on a growing, vernacular tertiary sector has broader implications
for public understandings of economic ingenuity, social mobility, and
interpersonal exchange between heterogeneous groups of people.