* 1628674
* Scientific Program Overview (SPO):  Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES)
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Robert Rauber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2018
* USD 52,541.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, accompanied by excessive
solar absorbtion by the ocean surface which may in turn cause errors in
estimates of climate sensitivity.

This award funds planning and organizational activity for a field campaign
titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study
(SOCRATES). The campaign itself is not yet funded, nor does NSF commit to
funding it by making this award. By making the award NSF encourages the PIs to
submit a set of proposals requesting support for each of the various campaign
activities, which are reviewed collectively at a later date. This second round
of reviews determines whether the campaign goes to the field and what elements
of the campaign are supported by NSF.

The campaign consists of a deployment of the Gulfstream V (GV), a research
aircraft maintained by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, based either in Hobart, Australia or Christchurch, New
Zealand. The GV would fly south across the polar front, reaching the colder
waters beyond 55 degrees South, to obtain observations of atmospheric boundary
layer structure and vertical distributions of clouds and aerosols, including
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice nucleating particles (INPs). A key issue
to be addressed in the campaign is the relative abundance of supercooled liquid
water (SLW) droplets and ice particles in SO clouds, as SLW is more prevalent in
SO clouds than their Northern Hemisphere counterparts. The PIs hypothesize that
the extent to which SLW freezes at a given temperature is more strongly
modulated by cloud updraft velocities than by availability of INPs. The PIs also
seek to determine the relative influence of overlying free tropospheric aerosol
concentrations versus local surface and boundary layer controls, including
precipitation and wind speed, in determining the concentration of SLW droplets
in boundary layer clouds. The GV is equipped with radar and lidar for
characterizing cloud properties as well as instruments which use inlets on the
aircraft to collect and analyze the chemical and physical properties of aerosols
and cloud droplets and ice particles. The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to
SO activities planned internationally and by other US agencies, including
surface observations taken on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited
island at 54 degrees South.

As noted above, the work has broader impacts due to the potentially significant
role of SO clouds in determining the response of global climate to increases in
greenhouse concentrations, and the inadequacy of SO clouds in climate models
used for future climate projections. In addition, a number of education and
outreach activities are planned for the campaign. Graduate students are expected
to participate in the campaign through the awards given to PIs for fieldwork,
and other opportunities for graduate student fieldwork will also be proposed.
Summer internships for post-campaign data analysis will also be considered as
part of the review process conducted for the campaign. In addition, outreach to
K-12 students and the general public is planned through regular newsletters and
blogs, and an interactive "Ask SOCRATES" website through which campaign PIs
answer questions on clouds and their role in the climate system.