* 1628347
* Exploring the link between re-reading and comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Kiel Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 460,265.00

When people have trouble understanding what they are reading, they tend to go
back and re-read a portion of the text. In other words, your eyes don't
continuously move left to right when reading English. Instead, your eye
movements are often interrupted as you return to look at one or more previously
read portions of the text. It has been assumed that returning to earlier parts
of a sentence helps the reader understand the text. Although reading an entire
text multiple times does result in a more detailed understanding, no studies
have yet shown that readers' selective backwards eye movements are related to
specific corrections of earlier misinterpretations or even to more accurate
understanding. It is also not known how individual readers differ with respect
to how they re-read, or whether individual strategies or patterns of re-reading
behavior are related to better reading comprehension. Reading is fundamental to
learning, education, and daily life and reading difficulties can hinder learning
in all areas. Thus, understanding how real-time reading behaviors relate to
comprehension is critically important.

During normal, skilled silent reading, approximately 15% of eye movements return
to earlier portions of the text (i.e., they are "regressive"). Regressions are
typically triggered by some sort of disruption to the normal forward progress
through the text and subsequent re-reading is typically interpreted as a
reanalysis, revision, or reprocessing of some or all of the previously read
text. This reprocessing is generally taken as an indication that the reader has
derived a more accurate, grammatically licensed interpretation. However, in the
psycholinguistic and reading literatures, the actual affect of these re-reading
behaviors on comprehension has been largely assumed. Moreover, studies have not
linked the various aspects of re-reading (location of regressions, scan paths
during re-reading, time spent re-reading, as so on) to accuracy rates on
comprehension probes of the type often used in educational assessments of
reading comprehension. The proposed project includes three series of eye-
tracking experiments that examine (1) the triggers for regressions; (2) the type
of reprocessing performed during re-reading; (3) the influence of re-reading on
reading comprehension; and (4) individual differences in working memory capacity
and reading fluency on re-reading and text comprehension. The proposed project
is a large-scale systematic exploration of the fundamental assumption that re-
reading enhances comprehension. The results of the proposed work will inform the
fields of psycholinguistics, psychology, reading, education, linguistics, and
STEM instruction -- indeed, any area that relies on extracting complex
information from text.