* 1628408
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the mechanism of phonological change in progress: Allophonic restructuring of /ae/ in Philadelphia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Elizabeth Sneller, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 14,064.00

The goal of this dissertation project is to deepen our understanding of how
language change spreads through a speech community. Language change is a
constant and inevitable fact about language: new words, new sound patterns, new
syntactic constructions. Because large-scale sound recordings are relatively
new, very little is understood about the production and mental representation of
sound changes in the minds of individuals who acquire language during a period
of phonological change. This project investigates a phonological restructuring
currently in progress in Philadelphia, in order to identify the mechanism of
phonological change as it propagates through individual speakers in a speech
community. The results will form the basis of a science fair exhibit on
phonological change in Philadelphia, educating the public on language change and
emphasizing the value of linguistic diversity.

Phonological change is defined as a change in the abstract representation or
allophonic rules governing a phonological segment, to the exclusion of phonetic
change, which entails a change in the physical output of a phonological segment.
Previous hypotheses have suggested that phonological change occurs as the result
of phonetic incrementation (Ohala, 1981), occurs before any phonetic
incrementation (Fruehwald, 2013; Janda and Joseph 2003), or through an extension
of competing grammars (Kroch, 1989; 2001) to phonological change (Fruehwald et
al. 2013). The restructuring of short-a in Philadelphia provides an ideal
testing ground for these three theories of phonological change, as it is an
ongoing change allowing access to the critical speakers, and as the outputs of
both systems provide clear evidence regarding the underlying system.
Understanding the mechanism of phonological change within individuals will shed
light on the mental representations of language change more broadly. Preliminary
findings suggest the operation of two phonological subsystems of short-a within
a single speaker, supporting the extension of competing grammars to phonological
change and suggesting that categorical linguistic change in both the syntactic
and phonological domain may occur through a period of grammar competition within
individual speakers.