* 1628498
* The Origins and Consequences of Spatial Inequality.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Philip Roessler, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 148,817.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial inequality is the heart of the
development crises in many low income countries. The lack of spatial inclusion
represents not only a significant barrier to economic growth and integration but
is increasingly linked to civil war and state failure. The PI analyzes the
historical origins of within-country inequality, focusing on the rise of global
demand for cash crops and minerals in the 19th century, European colonization
and the spatial consequences of economic specialization in primary commodity
production (e.g., cocoa, copper, coffee, diamonds, etc.). The highly localized
nature of colonial investments in primary commodity production sowed the seeds
of regional inequality and societal divisions that are still felt today. This
analysis not only enables us to better understand the underlying causes of
spatial inequality and its effects on political instability and civil war, but
to determine the degree to which policy interventions, such as democratization,
economic liberalization, and foreign aid, are reversing this historical legacy
and building more inclusive and integrated economies and states. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a
comprehensive geospatial dataset of primary commodity production at the end of
colonialism across 40 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The aim of the project is
to better understand (1) the origins and consequences of spatial inequality in
Africa; (2) the effect of primary commodity production on ethno-political
bargaining and conflict; and (3) the impact policy interventions on reducing the
colonial legacy of uneven development. The PIs systematically geo-reference and
digitize maps, atlases, census records and economic reports produced by the
colonial governments in the late colonial period as well as contemporaneous
academic sources. This highly granular data on areas of cash crop production,
mining, and other primary economic production will be generated at a spatial
resolution of 5x5 km as well as aggregated up to 25x25 km and current second-
level administrative units. The PIs will combine this data on primary commodity
production with contemporary geospatial data on electrification, access to
public services, conflict events and violence, ethnic inclusion, survey data on
perceptions of state capacity and legitimacy, and agricultural production to
unravel the path dependent effects of colonial economic extraction and change
over time. They anticipate that the data and visualization of the data will
serve as valuable resource for students, scholars and policy-makers alike, who
are interested in better understanding the link between economic geography,
state-building and long-run development.