* 1628708
* Scientific Program Overview (SPO):  Remote sensing of Electrification, Lighting, And Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations (RELAMPAGO)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Robert Trapp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 23,940.00

This is a scientific planning overview (SPO) for planning the RELAMPAGO (Remote
sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale Processes with
Adaptive Ground Observations) field program from 1 Nov - 15 Dec 2018 in west
central Argentina in the general vicinity of the Sierras de Cordoba (SDC) and
the Andes foothills near Mendoza. This region arguably has among the most
intense convective systems in the world with respect to the frequency of large
hail, high storm tops, and extreme lightning activity, yet much remains unknown
about the scarcely observed intense convection in this region. RELAMPAGO,
leveraging the repeatability of storms in the region, aims to address science
questions related to the pre-initiation to initiation, initial organization, and
growth/backbuilding stages of storm development, which are poorly understood.
New insights into connections between the extreme hydroclimate, high impact
weather, and atmospheric dynamical processes in meteorological and geographical
settings unique to the these regions can be obtained by bringing together NSF
facilities with (1) new operational dual-polarization radars in Argentina, (2)
significant contributions from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, NOAA, and NASA, and (3)
a complementary funded U.S. Department of Energy major field campaign called
Clouds, Aerosols, and Complex Terrain Interactions
(CACTI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these objectives, the field campaign
will obtain targeted, multi-platform observations from the subsurface through
the depth of the troposphere throughout the region to characterize the synoptic
scale, mesoscale, and convective scale thermodynamic and kinematic environmental
evolution during convective events with varying morphologies, evolutions of
cloud and precipitation properties, and severe weather characteristics. An
adaptive ground-based and aircraft-based network, including mobile mesonets,
lightning instruments, soundings, fixed and mobile Doppler/polarization radars
(from W- to S- Band), lidars, microwave profilers, and surface flux
measurements, will be used to (1) characterize the pre-convective and convective
environments, (2) characterize kinematic and microphysical properties of clouds
and precipitation, convective outflows, atmospheric electrification, and
hydrometeor size distributions and (3) observe hydrometeorological interactions
with convective systems in a region of repeatable
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;RELAMPAGO will
provide unique observations of atmospheric and surface conditions in a region
with substantial terrain and explore a regime of convection not observed
comprehensively. RELAMPAGO will form a key part of an observation network that
will elucidate the tight connections between the land surface, complex terrain,
convective development, and the production of severe weather, role of terrain
processes in initiating and developing organized convective systems and altering
flows within and above the convective boundary layer, and roles of environmental
moisture, aerosols, and instability on the resultant intensity, organization,
precipitation, and high impact weather production of deep convective systems.
Through its unique configuration of atmospheric profiling and remote sensing
capabilities, understanding of processes that impact prediction of natural
hazards will be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental design, focusing on the contrasting factors controlling the
initiation and growth of these systems with the global population of convective
storms, particularly in the U.S. Great Plains, will improve understanding of,
and the ability to predict, severe convective storms worldwide. The extensive
set of observations and research conducted will aid current efforts to install
new weather radars and regional lightning networks, and modernize the weather
and climate prediction infrastructure in South America, in the development of
conceptual models of extreme weather events for use by forecasters in South
America and globally, and in combination with improved prediction of weather-
and hydrological-related hazards, will lead to reductions in future loss of life
and property. Education and outreach in several universities and schools in
subtropical South America and the U.S., extensive international student and
scientist cooperation and involvement in the observation campaign, and a large
internet presence through social media and webinars will enhance collaboration
and awareness across the Americas as well as train the next generation of
scientists and engineers in the Americas.