* 1628730
* Summer Institutes in Social and Personality Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Wendy Mendes, Society for Personality and Social Psychology
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 392,960.00

In the past two decades, the cutting edge of social and personality
psychological research has become significantly more complex in theory,
methodology, and statistics. These scientific advances are due, at least in
part, to increasingly connected and diverse academic and professional networks
amongst faculty. This project will support the continuation and extension of the
highly successful program of Summer Institutes in Social and Personality
Psychology. Graduate students from social psychology and personality graduate
programs attend the advanced two-week intensive training program, led by the
best scholars in the field. The summer training institute helps to ensure that
the training of graduate students sustains advances and innovations in these
fields. This training institute is helpful for advancing the field and also for
broadening the opportunity for training of graduate students who, although are
well-trained in the content and methods represented at their institutions, they
may not have intensive access to scholars in other areas of the fields of Social
and Personality Psychology. Evaluation of the previous training institutes
reveals that graduate students who participate are successful in obtaining
academic positions, peer-reviewed publications and funding for their research.
Further, affording graduate students with cutting-edge theoretical and
methodological training enhances their ability to participate in
interdisciplinary and international collaborations, which are becoming
increasingly important across all of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will support the continuation of the highly successful program of Summer
Institutes in Social and Personality Psychology (SISPP). Scheduled every two
years, the SISPP provides an opportunity for approximately 80 advanced graduate
students in social and personality psychology Ph.D. programs to obtain intensive
experience and instruction into cutting-edge theories, research, and methods.
Graduate programs have strengths in different areas, and preference for
attendance is given to students whose home institution does not offer strengths
in the topics covered during a particular Summer Institute. SISPP has been
successful in fostering diversity in the field, both in terms of promoting the
careers of members of historically underrepresented groups and enhancing the
graduate training of students from programs with different emphases and
resources. SISPP has also been successful in fostering research collaboration
and communication networks among individuals from different laboratories,
universities, regions, and nations, and creating a collaborative scholarly
community for a new generation of researchers. These diversifying experiences
enabled by SISPP are critical for fostering creativity, innovation, and flexible
scientific practices in knowledge and for expanding social and personality
psychology's scientific potential to provide solutions for important societal
problems.