* 1628974
* DMREF: Predictive Multiscale Modeling of the Mechanical Properties of Polymers 3D Printed Using Fused Filament Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Peter Olmsted, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,864,988.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer Our Future (DMREF) grant
will provide new scientific understanding of the Fused Filament Fabrication
(FFF) process and its effect on the underlying molecular structure and
properties of 3D-printed polymers. 3D-printing is driving a paradigm shift in
the design and manufacturing of objects both in every day life and in high-tech
applications. The integration with computer-aided design allows printed parts to
be customized quickly and inexpensively to meet unique specifications and
provide new functionalities. FFF is the most widely used and fastest growing 3D
process and FFF printers dominate the growing desktop 3D printing market, driven
by the low cost and relative simplicity of the printer construction and wide
availability of feedstock materials. Although widely used, applications of FFF
printed materials are limited by modest strength and toughness and large
variability in material properties. This award supports fundamental research to
understand how the printing conditions affect the materials properties of
polymers printed by FFF. This fundamental knowledge is needed to advance the
application of FFF to structure-critical components, provide computational tools
to accelerate the design of FFF printed parts, and develop the next generation
3D-printing technology for polymers. Thus, the outcomes of this project will
benefit the US economy. This project will also provide opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in multidisciplinary research
that involves close interactions with national laboratories and product design
researchers, and create innovative outreach actives for K-12 on the science and
engineering of 3D-printing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to uncover the relationships between important printing parameters
and feedstock material properties and the anisotropy, strength, and toughness of
the printed material. We will develop an integrative research approach with
iterative feedback between printing, modeling, and experiments at multiple
length scales to investigate: 1) the molecular orientation of the extruded
fiber, 2) the nonequilibrium structure and anisotropic, viscoplastic behavior of
the annealed fiber, 3) the entanglement structure, strength and toughness of the
fiber-fiber weld, 4) the anisotropic viscoplastic and damage behavior of the
raster structure, and 5) the thermal history and residual stresses in the
printed part. Finally, we will apply the experimentally-validated multi-scale
modeling framework to design the properties of feedstock material and printing
parameters to improve the strength and toughness of the printed part.