* 1628146
* Psychological Distance and the Mitigation of Interpersonal Risks
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Angela de Oliveira, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2021
* USD 435,708.00

In our increasingly inter-connected society, many of the daily decisions
individuals make can create, contribute to, or alter the risks that other people
face. Perhaps more than in any other setting, individuals' decisions to prepare
(or not) for hazards and natural disasters - such as wildfires, extreme storm
events and invasive pests - can hugely impact the severity and likelihood of
risks faced by others, including their neighbors. This project will seek to
uncover some of the key factors that shape whether people are willing to invest
in personally costly but mutually beneficial efforts to reduce the risks that
natural hazards pose not only to themselves but also to those around them. In
particular, the PI will explore how the physical and psychological distance
people feel and perceive between themselves and others who could be affected by
their actions influences how much risk-reducing action individuals are willing
to take. The project will examine these factors in the context of two
particularly relevant problems many people in the U.S. face: wildfire mitigation
and invasive forest pest management. Using a combination of surveys and
decision-making experiments, the PI will test how these feelings of distance
influence the decisions people make in these two settings. The knowledge gained
from this research will be widely applicable to other contexts involving these
types of "interpersonally produced" risks, such as reckless driving, childhood
vaccination, and financial investments. The project will also provide
policymakers and others with guidance for developing effective ways to encourage
individuals and communities to take proactive action to reduce these sorts of
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the key factors that influence
individuals' willingness to invest in costly mitigation of natural hazards-
related interpersonal risks is critical in order to improve decision-making
across a wide range of decision contexts. The production of interpersonal risks
refers to the process of individual actions changing the probabilities or
payoffs of risks that others face, hence the name "interpersonally produced
risks" (IPRs). IPRs occur when the actions of one individual modify either the
likelihood of another person's experiencing a risk or the severity of the risk.
The study of IPRs contributes to our understanding of interdependent risks and
the social aspects of risk. In this project, the PI investigates one possible
driver of IPR decision-making, psychological distance. Psychological distance is
a concept that captures the perceived distance between an individual's present
state of being and an object or concept. The research will investigate the
relationship between psychological distance and the production of IPRs in two
impactful decision-making contexts: wildfire mitigation and invasive forest pest
management. IPRs are highly relevant in these contexts as decisions made by
individuals directly affect risks faced by others. The proposed set of studies
will contribute new knowledge to multiple literatures within economics,
psychology, and natural resources management. Results will contribute to our
theoretical understanding of processes underlying IPRs, social aspects of risky
decisions, and the relationship between psychological distance dimensions and
IPRs. The proposed work will also help federal, state and local agencies develop
better methods for engaging individual citizens in IPR mitigation behaviors.