* 1628926
* XPS: FULL: Hardware Software Abstractions: Addressing Specification and Verification Gaps in Accelerator-Oriented Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Sharad Malik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2022
* USD 875,000.00

Given slowdowns in semiconductor technology scaling, it has become increasingly
challenging to maintain processor performance scaling at acceptable power
constraints. In response, microprocessors increasingly use complex architectures
with heterogeneous parallelism and specialized compute units known as
accelerators. Accelerators provide high compute performance at reduced
power/energy by avoiding the overhead of instruction-programmability. The key
challenge, however, is that unlike traditional microprocessor CPUs, accelerators
have no durable, portable instruction set architecture (ISA), and instead are
programmed via drivers or library APIs. These increase the effort of porting
accelerator-oriented programs to other platforms with similar functionality but
different implementations. The increased effort has serious consequences for
software cost. Furthermore, the fact that accelerators have no formal, durable
ISA causes increased verification complexity at a time when it is already the
limiting factor in the design of future computing platforms. The intellectual
merits of this work are that the research is developing Instruction-Level
Abstractions (ILAs) that extend the ISA concept to accelerators in order to
address these programming and verification challenges. ILAs offer a formal and
high-level summary of the visible state updates that an accelerator will perform
on each invocation. The project?s broader significance and importance are the
work?s ability to impact industry designs of future accelerator-based computing
platforms and thereby help sustain the US computing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two components to an ILA: specifying
the state updates, and specifying the Memory Consistency Model, i.e., the
permitted ordering of state updates relative to other parallel compute elements.
The research develops ILA methodologies that are (i) uniform across
accelerators, (ii) symmetric with the ISA of instruction-programmable processors
and (iii) unified across both computation (state change) and memory
(data/storage state update) abstractions. To show the value of ILAs, the
research develops: (i) ILA specification mechanisms for a rich set of
accelerators, (ii) synthesis techniques and tools for generating these ILAs
automatically, (iii) verification techniques and tools that check these
abstractions against implementations and (iv) further tools enabled by ILAs
including full-system architectural simulation. Through these efforts, this work
addresses fundamental software portability and verification gaps in the design
and deployment of accelerator-oriented systems.