* 1628509
* Testing multi-disciplinary theories of leadership using a cross-cultural database
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Edward Hagen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2018
* USD 91,619.00

All societies have leaders. In many societies, such as the United States, there
is a hierarchy of leadership positions corresponding to spatial administrative
hierarchies, such as of cities, counties, states, and the Federal government. In
other societies, such hierarchies do not exist and the rights and duties of
leaders are not formally delineated. This global variability has produced an
equal variety of scholarly theories; nonetheless, leadership remains poorly
understood. For example, why do some leaders use physical threats and aggression
to instill fear in their followers, but other leaders attract followers with
their skills and knowledge? Some theories emphasize our primate heritage: in
groups of primates, physically stronger individuals can dominate physically
weaker individuals. This might help explain why some human leaders physically
threaten their followers. Other theories point to the importance of leaders in
promoting human cooperation: leaders might be needed to maintain cooperation in
large groups by organizing the division of labor and punishing free-riders.
Alternatively, leaders might be important during warfare and other forms of
conflict between groups. Still other theories emphasize the transmission of
valuable knowledge from one generation to the next, which might explain why
leaders often have superior skills and abilities. These theories have important
implications for selecting and training leaders in a broad number of roles, such
as in schools; local, state, and federal government agencies; businesses; and
numerous other organizations. Unfortunately, none of these theories has been
tested systematically across the full range of social types. Therefore, to
address this gap, Washington State University anthropologist, Dr. Edward H.
Hagen, will test theories of leadership using the Human Relations Area Files
(HRAF), a database of millions of digitized pages of books, articles and other
documents that describe hundreds of different societies. The HRAF database
captures much of the known cultural diversity of human society and can be used
for a wide, cross-cultural test of several influential theories of leadership.

The investigator will begin by operationalizing key theories of leadership from
anthropology, psychology, sociology, and biology to produce set of variables
that will be used to code each ethnographic account of leadership in the HRAF.
The coded accounts will then be used to test these theories. Second, the texts
discussing the qualities and functions of leaders, and the costs and benefits of
leadership for both leaders and followers, will be isolated and coded for
analyses providing the first systematic cross-cultural data on these subjects.
Third, the HRAF material will be subject to meta-ethnographic and text-mining
techniques, such as latent semantic analysis, with the goal of identifying
commonalities and differences among the reported cases and cultural models of
leadership. The research will give the emerging subdiscipline of evolutionary
leadership theory a comprehensive cross-cultural foundation and provide an
empirical basis for future evolutionary and cultural models of leadership. The
database produced by the project will be made available to other scholars and to
the general public. The methodology used will be a model for future
investigations using the HRAF. Funding this research also provides a mentored
research opportunity for two American graduate students.