* 1628183
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Uneven Development and Perspectives on the Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jerry Jacka, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,731.00

Shale gas exploration and extraction through hydraulic fracturing and horizontal
drilling, have come to comprise a major component of the American energy supply.
Social scientists have documented the enivronmental controversies and local
resistance that sometimes accompany these practices, as well as the movements
calling for more sustainable and environemtnally benign forms of energy. But
less attention has been paid to communities that favor petroleum development.
That is the subject of the research supported by this award, which will be
undertaken by University of Colorado doctoral student, Gregorio Ortiz, under the
supervision of anthropologist, Dr. Jerry K. Jacka. The researchers ask: How do
communities that support fracking engage with the environmental discourse
against it? How do people in such communities understand their place within
environmental discourse and are these conceptions affected by their support of
extractive development? Is local extractive development, in turn, affected by
the sensibilites of local communities? Findings from this research will fill
critical gaps in scientific understanding of the social and environmental
impacts of resource extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted around the on-going development of the Eagle Ford Shale in south
Texas. The region is an appropriate site because it has a long history of
petroleum development and natural environmental challenges, such as drought. The
oil boom of the 1970s and 1980s shaped the area's recent history even though it
did not always lead to infrastructural development nor improved livelihoods.
Consequently, the subsequent resource "bust" has affected local livelihoods in
complex ways, which makes the study of why local residents support further
petroleum development particularly interesting. Ortiz will focus on the
communities of the Middle Rio Grande Development Council of Governments in south
Texas. He will use a mix of social science methods beginning with archival
research; semi-structured interviews with both governmental and non-governmental
local and state representatives whose work engages the petroleum industry; and
participant observations and interviews with petroleum industry workers. He will
then move on to in-depth ethnography, participant observation, and surveys in
two local communities. Data collection activities will include interviews, focus
groups, and local land and resource mapping. The researcher will highlight how
environmental concerns do and do not inform development policy and projects, and
if and how perspectives on the environment have changed since the development of
the Eagle Ford Shale began. Findings from this study will contribute to the
development of more complete social science theory about the relationship
between development, energy, and environmental judgment. Findings may also
inform development of community-appropriate energy policy.