* 1628895
* The Transmission from Households to the Real Economy: Evidence from Mortgage and Consumer Credit Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Tomasz Piskorski, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 514,527.00

This award funds research that will use an innovative data source to examine how
mortgage and consumer credit markets work to transmit economic shocks to the
broader economy. They want to answer three research questions. First, they will
measure the extent to which unanticipated changes (shocks) to mortgage interest
rates cause changes in the US economy as a whole. They plan to do this using
data from a commercial provider that has data on millions of US mortgages.
Second, they want to examine how mortgage refinancing and competition between
lenders enter into the picture. A homeowner can refinance to take advantage of
lower interest rates; does this mean that shocks that increase rates have a
different effect than shocks that raise rates? Third, they will measure how
inequality is affected by the ways in which interest rate shocks affect
household balance sheets. This third project will measure whether or not less
wealthy households are more damaged by high mortgage interest rates; if the
answer is yes, then interest rate shocks can exacerbate existing inequality.
Graduate students will learn advanced techniques for the analysis of very large
data sets by assisting in this project. The results will be valuable for
regulators who create rules for markets for mortgages and other kinds of
consumer credit, because they will help these policymakers understand how their
decisions affect the broader economy. The project is also important for other
economic policymakers who need to understand how housing markets affect the
broader U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent economic crisis has
highlighted the importance of borrower balance sheets and mortgage and consumer
credit markets for the propagation of economic shocks. The PIs develop new
empirical evidence by using a comprehensive panel data set and by devising
empirical strategies to isolate specific effects. They plan to study (i)
transmission of shocks to mortgage interest rates onto the real economy through
household balance sheets; (ii) how mortgage refinancing and intermediary
competition help to determine the intensity of transmission of these shocks to
household consumption and (iii) the redistributional consequences to household
balance sheets of these shocks. The project provides an empirical assessment of
how households responded to the prolonged reduction in mortgage interest rates
through accommodative monetary policy during the economic crisis. Focusing on
mortgages is an excellent way of measuring how households respond to an economic
stimulus: the size and persistence of the change in the cost of servicing
mortgage debt reduces payments each month and by thousands of dollars over the
term of the loan. The team also plans to provide new evidence on the broader
consequences of interest rates shocks by by exploiting regional variation in
exposure to lower interest rates. They also assess the role of market structure
in impacting consumption activity of households by influencing refinancing
activity in response to government policies. Finally, their projects will also
assess the impact of interest rate shocks and accommodative monetary policy on
the redistribution, economic inequality, and overall consumption response of the
economy.