* 1628860
* Retirement, Family Insurance, and Social Insurance: Evidence from the Great Depression and the Introduction of Social Security
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Fetter, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 244,900.00

In evaluating alternative reform proposals for Social Security and related
programs in the United States, it is critical to understand two key dimensions
of the overall costs and benefits of these programs. One is how these programs
affect the choices and well-being of the individuals eligible to receive
benefits themselves. The other is what effects those benefits may have on
beneficiaries' children and families. This project will investigate these issues
by focusing on the Old Age Assistance (OAA) program, a state-administered
program introduced alongside Social Security in the 1930s that was a precursor
of Social Security's Supplemental Security Income. The OAA program provides an
unusually rich empirical setting in which to investigate the effects of social
insurance programs both because it was the largest source of government old-age
support until the 1950s and because it exhibited wide variation in program rules
and benefit levels across states.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the costs and benefits of the OAA program in terms of its direct effects on
beneficiaries themselves and the indirect effects on beneficiaries' children and
families. Two of the key challenges that arise from examining these effects in
most social insurance programs are the difficulty in finding quasi-experimental
variation in national programs such as Social Security and the difficulty of
identifying family links in most datasets. This project will address both
challenges by exploiting the significant variation in OAA policies across
different states and across different groups of people within states --
variation much larger than in similar programs in more recent time periods --
and by taking advantage of newly available Census microdata covering the full US
population in all Census years through 1940. Using quasi-experimental research
designs and rich data, the investigators will estimate the effects of OAA on
labor supply and family transfers. This project will further use both structural
and sufficient-statistics methods to determine the implications of the quasi-
experimental evidence for the welfare effects of these social insurance
programs.