* 1628766
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Improved Spare Parts Inventory Management in Aircraft Engines through Hybrid Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2015,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Ryan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,204.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) award is to develop the basic science and necessary tools to transform
sensor measurements from a large set of machine equipment in the field into
reliable forecasts and inventory policies for the spare parts required to
maintain that equipment. While equipment health monitoring is of relevance to
many manufacturers, the application context of this research is commercial jet
engines. The research consists of four key steps: advancing sensing methods and
the interpretation of signals to diagnose engine condition; developing
procedures for transforming this data into predictions of time-to-overhaul and
resource-requirements; building part forecasting methods and inventory policies
that aggregate this information across engines in the field, with consideration
of usage and economic conditions; and creating a simulation tool for the
monitoring and maintenance of a large fleet to validate the methodology.

This research will establish a framework for modeling and simulating the process
of engine maintenance, and will produce theoretical results that can be
translated into applicable tools of practical value to the industrial partner
and the aerospace industry at large, leading to improved forecasting and
inventory management for spare parts. While currently-used sensor data can
provide an indication of the overall health of the engine, the advanced sensing
technologies developed in this research offer the potential to predict which
specific parts will need replacement before an overhaul is initiated, thus
providing more time to secure the necessary resources. This research will
determine the economic impact of the additional health information and improved
decision-making enabled by these advanced sensing technologies, and will
potentially make the case for their pervasive installation. Although the models
will primarily be validated within the industrial partner's business units, they
will be beneficial to a wide array of manufacturing firms for whom after-sales
service is a critical component of their business.