* 1628636
* Qualitative Data Repository 2016-2018
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 986,787.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Qualitative Data Repository's (QDR)
central mission is to ingest, curate, store, preserve, publish, and enable the
download of digital data arising from qualitative and multi-method research in
the social sciences. The repository also develops, disseminates, and promotes
standards and techniques for managing, sharing, and reusing qualitative data,
and pursuing research transparency. NSF funding helps to increase QDR's data
holdings; develop additional functionality (emphasizing scaling,
interoperability, usability, and tools for transparency); expand expertise in
qualitative data management; and increase efforts to teach these qualitative
data-management skills. Additionally, the project seeks to further integrate QDR
into the social science publication infrastructure and the data management
community. The QDR vigorously promotes the effective management, sharing, and
reuse of qualitative data, and engagement in research transparency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QDR seeks to
advance the storage and availability of qualitative data in five ways : (1)
governance - developing internal management structures and policies and engaging
with the broader data-management community; (2) technical capacity - securing
the hardware to house, and developing the software to enable the deposit,
indexing, search, and download of qualitative data; (3) content - soliciting and
curating qualitative data projects for secondary analysis, to increase research
transparency, and to enhance teaching; (4) ideational frameworks - developing
the intellectual framework for, a language to talk about, techniques and
practices to engage in, and guidance to facilitate data sharing and transparency
in qualitative research; and (5) promulgation and persuasion - stimulating and
participating in debate and dialogue to generate standards for sharing
qualitative data, conducting secondary data analysis, evaluating empirical
research, and teaching with data, and encouraging and teaching people to do so.
QDR has the potential to broaden the access of scholars from around the world to
a wealth of qualitative social science data. The repository encourages
intellectual exchange and the formation and growth of epistemic communities, and
serves as a platform for research networks and partnerships.