* 1628782
* DIP: Graphical Model Construction by System Decomposition:  Increasing the Utility of Algebra Story Problem Solving
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Fabio Milner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,362,298.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project
studies a new genre of learning technology that may remove a notorious
bottleneck in STEM education: mathematical model construction. These days,
computers can solve complex mathematical problems, but humans must still define
the problem for the computer, which is called constructing a model of a system.
Many students can learn procedural skills, such as solving a quadratic equation,
but constructing a model frustrates them because there is no procedure. This
effectively stops their progress in math and blocks their entry to STEM
professions. That may be why model construction is one of the few practices that
appears in both math (CCSSM) and science (NGSS) standards. The key innovation
for solving these problems is a new genre of learning technology based on two
ideas. First, it emphasizes decomposing the given system description into
subsystems. Second, although the final model is a set of algebraic equations,
the model is first constructed as a node-link graph that shows which quantities
are connected to which relationships. This notation is called
TopoMath.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TopoMath builds on prior success with the Dragoon
intelligent tutoring system, and represents a revision of that system to support
a novel graphical representation to allow learners to recognize distinct
problem-solving schemata. Stealth assessment using Bayesian Knowledge Tracing
will allow feedback on student submitted models in response to word problems in
modelling. When a model is represented as a TopoMath graph, it can usually be
drawn such that distinct subsystems correspond to distinct subgraphs. This makes
it easier for students to understand the relationship between the model and the
system that is represents. Moreover, when constructing a model by decomposing a
system into subsystems, blank areas in the TopoMath graph suggest which
subsystems still need to be modeled. Students can learn model construction
schemas by comparing and generalizing systems that have visually similar
TopoMath models so that when constructing a model by decomposing a system into
subsystems, if a schema matches a subsystem, then a whole section of the model
can be filled in without further decomposition. These are just a few of the
synergies of combining system decomposition and TopoMath's graphical
representation of mathematical models. This project will explore sequences of
TopoMath learning activities with the goal of bringing students to model
construction mastery with just 20 hours of instruction. The instruction will be
developed in the context of remedial college math classes that are equivalent to
high school algebra 2 classes. The instruction will include individual, small
group and whole class activities using the TopoMath technology. Qualitative
analysis of verbal protocols will be undertaken using the Knowledge-Learning-
Instruction framework both for system evaluation, and to better understand the
processes of learning in model construction that are supported by the system's
representations and scaffolds for modeling.