* 1628141
* United States Participation in the 2016-17 World Values Survey
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ronald Inglehart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 321,088.00

SES- 1628141&lt;br/&gt;Jon Miller&lt;br/&gt;Ronald
Inglehart&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the participation of the United States in the 7th cycle (2016-7) of the
World Values Survey (WVS). The WVS was initiated in 1981 with substantial
leadership from the United States. Over the last 36 years, the WVS has been the
only source of information on mass values and attitudes from countries
containing the majority of the world's population. The availability of data from
the WVS makes it possible to analyze (1) the impact of economic and
technological change on people?s values, and (2) the impact of individual-level
values and beliefs on societal-level characteristics such as the extent to which
a society has democratic values. The WVS includes a set of items measuring
attitudes toward science and technology. Current controversies over topics such
as global climate change, genetically modified foods, and infectious diseases
illustrate the importance of understanding the formation and distribution of
these attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WVS is built on a general model of
individual attitude formation that includes the early influence of family, the
social norms and culture of an individual?s community, and broader societal
beliefs about religion and economic systems. A common questionnaire is
constructed by scholars from more than 50 countries and is administered in each
country using methods and modes appropriate to that country. The social,
economic, and political values of individuals are changing and these changes
have a major impact on a wide range of societal expectations and public
policies. These values also have a major influence on the extent to which a
society has good governance and democratic institutions. In order to make
effective policy, it is important for policy makers to be informed about these
trends and the reasons underlying them. Numerous scholars have used WVS data in
analyzing social change, producing hundreds of books and more than 1,000
articles. More than 100,000 students and faculty from all six continents
downloaded data and information from the 6th cycle of the WVS. These data have
also been used for instructional purposes by many social scientists : one
publisher estimates that more than 50,000 students use WVS data with their
textbooks each year.