* 1628011
* A US-Africa workshop for a science and research vision on the food-water-energy (FEW) nexus
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Amilcare Porporato, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 01/31/2017
* USD 99,993.00

This award will fund a two-day satellite workshop prior to the Next Einstein
Forum (NEF) in Dakar, Senegal. The workshop will be held on March 6-7, 2016, and
will focus on enabling US-African collaboration on research challenges related
to the food, energy, water (FEW) nexus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing adequate
food, energy, and water for human development places enormous pressure on the
environment. The planetary scale of the challenge requires understanding complex
and inadequately characterized inter-relationships between ecosystems, climate,
and social dynamics. This workshop will bring together an interdisciplinary team
of U.S. and African researchers to sharpen the critical research questions
surrounding the FEW nexus, to outline strategies and solutions, and to offer a
vision for future FEW research goals, particularly in
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on Africa is appropriate since
understanding of the FEW nexus cannot possibly be complete without considering
the African continent which includes 20% of the global land mass, perhaps 60% of
the global arable land, is experiencing rapid deforestation and significant
ecosystem degradation challenges, and has a rapidly growing and young 16% of the
global population increasingly shifting from rural to urban demographics. Africa
is and will increasingly be an important region for FEW nexus research and U.S.
scientists need better access to the best scientists as well as key sites and
facilities. It will therefore be valuable to hold this meeting in Africa to
enable a larger number of African scientists to participate. In addition, the
preliminary outputs of this meeting will be presented at the Next Einstein
Forum, providing an opportunity for a large and influential group of policy
makers and stakeholders interested in science and development in Africa to
consider the FEW nexus more substantively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will pursue a relatively quantitative approach to understanding the FEW nexus in
Africa, considering the FEW system of systems as a large-scale space-time
optimization challenge to manage the limited resources of ecosystems with the
objective of securing food, energy and water via sustainable management of
environmental processes. U.S. and African researchers with expertise in
environmental science, ecology, hydrology, biology, agriculture, economics,
cultural anthropology and geography will participate. The dialogue and resulting
collaborations should improve future opportunities for US researcher to
understand unique and generalizable elements of African FEW systems, appreciate
existing research and resources, and prepare for future research involving
collaboration with Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity is co-funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET).