* 1628583
* The relationship between mobility and spatial reasoning in children across cultures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Elizabeth Cashdan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 199,926.00

There are gender differences in both spatial cognition and experiences in
navigating space, and these differences are found across a wide range of
societies. Out of doors, males tend to range farther than females and are more
confident in their navigational abilities, and males also outperform females on
many spatial tasks. One explanation for these effects is that having the
opportunity to navigate through larger areas may enhance both spatial skills and
confidence. These behavioral differences appear in middle childhood, and have
the potential to shape spatial learning throughout life. This study will
investigate these relationships among children in three foraging societies, to
explore how children's mobility affects spatial learning and confidence, and why
these often differ between girls and boys. Children in these societies have
greater exposure to the natural environment than children in industrialized
societies, and are given greater latitude for independent spatial exploration,
which are likely to provide a learning environment conducive to good spatial and
navigational ability. As a result, studying this question cross-culturally
provides an opportunity to more directly examine the impact of spatial
exploration and navigation on the development of spatial cognition. The outcomes
of the research will have important insights for optimizing spatial reasoning
across cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will include children 7 to 12
years old, and will take place in three populations that depend in whole or part
on foraging for sustenance and therefore permit significant opportunities for
ranging across large natural spaces: the Hadza (Tanzania), the Twe (Namibia),
and the Tsimane (Bolivia). Data on natural mobility (from GPS tracking and
interview), spatial performance (spatial visualization and navigation), and
spatial risk-taking will be used to answer three questions: (1) Is greater
mobility in childhood associated with enhanced spatial confidence and
performance? (2) Do gender differences in mobility stem from gender differences
in risk preference? (3) How are mobility and wayfinding shaped by environmental
factors? The three societies live in habitats that vary in both resource
patchiness and in landmark visibility; based on their earlier work with adults,
the investigators expect greater resource patchiness to increase male mobility,
and greater landmark visibility to enhance reliance on male-typical wayfinding
strategies. The project will provide valuable opportunities for training
students in cross-cultural research approaches and in inter-disciplinary
collaboration.