* 1628227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Analyzing Textually Mediated Social Relations across Writing Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Katherine Dimmery, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 23,769.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in the methods of conducting
empirically-grounded scientific research, explores how social relations are
conditioned and defined by the material and visual components of written texts
across different societies and writing systems. Existing comparative research on
textual practices focuses on alphabetic writing systems such as English, which
represent individual speech sounds in sequence. The research has tended to be
empirically weaker in its consideration of the world's vast array of non-
alphabetic systems such as pictographic and pictographically-inclined systems,
which draw on the visual resemblance of written characters to things.
Investigating written texts as material, visual media will deepen our
understanding of how writing and reading shape social relationships,
particularly within societies that use (or once used) non-alphabetic writing.
Given the increasing role of visually-rich texts in digital media throughout the
world, research findings should be especially important to understanding visual
design in its broadest sense, with implications for visual design practices in
the U.S. and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through 15 months of ethnographic
and archival research, Katherine Dimmery, under the supervision of Dr. Erik
Mueggler of the University of Michigan, will explore whether human/material
engagements can be shown to be inherently social, sharing many of the structural
features of face-to-face interactions, such as having dialogic emergent
qualities. Semiotic approaches to materiality have tended to analyze how
materials condition human forms of sociality. To test whether this theoretical
assumption holds, the project looks textual practices among the Naxi, a Tibeto-
Burman ethnic minority of rural southwest China known for their pictographic
writing system. The Naxi writing system (and the endangered language it
documents) is important for analyzing textual practice because unlike Western
writing systems build connections between orthography and speech to signify
symbolically, this pictographic system establishes reference based on visual
similarity (or iconicity) between orthographic elements and physical objects.
Focusing on the ongoing shift of this writing towards phonetic representation of
speech, the project aims to understand (1) how Naxi textual practices have been
transmitted across China's "Great Divide" and into the present; (2) how
increasing Western and Chinese presence in the southwest during that period
contributed to phoneticization, and (3) how these changes pose problems for
existing Naxi forms of sociality and personhood. The key method of this project,
an elaboration of traditional ethnographic participant observation, involves
repatriating copies of pre-1949 Naxi texts from an archive at Beijing's Minzu
University back to residents of Baidi, a Naxi community, and pursuing
collaborative translation with Baidi residents using the texts. This work should
yield data on the old texts as well as on their re-integration (or not) into
contemporary life. In addition, currently in-use texts will be translated,
observed in use, and documented photographically page by page, ultimately to
produce a database of archival and in-use texts. The project will contribute to
understanding the diverse ways that written texts shape social relations, and
offer lens through which to trace post-1949 social transitions among China's
rural, ethnic minority populations. By making the project's database available
online through collaboration with the University of Michigan's Deep Blue
archive, the research contributes to preserving a detailed record for future
researchers.