* 1628994
* DMREF: Grain Growth Beyond Isotropic Models: Microstructure Evolution with Experimentally-Derived Interface Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Robert Suter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,660,639.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nearly all man-made solids are made up of many small
crystals referred to as grains. The sizes of these grains and the way that they
are attached - characteristics determined when the material is made - influence
many of the solid's properties. Existing models for the evolution of the grains
during processing fail to predict observed outcomes. Because of the complexity
of the problem, it is not even obvious that it is possible to make accurate
predictions of how grains evolve during processing. The research will test the
hypothesis that it is possible to predict the evolution of the grains within a
material if information about the properties of the interfaces between the
grains is included. The research will couple simulations with newly developed
experimental techniques to test the hypothesis. Methods will be employed to
identify where current models are insufficient, how they can be improved, and
the degree to which it will be possible to predict grain evolution. The broader
impact of this research is that the ability to predict how grains change during
processing will make it possible to avoid trial and error experimentation and
develop improved materials more quickly and at a lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Predicting exactly how
microstructures evolve during thermal annealing is one of the longstanding
problems in materials science. While it is known how the average grain size will
change with annealing, very little is known about the evolution of the grain
boundary character distribution, the texture, and the grain shape. The main
assertion of this research is that with knowledge of the grain boundary
properties and how the properties vary with the crystallography of the grain
boundary, it will be possible to predict how the microstructure will change
during grain growth. A continuous feedback cycle of observations, simulation,
comparison, and correction will be employed with the objective of creating
accurate, predictive models for grain growth. The research will focus on
materials with a range of anisotropic grain boundary properties. Ferritic iron
has the most isotropic properties. The grain boundary properties of strontium
titanate vary mostly with respect to grain boundary plane orientation. The grain
boundary properties of nickel are anisotropic with respect to both lattice
misorientation and grain boundary plane orientation. The studies of three-
dimensional microstructure evolution in this research will make it possible to
test proposed mechanisms for the development of anisotropic grain boundary
character distributions and grain growth stagnation.