* 1628458
* NSF/SBE-BSF: How Past Collective Trauma of Suffering and Perpetrating Intergroup Violence Can Facilitate or Prevent Intergroup Violence in the Present
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bernhard Leidner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 444,583.00

The most defining feature of conflict between groups is also the most
challenging to address: the suffering and perpetration of violence. Intergroup
violence inflicts collective trauma for both victims and perpetrators, albeit in
different ways. A growing field of research identifies such past experiences of
trauma as an obstacle to conflict resolution. The collective memory of past
trauma that implicates another group can facilitate and escalate conflict with
that group long after those events. Understanding such issues may help society
develop more peaceful interactions between groups in conflict within a society
as well as between nations. Investigators in the U.S. along with investigators
in Israel test a comprehensive theoretical approach that links collective trauma
and future intergroup violence. One prediction is that both victims and
perpetuators can perceive their group's collective trauma in similar ways: as
either a threat, creating demands which outstrip one's ability to handle it; or
as a challenge, strongly demanding but which can be overcome and result in
positive outcomes. Cardiovascular research suggests that challenge responses
involve healthier physiological states and more adaptive behavior than do threat
responses. In the case of collective trauma, the stress response may have
tremendous societal impact as well--by causing defense motivations that result
in conflict escalation for all involved. In their project the investigators test
the hypothesis that the determining factor in perceiving trauma as threat versus
challenge is in-group glorification, or people's deference to their own group
and tendency to view it as superior to other groups. By testing these
hypotheses, this research can generate knowledge that could improve societal
outcomes related to large-scale conflict. In addition, the project may inform
efforts to develop evidence-based interventions that deal with collective trauma
and the violence that stems from it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eight studies address
four primary objectives. One aim is to understand how collective trauma
perceptions can differ in ways that escalate or deescalate conflict. Among
perpetrators, those who glorify their group should see their group's collective
trauma of perpetrating violence as a threat to the group's image, whereas those
who do not glorify their group should see it as a challenge. Among victims,
those who glorify their group should see their group's collective trauma of
suffering violence as a threat to the group's existence, whereas others should
see it as a challenge and potential for growth. The second aim is exploring how
historical representations of trauma affect motivation and intention to act.
Cognitive representations of past trauma in terms of threat should make people
defensive and take measures that ultimately facilitate future violence.
Representing past trauma in terms of challenge should reduce defensive behavior
and ultimately prevent future violence. The third aim is testing whether
individuals with different historical representations of trauma have
cardiovascular responses that reflect threat versus challenge stress responses.
The fourth aim is determining whether experimental manipulations can shift
threat representations into becoming challenge representations. To test these
aims, the investigators use multiple methods, including self-report measures and
impedance cardiography. Research participants are from multiple countries that
have experienced collective trauma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international
component of this research was supported by co-funding from the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).