* 1628110
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The role of input in the acquisition of factivity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2018
* USD 18,211.00

Language is used to communicate ideas and transfer information because it can
reflect what our individual beliefs are and what our shared beliefs are. As one
example, the way that words like "know" and "think" are used within a
conversation reflects how sure the conversational participants are about what
they believe, whether they agree about what they are discussing, and what they
take to be facts or opinions. This project examines how children come to
understand how belief words like "know" and "think" contribute to the exchange
of information within a conversation. Do children from different backgrounds
have similar experiences with these words? And to the degree that there are
differences, how does that variation contribute to differences in acquiring an
adult-like understanding of these words? To answer these questions, this project
first conducts corpus analyses to investigate how parents use belief words in
talking to their preschool-aged children. Then, these corpus results are
combined with behavioral methods to reveal how linguistic experience relates to
children's mastery of these words.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finding out how children
come to learn words like "know" and "think" is important in understanding
contributing factors to later academic and professional success. Specifically,
these words require an understanding of the ways that information is exchanged
and communicated through conversations. As a result, understanding these words
leads to mastery in interpreting what their conversational partners believe and
why they believe it. This, in turn, allows children to better understand
academic and professional communication and may lead to greater achievement in
school, and ultimately, in their careers.