* 1628956
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of the Effects of Organic Matter and Sulfur in the Environmental Fate of Mercury
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Kathryn Nagy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 12/31/2021
* USD 261,798.00

Mercury is responsible for more than 80% of the fish consumption advisories in
fresh waters of the United States. Most of this mercury is released by the
combustion of coal and is deposited from the atmosphere near and far from the
sources. Once deposited, the threat of mercury to food webs depends on the
extent to which ionic mercury is converted to (1) methylmercury, the form of
mercury that is accumulated from plankton to fish and ultimately to humans, and
(2) elemental mercury, the form of mercury that is removed from aquatic systems
by volatilization. Mercury is converted to methylmercury mainly by sulfate-
reducing bacteria that thrive in aquatic environments deprived of oxygen. The
ability of these bacteria to methylate mercury depends on the form of the ionic
mercury -- whether or not its availability to sulfate-reducing bacteria is
limited by its association with organic matter or its precipitation as mercuric
sulfide minerals. Mercury is converted to elemental mercury by reduction by a
variety of processes for which the influence of organic matter association and
precipitation as mercuric sulfide is not well known. The goal of this research
is to assess the role of organic matter and sulfur in influencing the conversion
of ionic mercury to methylmercury, the first step in making mercury available to
aquatic organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is to improve
understanding of the interactions between mercury, sulfur, and organic matter.
The research is driven by two main hypotheses that investigate the role of
sulfur cycling and redox conditions on the reactivity of organic matter to
mercury. The first hypothesis examines the abiotic incorporation of sulfide into
organic matter as a function of organic matter composition, and the role of
metals on the stability of the newly-incorporated organic sulfur to oxidation.
The second hypothesis addresses the effects of the composition and redox state
of organic matter on the reduction of mercury from Hg(II) to Hg(0), and
inhibition of the reduction of Hg(II) by complexation to reduced sulfur groups
in organic matter and inorganic sulfide. The hypotheses will be tested by (1)
examining sulfide incorporation into organic matter and reduction of Hg(II) to
Hg(0) by organic matter using laboratory experiments and field studies at sites
in the Florida Everglades and interior Alaska that represent a range of sulfur
and organic matter conditions and (2) characterizing sulfur and mercury in these
materials by X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy. These
efforts will be enhanced by the use of electrochemistry to study coupled metal-
organic matter redox reactions and high energy-resolution XANES spectroscopy to
resolve sulfur functionality. The research goals will be complemented by a high-
school teacher training program focusing on the laboratory research and
participation in ongoing and new science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education efforts.