* 1628384
* XPS: FULL: Emerging Nonvolatile Memory for Analog-iterative Numerical Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stephen Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 833,000.00

A new type of computer memory - crosspoint resistive memory -
has&lt;br/&gt;emerged as a likely candidate to replace current memory technology
in&lt;br/&gt;future computing systems. This memory allows for potential
computer&lt;br/&gt;designs with high memory capacity and with memory
incorporated&lt;br/&gt;directly into processing units. Novel thinking about
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods is required to exploit the potential of these
novel&lt;br/&gt;systems. This project will explore new, fundamental methods in
the&lt;br/&gt;field of numerical optimization that are suited to implementation
on&lt;br/&gt;computer systems that incorporate crosspoint resistive memory.
The&lt;br/&gt;field of optimization is chosen as a testbed because of its
importance&lt;br/&gt;to a wide range of scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crosspoint memory has unprecedented advantages
in capacity and access&lt;br/&gt;latency. Substantial innovation is required to
fully exploit the&lt;br/&gt;potential benefits of integrating memory into
processing units;&lt;br/&gt;current algorithms are unsuitable, because they are
constrained by the&lt;br/&gt;von Neumann bottleneck. The PIs will design the
Gigascale Analog Iterative&lt;br/&gt;Network Solver (GAINS), a system
architecture to enable efficient&lt;br/&gt;in-situ data processing. GAINS alters
the application-, architecture-,&lt;br/&gt;and logic/circuit-level abstractions
that enable designers and&lt;br/&gt;developers at each layer to work
independently. (i) It promotes&lt;br/&gt;matrices to a first-class data type.
(ii) It integrates computataion&lt;br/&gt;and memory, avoiding pitfalls of
conventional memory&lt;br/&gt;hierarchies. (iii) It exploits multi-valued
representations in storage&lt;br/&gt;and computation. (iv) It replaces binary
logic circuits with&lt;br/&gt;multi-valued analog circuits, reducing area
overhead and power&lt;br/&gt;consumption. The PIs will investigate the effects
of this changed paradigm&lt;br/&gt;on the design of algorithms in numerical
optimization and machine&lt;br/&gt;learning.