* 1628789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Articulation and Altered Auditory Feedback
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Keith Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,744.00

Individuals vary from one another in how they speak. Speakers listen to
themselves while talking, and they constantly use this auditory feedback to
correct their speech. This project examines two factors that influence the way
that speakers are able to effectively use this auditory feedback: vocal tract
shape and native language. The shape of the hard palate, which is an important
factor in the relationship between articulation and acoustics, will be used as a
measure of individual anatomical variation. Two similar sounds with comparable
articulatory variation in American English and Tamil are compared to test the
role of native language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this experiment, participants
say words containing the speech sounds of interest, and their auditory feedback
is altered in real time by a computer so speakers hear themselves saying
something different from what they actually produced. Previous studies (e.g.
Houde and Jordan 1998) show that speakers change their articulation in response
to altered auditory feedback, but it is not known how. Here, the novel addition
of simultaneous ultrasound imaging will reveal how speakers
compensate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these studies stand to improve
models of how we modify our motor plans while speaking. A complete model of
typical speech serves as a baseline for understanding motor control in
populations with disordered speech, such as those with apraxia of speech or
Parkinson's Disease. This research will also contribute to our understanding of
the role of auditory feedback in motor control, which has direct implications
for people with hearing loss. Comparing English and Tamil helps to support
generalizations about motor control in speech without confining results to
English alone. This research also addresses long-standing questions concerning
the instigation of language change. Exploring the factors that cause individuals
to be fundamentally differently from each other in their speech production may
provide an explanation for why some individuals might be more likely than others
to contribute to the pool of language variation that results in sound change.