* 1628096
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Urban Redevelopment.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Nicholas Caverly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2017
* USD 24,438.00

Cities are complex assemblages of social, political, economic, and environmental
systems, all of which are dependent on the built environments in which people
live and work. When the buildings deteriorate and the infrastructure breaks
down, the effects may exacerbate contemporary problems such as
deindustrialization, population loss, and environmental degradation. But what
happens when the environmentally hazardous structures are removed? Are the
problems cured? And are the lives of urban populations, particularly previously
disadvantaged populations, improved? To answer these questions, the research
supported by this award will examine the before and after of a planned massive
demolition of an urban center in an American city. The researcher will document
the process of demolition, map the changes in the configuration of urban space,
explore the new economic arrangements that are established, and connect them to
changes in people's lives, health, and opportunities. By enhancing social
scientific understanding of how complex systems shape urban life, findings from
this research will provide critical information for officials, planners, and
scientists charged with improving urban life.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
will be carried out in Detroit, Michigan, by University of Michigan doctoral
student Nicholas Caverly, under the supervision of Dr. Erik Mueggler. Caverly
will focus on the case of the large-scale building demolition program, which
anticipates demolishing 50,000 vacant buildings by 2020 in order to improve
public health and safety, property values, and the municipal budget. Caverly
will gather data on the removal process, worker retraining, and the management
of hazards, as well as the spatial, environmental, and economic outcomes. He
will use a mix of social science methods including participant observation;
semi-structured interviews with a wide range of stakeholders; institutional
ethnography and extended case studies; archival research; and cartography. By
taking advantage of this opportunity to see how the built environment affects
urban life in the process of its creation as well as in its aftermath, this
research will make a unique contribution to social science theory as well as to
improved urban social policy.