* 1628813
* Dynamics of High School Course Enrollment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Samuel Lucas, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Dynamics of High School Course Enrollment

Abstract This project will investigate the dynamics of high school course
enrollment in order to understand some of the mechanisms that contribute to
long-term inequality in society. High schools offer courses of different levels
of rigor. In some schools students, with their parents' blessing, are free to
select the level of rigor of their courses for study, while in others student
choice plays a limited role. Yet, in the former schools, some students and
parents may be unaware of how great the differences are among courses, and thus
may select courses that do not fully build on the students' potential. The cost
of such under-placement may last long after high school is over, delaying or
even denying the individual as well as the nation the contributions the student
might ultimately have made. Such costs may be especially acute in the sciences,
and may play a role in gender inequality in the pursuit of science. Further,
racial/ethnic differences may be traceable, in part, to differences in the
information parents and students may have about courses. Studying the course
enrollment process of disparate schools can help to identify practices that can
support each student in selecting the most rigorous courses for which the
student is qualified. Findings of such practices can then be shared with school
districts and school-site actors via journals and presentations. Analysts have
studied course enrollment before, but schools have changed appreciably since
such studies were completed. While completing a comprehensive, systematic review
of existing evidence, the project will also gather empirical data on the course
enrollment process. Researchers will analyze materials used to convey the course
enrollment process to students and parents to discover the range of official
course enrollment procedures. At the same time, parents of students attending
diverse schools will be recruited for several group interviews (focus groups) in
which parents can reflect upon and report on their and their child's experience
of the course selection process. Further, researchers will compare the official
course enrollment process and parents' report of their experiences in order to
investigate whether some kinds of materials and processes are more likely to
help parents help their children navigate the course selection process.