* 1628195
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Factors Driving Changes within Global Healthcare Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Zakea Boeger, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,624.00

Though by no means a new phenomenon, medical travel - the seeking of healthcare
services abroad - continues to grow rapidly as individuals look to the global
market to meet their healthcare needs. While anthropologists have pointed to the
intensely varied nature of medical travel experiences, there remains much to be
understood about the different kinds of healthcare concerns which drive medical
travel, as well as how individuals and families navigate financial,
bureaucratic, and other systems to obtain care abroad. This project, which
trains a graduate student in methods of empirically-grounded, scientific
research, seeks to understand how individuals' and families' desires for
particular healthcare treatments (e.g. cancer screenings and treatments) may
influence their temporary or long-term migrations to the U.S. and elsewhere, as
well as how their shifting healthcare concerns may evidence changing ideas
regarding illness, health, and expectations of healthcare systems. Understanding
these factors is imperative to informing programs and policies that respond to
the shifting nature of contemporary, global healthcare seeking, particularly as
it impacts migrations to and the use of healthcare services in the U.S. and
elsewhere.

Zakea Boeger, under the supervision of Dr. Jan Brunson of the University of
Hawai'i at Manoa, will examine the factors impacting travel to service
healthcare needs. This yearlong research project will be conducted in
Nuku'alofa, Kingdom of Tonga, where the researcher has conducted previous work.
As the Tongan government supports a publically funded healthcare system,
Nuku'alofa is an apt site for identifying key healthcare concerns that drive
individuals to seek healthcare abroad, and to draw on often-limited resources to
do so. Scientific research of medical travel has tended to focus on populations
with more extensive resources to finance travel for medical purposes, so this
site offers an opportunity to test a number of prevailing assumptions about the
drivers of medical travel. The researcher will engage in extensive interviews
with individuals and families who have engaged in and/or plan to engage in
medical travel, so as to gain an understanding of the motivations for and means
by which individuals are able to access health care abroad. Interviews will
provide insight into the possible relationship between Tongans' primary medical
travel destinations (e.g. the U.S.) and contemporary, ongoing Tongan and Pacific
migration to the U.S. and elsewhere. Interviews will also consider how medical
travel experiences may be intertwined with shifting socio-cultural notions of
health, appropriate health care, and resultant expectations of healthcare
systems in Tonga and abroad. Project findings will help illuminate broader
health concerns that drive global, medical travel, as well as how this travel
may impact healthcare systems in the U.S. and abroad.