* 1628986
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: ETFs and Arbitrage under Liquidity Mismatch
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Kevin Pan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 21,125.00

This award funds doctoral dissertation research that will be conducted by coPI
Kevin Pan. He wants to understand how the market for corporate bonds is affected
by the existence of corporate bond exchange traded funds (ETFs). These funds
maintain liquidity by establishing authorized participants (APs) who are the
only market participants allowed to transact with the ETF issuer to create and
redeem shares of the ETF. The coPI will examine how AP trading behavior affects
underlying bond returns, liquidity, and price volatility. The goal is to
understand whether ETF arbitrage might fail under certain circumstances. ETF
shares are owned by individual investors in the U.S.; understanding conditions
under which the market could fail is important, since a market failure could
have significant effects on many Americans' retirement savings. The results will
be useful for regulators, who have been concerned about ETF liquidity during
financial stress. They will also be useful to the many individual investors who
hold ETF shares; the lack of scientific research on ETFs means that individual
investors have few resources for disinterested information on the benefits and
risks of ETF investments.

The project generally seeks to understand how financial institutions,
specifically authorized participants, can affect financial markets and asset
prices. The coPI will construct a detailed panel set of (1) ETF prices,
holdings, and arbitrage ability, (2) AP lists by ETF, and (3) corporate bond
trades and characteristics. The plan to is to examine several research
questions. First, how are excess volatility and co-movement of underlying
corporate bond returns affected by the intermediation friction of broker-dealers
in this market? Second, how have changing market trends and conditions affected
the market and trade of corporate bonds and corporate bond ETFs? Third, how do
APs use the creation/redemption process to relax their inventory or financial
constraints? What are the resulting implications for their trading behavior in
corporate bonds and ETFs, and how is this behavior different than what is
observed for financial intermediaries who are not APs? Fourth, how and under
what circumstances might ETF arbitrage fail? What are the implications of
failure and what role do APs play in this failure? The coPI's theory suggests a
new channel of transmission via APs' inventory constraints and ETFs' liquidity
mismatch. The coPI will also use the data to test various theories about
arbitrage in this market.