* 1628401
* XPS: EXPL: Cache Management for Data Parallel Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Zheng Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Current advances in computer science and other disciplines rely on the massive
computation horsepower of data parallel architectures, such as GPUs. Programming
data parallel architecture is not easy, as it requires the efficient handling of
data movements across the memory hierarchy of thousands of processing cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, data movement problems have been primarily
studied in uni-core and multi-core programming systems. Thus, shifting to a
many-core programming paradigm presents the new challenges of 1) scalability, 2)
software and hardware interface, and 3) addressing the trade-off between
performance and energy. First, the data movement models in uni-core and multi-
core processors do not scale well, thus, this project develops scalable
analytical models and yet provides powerful heuristics in practice. Second, it
is important to redefine the responsibilities of software and hardware. Given
the complexity of many-core architecture, it is impossible to solve data
movement problems using software-only or hardware-only approaches. This project
optimizes data movements with a cross-stack design principle that aims to
combine the strengths of software and hardware. Third, previous studies have
focused on performance without much consideration to issues of power and energy
efficiency. This project targets both performance and energy, models the energy
cost of data movement and integrates this information into the power/energy
model for the entire system. Overall, this project can help shape future
software-hardware cache interfaces and lay the foundation for the design of
next-generation cache systems.