* 1628750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Documenting the endangered Koman languages and their linguistic relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Doris Payne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,900.00

Just like biologists have methods to investigate the relationships between
species, linguists have methods that allow them to determine the relationships
between languages. Linguists do this by comparing a set of languages along
various dimensions, such as words or language structures that may have a common
origin. Documentation of individual languages plays a key role in how scholars
reconstruct the family relationships between languages, but with little or no
documentation, it is highly challenging to make conclusive determinations of the
linguistic relationships. This project will investigate a small set of five
endangered languages which are related to each other, according to the existing
small sets of data. These languages are poorly documented due to being spoken
only in a remote, conflict-ridden area, inaccessible except by footpaths. This
project will also research whether these languages are related to others in the
neighboring geographic region by documenting the individual languages in this
group, and by making comparisons between specific words and other linguistic
features of each of the languages. The dissertation will increase the linguistic
understanding of the five targeted languages and their relationships with each
other and with other languages in the region. This dissertation will also add
deeper insight to the less frequent type of patterns ("typology") in the sound
systems and in grammar of these languages by collecting and analyzing new
documentation. The documentation will serve not only linguists and educators but
also anthropologists and historians interested in the inhabitants of a virtually
forgotten area.



In this dissertation project, doctoral student Manuel Otero will document the
endangered languages, including a comparative vocabulary of the Koman peoples.
The Koman languages constitute a small group of five languages spoken in the
Ethiopia, Sudan and South Sudan borderlands. Aside from Uduk, the Koman
languages are only spoken in Africa, so fieldwork will be carried out primarily
in Ethiopia for the Komo, Gwama, Opuo and Dana languages. Little is known about
the Koman languages and peoples, as the terrain these groups have inhabited for
centuries is rugged and primarily communicable by footpaths. Most Koman people
continue traditional practices, including hunting and gathering alongside
subsistence farming. Impacted by more than a century of strife and conflict,
these populations continue to dwindle and some of their languages are on the
verge of extinction, in urgent need of documentation. The primary research
questions concern developing an understanding of their sound systems and
grammar, their interrelationships, and how Koman relates to larger African
language families, which is still under debate. Typologically rare grammatical
features in Koman include temporal distinctions made by suffixes that primarily
indicate direction of movement and track the location of participants. Such
systems are important to the study of human language and cognition, as they show
how grammatical material can evolve. In Koman languages, the grammar of "tense"
is developing out of the human desire to communicate the whereabouts of other
animate beings.