* 1628026
* Support for the Elemental Analysis Facility at The Field Museum of Natural History
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 131,018.00

This award will continue National Science Foundation (NSF) support for the
Elemental Analysis Facility (EAF) at the Field Museum of Natural History in
Chicago, which provides instrumentation for the rapid compositional analysis of
ancient materials like ceramics, glass, metals, and pigments, to enhance
research on a very wide range of anthropological topics. Researchers are able to
analyze archaeological samples for major, minor, and trace elements in a non-
destructive manner to address questions related to the archaeology of cultural
production, interaction and exchange in the Americas, Africa, Oceania, Europe,
and Asia, and advance the cause of material conservation of The Field Museum's
renowned anthropology collections. The EAF serves the Field Museum community as
well as scholars and students from the Chicago area, the Midwest and throughout
the world, by offering financial support to offset travel and accommodation
expenses as well as part of the analytical costs. The presence of an on-site
laboratory at the Field Museum creates the opportunity to study artifacts from
the unique collections of the museum that could not be moved easily to outside
analytical facilities. The EAF also supports undergraduate and graduate student
research and training. Students are initiated into the analytical process by
undertaking their own analyses and are trained in method development, the
statistical processing of the data, and interpretation. Results of this research
will inform future exhibits and education activities of The Field Museum, which
provides science education and outreach for hundreds of thousands of school
children and millions of visitors annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EAF
includes a scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive spectrometer
(SEM-EDS), and inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). The ICP-
MS can be fitted with two lasers. One of the lasers is dedicated to the sampling
of small objects with a high throughput, whereas the second laser, a totally
unique, custom-transformed apparatus, accommodates large objects. This equipment
is complemented by three portable XRF instruments for totally non-invasive
investigations of artifacts on the premises of the Museum or in the field. The
intellectual merits of the project include the establishment of extensive new
datasets of archaeological and ethnological material from around the world that
directly inform hypotheses about ancient trade and exchange, technology, and
their relationship to the development of social complexity around the world. By
providing expertise for the investigation of ancient material, linking leading
scholars and graduate students to the museum's extensive collections, and giving
them the tools to analyze these one-of-a-kind assemblages, the project will
significantly enhance understanding of the role of cultural production in the
development of complex societies.