* 1628580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Infrastructural Design Challenges in Municipal Planning Efforts Aimed at Maximizing Energy Efficiency
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Rebecca Journey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 24,973.00

In 2007, half of the global population became concentrated in cities for the
first time in human history. By 2050, nearly 90% of global population growth and
60% of aggregate energy consumption will occur in cities. Climate scientists
suggest that efforts combat anthropogenic climate change will be won or lost in
cities, especially through the large-scale transformation of urban transit
networks. As municipal planners worldwide reckon with the ecological and public
health hazards of mass automobility, a transition to decarbonized transit has
emerged as a significant concern for municipal planners and engineers. This
project, which trains a graduate student in methods of conducting empirically
grounded scientific fieldwork, explores what factors contribute to the cultural
and social efficacy and effectiveness of municipal planning efforts aimed at
improving energy efficiency and optimizing mobility around urban
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an ethnographic study of energy
efficient infrastructure design, Rebecca Journey, under the supervision of Dr.
Michael Fisch of the University of Chicago, will investigate the social and
cultural factors that shape urban planning efforts. Tasked with retrofitting
ever-sprawling cities with energy efficient transport infrastructure, urban
planners are looking increasingly to Northern Europe for models. Within this
context, the Danish capital and self-styled "eco-metropolis" of Copenhagen has
surfaced as a prototype. At a municipal scale, this ambition is outlined in the
Climate Plan, Copenhagen Municipality's long-range, comprehensive planning
initiative to build the world's first carbon-neutral capital, and by extension,
to shape a citizenry that might prove capable of mitigating climate concerns. To
that end, this project will track a range of infrastructure design, development,
and retrofit projects prescribed by the Climate Plan. Through participant-
observation, multimedia documentation, and ethnographic interviews with city
planners, architects, policymakers, and citizens, this research will investigate
the sociocultural drivers and experiential dimensions of sustainable transport
technology. For good reason, mobility studies have tended to focus on cars,
trains and planes. Such studies have illuminated the inequitable distribution of
resources in transit networks as well as the environmental and geopolitical
hazards of fossil-fueled mobility. Yet in addition to rendering the harms of
carbon-based transit apparent, mobility studies should attend to the modes by
which alternatives become a thinkable and practical dimension of everyday life.
This research takes up precisely this charge by enriching the social scientific
study of infrastructure and mobility with the understudied regional and cultural
perspective of Scandinavia.