* 1628866
* Firm Dynamics and Productivity Growth During the Industrial Revolution
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Nico Voigtlaender, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 367,350.00

While it is well understood that productivity growth is crucial for sustaining
increasing income per capita over time, there is less consensus about how
different factors contribute to it. Innovation is widely considered to play a
key role, and the Industrial Revolution boasts a host of new technologies such
as the steam engine and the spinning jenny. In light of this, previous research
has focused extensively on the role that these new inventions played in the
onset of sustained economic growth in parts of Western Europe in the late 18th
and early 19th century. Nevertheless, a key limitation of previous studies was
the level of data availability, restricting research to the level of countries
or, at best, aggregate industrial sectors within countries. However,
contemporaneous research has shown that firm dynamics are a key element of
aggregate productivity growth. In particular, country-wide productivity tends to
grow if resources are allocated to the most productive firms, i.e., if
productive firms grow more quickly than less productive ones. To date,
understanding how firm dynamics evolved during the Industrial Revolution and
what effect this had on productivity growth has been inhibited by the lack of
firm level data. This project aims at filling this important gap by building a
novel dataset of French firms. The dataset will follow firms across time, in a
number of different industries during the Industrial Revolution. This dataset
will allow the investigators -- and future researchers -- to examine the
transition from stagnation to ongoing growth in unprecedented detail.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes an important step towards understanding
how firm dynamics evolved during the Industrial Revolution by assembling an
original dataset with comprehensive coverage of French firms for the period
1788-1847. The dataset will be unique in several dimensions: (1) it will cover
firms in a wide set of industries, including highly innovative and less
innovative sectors; (2) within industries, the data will cover firms along
different stages of the production chain -- for example, in the cotton industry,
data on spinning, weaving, and dyeing firms will be available; (3) since firm
name and location are available, a panel-like structure can be created, allowing
for the use of firm fixed effects and the study of entry and exit; (4) the fact
that regional data (and firm location) are known can also be used to investigate
agglomeration effects. The usefulness of the data collection in this project is
not confined to studying productivity growth during industrialization. It will
also be valuable to study the effects of trade integration, the role of
misallocation of resources, as well as the relationship between social and
institutional change and economic development.