* 1628961
* II-NEW: Probe Station to Characterize Body Area Network Sensor ICs  for Cyber Physical Systems Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Scott Smith, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2019
* USD 362,865.00

This research infrastructure will enable North Dakota State University (NDSU) to
pursue a wide area of research topics: System-on-Chip (SoC) integrated silicon-
based CMOS/Silicon-Germanium (SiGe) Radio Frequency (RF) and millimeter-wave
Integrated Circuits (ICs) for high data rate (Gb/s) wireless body/personal area
network (WBAN, WPAN) communication involving humans and computers, communication
radar and sensors for detection applications ranging from hand-held scanners for
bio-medical imaging to portable/wearable weapon scanners for military
applications, asynchronous logic circuits for ultra-low power computer chips,
extreme environment ICs for use in outer space and high temperature power
electronic applications, side-channel attack resistant ICs, RF nanotechnology,
and developing sub-millimeter wave and Terahertz frequency ICs. These research
topics are very crucial and play a significant role in bolstering the leading
position of the United States in research and development related to wireless
communication, information technology, and IC design, which will strengthen our
country's defense and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-Art research
instrumentation is essential. This instrumentation will enable precise
characterization of devices and circuits to understand their behavior in order
to be able to successfully design new classes of ultra-low-power BAN sensors ICs
that are adaptable to dynamic changes based on body movements or environmental
changes for Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) applications. This will further
significantly aid faculty and students to conduct fundamental research, which
will directly benefit the research community from the tests and analysis enabled
by the probe station equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to facilitating
cutting-edge research, this probe station will provide a variety of
undergraduate and graduate students the ability to be trained on state-of-the-
art industry-standard equipment, affording them a tremendous competitive
advantage in the job market. The system offer broad opportunities for general
Electromagnetics, Computer Communication Networks, Biomedical Engineering, and
Material Characterization Research.