* 1628915
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The Social Roots of Political Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Paul Beck, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 28,644.00

Individuals make decisions in relation to those around them -- what to buy, what
to eat, and even how to vote. Understanding the social component of those
decisions is confounded by the reality that individuals surround themselves with
individuals like themselves along racial, social class, and even partisan lines.
Social networks can either lead toward increased understanding and tolerance of
others views or further entrenchment in views. Thus, while formal and informal
social groups represent a necessary component of democracy, they also present
opportunities for political division. Understanding the process and implications
of how individuals make political decisions in relation to their social context
is imperative toward understanding and engaging the current political climate.
This research sheds new light on social explanations of the vote decision and
political activity beyond voting by accounting for the reasons individuals
select into groups and how the group then affects their political decisions. The
theory is that selection into a social environment conditions the influence that
occurs there. For example, individuals in political groups are more likely to be
influenced by that group because political norms are clear and the pressure to
comply with those norms is high. In other words, the mechanisms of social
influence depend on the selection process. Once selection is accounted for, the
influence of the group on the individual can be better ascertained.

This study utilizes a mixed-method approach to illuminate the relationship
between individual political attitudes and social networks. The project begins
with a three-wave panel study of individuals in organizational groups with
varying amounts of political purpose. While documenting the change in political
beliefs as a result of social ties with longitudinal data, the researchers also
employ experimental analysis to illuminate mechanisms of the influence process.
Specifically, the research explores whether social learning (information), group
dynamics (social pressure), and the size and structure of the network itself are
mechanisms through which the social environment affects political beliefs. The
researchers record individuals before, during, and after their selection into
groups in order to shed light on how political predispositions influence an
individuals' selections into social environments and how those environments then
influence their political beliefs. This project makes both theoretical and
empirical contributions to the study of social influence, network analysis, and
political decision-making by using a research design that overcomes common
limitations of social influence studies. Recent scholarship ignores the
selection process in their attempts to understand influence and little attention
has been given to understanding exactly how social influence on politics occurs.
By holding the reasons for selection into a social group constant, the research
illuminates the mechanisms through which individuals influence others in
politically consequential ways using novel cross-sectional, longitudinal, and
experimental data. Taken together, these efforts focus on the entire influence
process: from the selection into influence groups to the opportunities for
influence in those settings.