* 1628976
* DIP: Improving Collaborative Learning in Engineering Classes Through Integrated Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Emma Mercier, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,349,576.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology to build and
refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that allows them
to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the future and
that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to foster or
assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project is focused on
the teaching of collaborative problem solving activities in introductory
engineering courses and builds on a prior project to design tools for
collaborative sketching in these courses. The project is based on a recognition
of the importance of collaborating in engineering, the need for student to learn
this skill, the value of collaborative learning tasks for engaging students in
authentic problem solving activities, and the difficulty that graduate student
teaching assistants (TAs) encounter when trying to teach in this way. There are
two parts to the technology innovation. The first part is a set of tools for the
teaching assistants, to help them manage the classroom technologies, and to help
them understand how to intervene in groups who are struggling with the content
or collaborative processes. The second part is a set of tools for the students.
Building on the collaborative sketch software previously developed, prompts to
support their collaborative processes will be embedded in the software students
will use, based on analysis of the logfiles that help determine who needs what
prompts when. Research goals include understanding how receiving prompts changes
the nature of students' collaborative activity, and how receiving insight into
the difficulties students are having helps TAs learn about to foster
collaborative learning in their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are
addressing the difficulties encountered implementing collaborative learning
activities in engineering courses by designing and studying tools for TAs and
students in these classes. Through an iterative design approach, the PIs will
design and study tools for TAs to orchestrate the classroom and collaboration
activities and to tools for students which support their collaborative problem
solving processes. The PIs will investigate the use of learning analytics in
evaluating the collaborative practices of students using these tools; in
particular, logfiles will be examined for collaborative indicators based on
prior research on collaborative processes, then clustered to look for patterns
of engagement, and finally used to create regression models of successful
collaboration processes using machine learning techniques. Cross-validation of
the models will be done with both logfile and video data to avoid overfitting.
These insights will be provided to TAs to examine whether such information is
helpful in determining how and when to intervene in groups. Findings from the
research will provide insight into: 1) The knowledge that TAs need in order to
successfully implement collaborative problem solving in undergraduate courses;
2) Whether TAs can learn more about collaborative problem solving with the
support of tools aimed at helping them implement this form of pedagogy; 3)
Whether students can learn collaborative problem solving skills through embedded
prompts during multi-week collaborative activities and 4) The potential of
analytics in determining when and how to reduce the collaboration supports from
groups.