* 1628939
* Collaborative Research: Honest Inference and Efficiency Bounds for Nonparametric Regression and Approximate Moment Condition Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Timothy Armstrong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 202,154.00

In analyzing economic data, researchers use models and assumptions that are
typically best thought of as approximations of reality. This project will
develop statistical methods that are valid when these models are only
approximately correct, rather than exactly correct. The methods developed in
this project can also be used to provide simple ways of assessing the
sensitivity of the conclusions of an empirical study to its underlying
assumptions. These methods can be applied to numerous commonly studied problems
that are relevant for policy and for understanding the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop confidence intervals in
approximate moment condition models with convex parameter spaces, as well as
sharp efficiency bounds showing that they are as tight as possible in a certain
precise sense. The setup covers inference on a linear functional of a
nonparametric regression function, such as its value at a point, the regression
discontinuity parameter, or an average treatment effect under unconfoundedness.
The setup also covers parameter constraints in the linear regression model as
well as moment condition models such as generalized method of moments (GMM) or
minimum distance models in which the moment condition is locally misspecified.
The confidence intervals are simple to construct, and valid in an "honest" or
uniform sense. As special cases of the results, the project obtains optimal
kernels for inference in nonparametric regression models, and optimal weights
for GMM under misspecification.