* 1628654
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Lesser Spoken Language Access in Immigration Court
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Sonya Rao, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 10,678.00

The proposed research examines how scarcity of interpreting services shapes
access to justice in immigration courts through an ethnographic case study.
Though respondents have a right to an interpreter at all hearings, interpreting
services for lesser spoken or rare languages are minimally available. As a
result, respondents frequently waive interpretation services. The research
analyzes how courtroom authorities attempt to uphold language access plans that
prescribe best practices while availability of quality language services remains
limited on the ground.

The research applies language and communication theory to institutional policies
through first person interviews and observations of courtroom proceedings.
Expanding on conclusions from over a year of preliminary fieldwork, the research
observes how (1) scarcity of interpreting resources creates an economy of labor
between judges, lawyers, and non-government legal aid to help respondents
understand proceedings; (2) courtroom spaces with limited language services
allow immigration judges to innovate communicative strategies to compensate for
gaps in respondent understanding; (3) under the pressure of limited resources,
judges rely on both institutional and personal beliefs about language, and
linguistic comprehension, to make decisions about the necessity of interpreting
services. This long term ethnographic study of immigration court will contribute
to sociolegal and anthropological scholarship on mobility and citizenship by
examining the critical component of language access in immigration adjudication.