* 1628881
* Collaborative Research: Market Power and Resource Allocation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jan De Loecker, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 142,559.00

Most discussion of the social cost of market power focuses on the harm to
consumers, with little focus on the extent to which production can be distorted.
However, market power and especially cartelization can be a significant source
of production misallocation. This project aims at measuring this effect in an
important setting -- the global market for crude oil, in which the OPEC cartel,
the largest cartel currently in existence, is active. Over the course of
history, OPEC has allocated production to members via a quota system. One effect
of this quota system is to shift output from low cost producers to high cost
producers. By exploiting a comprehensive data of global oil producing assets,
this project will produce precise estimates of the global costs of this
production distortion. Therefore, this research will enrich public understanding
of the global costs of the current structure of the global oil market, and
better inform microeconomic policies on the relative costs of market power.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the extent to which
market power can be an important source of production misallocation. This
research will engage with existing literatures in the fields of Macroeconomics
and Industrial Organization that seek to understand the sources of differential
performance across countries and industries. The setting is the global oil
market. Using a comprehensive global data set of oil producing assets, the
investigators will first measure covariances between observed production costs
and market shares, because variation in these measures can be shown to reflect
variation in misallocation over time. The investigators will then adopt a more
structural econometric approach to estimate asset-specific cost functions and
further aggregate them to form an industry supply function. This will allow
current allocations to be compared to the allocations that would occur in a
perfectly competitive model, hence providing a static quantification of
misallocation on a year-by-year basis. This static measure will then be adjusted
to account for the dynamic extraction problem embodied in the oil production
process, which will be addressed by adapting existing computational oligopoly
methods from Industrial Organization.