* 1628407
* Engineering Stable Glass Films Using Molecular Design and Surface-Mediated Equilibration
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Zahra Fakhraai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanoscopic thin films of small molecule amorphous
organic materials are widely used in applications that range from protective
coatings to organic photovoltaics and resist materials in nanoimprint
lithography. These films are frequently manufactured through use of physical
vapor deposition (PVD) onto a substrate held below the materials' glass
transition temperature, Tg. Tg signifies the temperature where a system is
unable to equilibrate on laboratory or computational time scales. Since glassy
systems are out of equilibrium, the precise method of their fabrication,
including substrate temperature, its properties, and rate of deposition can
profoundly affect the materials properties and function in these applications.
This project employs a combination of molecular synthesis, high-throughput
characterization, and molecular simulation to design and characterize a library
of synthetic glass-forming materials as a function of deposition variables.
Addressing fundamental questions of the formation of highly stable glasses
during PVD will have a transformative effect on the community's ability to
engineer the properties of amorphous organic thin films and open the door to new
applications of stable glasses for various industries. In addition to the
project's impact on our fundamental understanding of stable glass formation and
industrial applications, this project will impact the education of junior
scientists from the undergraduate level through the PhD level. Undergraduate
education is integrated into all aspects of the project. The starting material
for the synthesis of glass formers is prepared as part of an undergraduate
organic chemistry laboratory course. Advanced undergraduates and graduate
students participate in the synthesis of the glass-formers as well as the
characterization of PVD films using various experimental and computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: When held at a constant
temperature a glass very slowly evolves towards a more stable, higher density
state. This process, called physical aging, can take millions of years to reach
equilibrium and only result in modest improvement in properties. Recent
breakthrough studies have shown that PVD onto a substrate held just below Tg
leads to a glass with properties that appear to be that of a glass that has aged
hundreds or even thousands of years. It is hypothesized that this is a result of
the enhanced mobility at the free surface of the film during deposition. Through
PVD, each deposited molecule experiences this enhanced mobility upon
condensation, allowing it to find a low energy state. As such, this process is
referred to as surface mediated equilibration (SME). The remarkable kinetic
stability of SME-generated glasses opens the door for their use in a number of
new applications, but several fundamental challenges hinder their adoption. Most
notably, a systematic understanding of the role of the chemical structure and
intermolecular interactions, the interactions of the organic molecule with the
substrate, and the effect of film thickness remain poorly understood. The
synthesis capabilities previously developed by the PIs allows one to dial in
particular structural motifs and intermolecular interactions. High-throughput
characterization methods will enable rapid determination of a materials' kinetic
stability as well as the relationship between stability and enhanced surface
dynamics. Finally, molecular-level insights will be provided through coarse-
grained simulations of the molecules synthesized and characterized
experimentally. Specifically, the primary goals of this project are to i)
determine the influence of chemical structure on surface mobility and SME glass
stability; ii) determine the effect of film thickness on stability; and iii)
determine the role of substrate interactions on altering materials' packing and
ability to form a stable glass. Addressing these questions will have a
transformative effect on the community's ability to engineer the properties of
amorphous organic thin films and open the door to new applications of stable
glasses.