* 1628301
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Translating Rules and the Rule of Law into Local Practices
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tommaso Pavone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,194.00

This project analyzes how international organizations advance the rule of law
when they lack the financial and military capacity to enforce their authority.
The project asks: How do legal cultures emerge so that law, though distantly
created, becomes a local resource invoked by community members and routinely
vindicated in court? Translating 'paper laws' into behavior on the ground is
critical for all legal systems, but it is a particular challenge for federal,
decentralized polities that lacks a military, an independent tax system, and a
large bureaucracy. Such polities might rely on communities of lawyers, judges,
legal academics, and civic associations to sustain the local operation of the
law, particularly in cities, where most courts and litigants are located.
Focusing on the European Union (EU) -- one of the most successful international
organizations of the modern era -- and using a comparative historical analysis
of how legal professionals across a set of European cities have organized to
practice EU law, the project examines the diverse motives, organizational
practices, and institutional constraints faced by these actors: How does local
socio-economic context shape their motivations to invoke EU law? How do they
promote awareness of EU law and amass the financial resources to vindicate it in
court? And how does the organization of the domestic judiciary shape their
ability to effectively secure the EU rights of local citizens? The resulting
findings support comparative research into the variable uptake of legal rules in
federal polities, where comparisons between the EU and the United States are
particularly appropriate. That is, by analyzing how legal rules come to be
practiced by local communities of legal professionals, the project identifies
the various ways in which individual rights and the equal application of the law
can be secured in diverse and decentralized legal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of interview, archival, and
quantitative evidence, amassed via twelve months of fieldwork, will be leveraged
to answer these questions. Preliminary research has already leveraged GIS
technology and fieldwork in Italian cities to demonstrate that local engagement
with EU varies at the city-level; additional fieldwork will assess the
mechanisms underlying this variation and the generalizability of the findings to
countries with diversely organized judiciaries. In this light, this project
first leverages geocoded EU litigation data to select Italian cities where
additional archival work can be conducted and key legal practitioners
interviewed to probe how they understand EU law, what local supports exist for
EU litigation, whether distinct local 'styles' of EU legal practice have
crystallized, and how these practices evolve over time. Fieldwork will assess
the hypothesis that local institutions -- such as universities and lawyers'
associations -- entrench distinct city-level patterns of engagement with EU law
depending on their ability to diffuse awareness of EU rules and to mobilize the
material resources to vindicate them in court. To do so, EU litigation in
northern Italian cities -- long boasting resource-rich, large-law-firm
litigation support structures -- will be compared to EU litigation in southern
cities, where institutions promoting EU legal practice have only recently been
founded to train the many solo-practitioners there. Fieldwork will also identify
how local, state, and EU actors shape the local litigation support structure
necessary to participate in the EU legal system. To then determine whether
Italian patterns of subnational engagement with EU law extend to different
judicial systems, additional archival work and interviews in select French
cities -- embedded within a more centralized judicial hierarchy than Italy's --
and German cities -- embedded within a more decentralized judiciary than Italy's
-- will be conducted.