* 1628538
* Do Peremptory Challenges Increase Bias on Juries?
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Ronald Wright, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 111,852.00

Criminal defendants hold the right to a trial by an impartial jury that
represents a fair cross-section of the community. Prosecutors and defense
lawyers usually help determine the jury by using a fixed number of "peremptory"
challenges to remove jurors they believe to be unsympathetic. The present study
will be the first to test empirically the common assumption that peremptory
challenges increase the impartiality of juries. This study will also expand the
scope of the limited empirical research on discrimination in jury selection, and
provide a novel data set for use in future analysis.

Researchers will collect court data from Minnesota about the demographics of all
jurors summoned over a multi-year period, as well as details about juror
selection and trial verdicts, and combine these with data already gathered from
North Carolina. The purpose of the study is to examine (i) if there are distinct
patterns in peremptory challenge use for prosecutors and defense attorneys, (ii)
how peremptory challenges affect the composition of impaneled juries, (iii) how
any effect on composition influences verdicts, and (iv) how results compare to
previously collected, parallel data from North Carolina. Data will be collected
on site in Minnesota district courts, and through remote access to court files.