* 1628918
* DIP: Collaborative Research: Interactive Science Through Technology Enhanced Play (iSTEP)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joshua Danish, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 371,618.00

The iSTEP project addresses a basic research question by exploring the role of
the body and physical activity in learning through the design of a new genre of
developmentally appropriate learning technologies for young children. There is
increasing recognition that the body plays a role in cognition: human beings,
especially young children, understand complex concepts in part by relating them
to how we move our own bodies. In extending these ideas, the iSTEP project also
aims to develop teaching techniques and technological tools that can be used in
real classrooms in the near future. Instead of supporting the learning of
individual students as many current technological advances attempt to do, the
iSTEP project creates opportunities for entire classrooms of students to engage
together to model scientific phenomena using their bodies. For instance, a
classroom of students can use their own bodies to model how a state of matter
such as liquid is made up of many moving particles and technologically enhance
this activity to improve learning. The iSTEP project builds upon the already
successful STEP mixed reality platform (IIS-1323767) by adding new forms of
interaction - the use of gestures and physical props to control the STEP
computer simulation. Adding these new forms of interaction allows us to examine
their role in supporting learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing open source
STEP platform uses commercially available vision-based sensors to track the
motion of up to 12 children in an 8m x 8m space. The children simply walk into
the space, are assigned an avatar (i.e., they become a water particle), and that
avatar follows them as they move around the room. The children's avatars are
then immersed in a virtual simulation that is programed to mimic the scientific
concept they are learning. In this case, the state of matter of water (e.g.,
solid, liquid, or gas) is determined by how fast the children move and the
relative distance between them. This allows the students to discover the laws
that govern state changes through their collaborative activity. Students can
also use the PLAE interface (IIS-1522945) to annotate the simulation and create
representations of their peers' activity, helping them all to reflect on the
underlying principles inherent in the system. In iSTEP, students will now also
be able to control the simulation by gesturing, posing with their whole body,
and by manipulating physical objects in addition to the previous model of
interacting with their entire body. In addition, by using smart watches, the
project will explore alternative forms of feedback to the students as they can
feel vibrations, hear sounds, and even see simple images that are targeted to
help them explore the simulation. In the first round of experiments this project
will contrast the gesture (and pose) interface with a new interface that uses
physical props to see how each contributes to student learning. In the final
year, these will be integrated to develop deeper insights into how they can best
be used to support the design of learning environments that build on mixed
reality systems.