* 1628958
* DMREF: Doping and Defects in Diamond for Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Greg Swain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Diamond's electronic properties are superior compared to currently used wide
bandgap semiconductor materials. For electronic applications, diamond's high
electron and hole mobility values enable high speed and high current operation,
its low dielectric constant contributes to high frequency operation, its wide
bandgap supports a high breakdown electric field and its high thermal
conductivity supports high current operation. Diamond-based power and high
frequency electronics will operate at power regimes not allowed by current
semiconductor electronic devices. The impact is that the exceptional
semiconductor properties of diamond will enable a new and more energy efficient
class of higher-power, higher-voltage, and higher temperature electronic devices
and will transform applications in transportation, manufacturing and energy
sectors. To realize the potential of diamond for electronic diodes and
transistors it is crucial that the electric field breakdown strength be large
and that desired p-type and n-type doping profiles be achieved. The formation of
doping profiles with desired variation in both the lateral and vertical
directions are key to forming semiconductor junctions and controlling the
electric field and breakdown voltages in diode and transistor devices. The goal
of this project is to advance the scientific and engineering knowledge needed to
form desired doping profiles for diamond electronic devices and to reduce the
defects in diamond such that the full high voltage potential of diamond devices
is achieved. An additional goal is to train graduate students and summer
undergraduate student interns in diamond technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
formation of doping profiles in diamond material with desired variation in both
the lateral and vertical directions are key to forming semiconductor junctions
and controlling the electric field and breakdown voltages in diamond diode and
transistor devices. The first objective of this project is develop the
processes, know-how and understanding of forming controlled doping profiles in
diamond for electronics by using ion implantation coupled with annealing.
Diamond annealing will be studied at (1) high pressure and high temperature
conditions and (2) metastable conditions of low pressure and high temperature
with the surface of the diamond covered with hydrogen to prevent/slow the
conversion of diamond to graphite. The second objective of this project is to
develop processes, know-how and understanding to reduce point and dislocation
defects in the diamond yielding electronic devices with higher breakdown
voltages and lower leakage currents. The third objective is to develop the
computation tools and diamond material properties understanding to predict
doping profiles, to predict annealing process results for dopant activation, and
to predict diamond electronic device characteristics.