* 1628987
* CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: COVE-Computer Vision Exchange for Data, Annotations and Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Jason Corso, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 343,000.00

The project provides discoverability, low overhead for use, reproducibility of
research, and persistence for computer vision data. The project is hence setting
a direction toward which the computer vision community can collectively work in
creating a dataset infrastructure that allows for transparency across individual
datasets and annotations, experimental benchmarks with community-set corpora and
metrics, and a web-based infrastructure to cultivate continued development of
computer vision datasets. The availability of such an infrastructure, which is
named COVE: Computer Vision Exchange of Data, Annotations and Tools, impacts the
computer vision and related communities to develop next generation robust
intelligence capabilities that have great potential to positively impact
society. The project is integrated with education by supporting graduate and
undergraduate students, and reaches middle school students through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is establishing COVE, a centralized
community-run infrastructure to support the exchange of data and annotations as
well as the software tools to manipulate them. The infrastructure is web-based
open-source, and provides open access to its contents. Stewardship over the
contents are managed by the Investigators initially and subsequently through
elected members of the computer vision community. There are two salient
components of the infrastructure. First, a curation infrastructure facilitates
back-end storage, querying, data annotation and curation tools, to support it.
To curate the federated data set, COVE uses widely known open-source tools like
Python, Bootstrap and Postgresql. For curation of new annotations to incorporate
into the exchange, the project relies heavily on crowd-sourcing. Second, a usage
infrastructure, e.g., data structures and software enables widespread and easy
use by researchers and practitioners. The project develops APIs to allow for
easy programmable access to the federated data sets and tools through common
software interfaces like Matlab and OpenCV.