* 1628471
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation at the University of New Mexico
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Forrest, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,358,125.00

The ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of women faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in areas such as policy,
practice, culture, and organizational climate. The ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation (ADVANCE-IT) track supports the development of innovative
organizational change strategies within an institution of higher education to
enhance gender equity in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of New Mexico's (UNM) ADVANCE-
IT project will create the Institute for Diversity and Equity Across STEM
(IDEAS) to serve as the organizational catalyst of institutional transformation,
promoting gender equity in the recruitment, retention and advancement of STEM
faculty. UNM is in a majority-minority state and is a Carnegie Very High
Research Activity University and a Hispanic-Serving Institution with a diverse
student body. The project will implement strategies to engage STEM leaders,
including senior faculty, as partners; create mentoring and networking programs;
and improve the transparency of policies and processes that impact
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS will implement a "managerial engagement
model" developed by sociologists Dobbin and Kalev which proposes that engaging
managers in programs to promote diversity, including connections with
underrepresented groups, enhances their motivation and changes attitudes. IDEAS
will show how this managerial engagement model, an evidence-based approach to
promote diversity in organizational leadership, can be applied to universities.
In addition, IDEAS will incorporate an intersectional perspective to address the
distinct situations of minority women in STEM. IDEAS will generate evidence to
inform comparative analyses of factors influencing the advancement of women and
minorities across different types of organizations as well as of the strategies
most appropriate to different subgroups of women. The goals of the project
include the creation of a more inclusive, egalitarian, and supportive
institutional climate and improving satisfaction with, and perceptions of
fairness of, the tenure and promotion process at UNM.