* 1628916
* EAGER Germination: Cultivating Creativity and Innovation in Engineering Research through Mindfulness Training
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Pelin Kesebir, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 99,996.00

The University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison, under the direction of Prof. Susan C.
Hagness is proposing a project to develop and evaluate a radically new learning
framework for engineering graduate students that is intended to cultivate a
highly creative, innovative, and grand-challenge-focused research culture. The
framework is based on mindfulness training: understanding the brain, emotional
styles, and how they can be modified through meditation and other contemplative
practices. The rationale for introducing engineering graduate students to
contemplative practices stems from recent studies suggesting that mindfulness
meditation improves insight problem solving, reduces cognitive rigidity, and
positively impacts creativity outcomes, as well as increasing empathy and
compassion. The underlying hypothesis is that cultivating creativity,
innovation, intellectual risk-taking, altruism, and overall well-being "through
mindfulness training" will collectively enhance graduate students' skills to
conceive and conduct transformative research, and will motivate them to address
societal challenges through the research problems they pursue.

Contemplative neuroscience research studies have demonstrated that brain
plasticity can be exploited via mindfulness training to produce measurable
effects on brain function, and physical and emotional well-being. The project
represents an entirely new exploration of the potential role of mindfulness in
cultivating attributes in the brain that are essential to conceiving and
conducting transformative research with societal impact. The project will yield
a scalable and adaptable curriculum for training engineering graduate students,
integrated assessment tools suitable for evaluating creative capacity, emotional
styles, and well-being, and documentation of the effectiveness of the proposed
learning framework in enhancing graduate student ability and interest to conduct
societally-focused transformative research.