* 1628302
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Acquisition of subject-verb agreement and the role of developing numeracy--A behavioral and electrophysiological study
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Valerie Shafer, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 18,340.00

The goal of this dissertation project is to deepen our understanding of how
language acquisition is related to the development of other cognitive abilities.
Children seem to learn their first language effortlessly and rapidly. By three
years of age, most children appear to speak in fully grammatical sentences and
are able to learn up to ten new words every day. How language acquisition
happens continues to be one of the driving questions in language research and an
important one for all fields related to early childhood development. Knowing how
children acquire a first language is crucial for understanding how a second
language is learned and therefore is important for understanding how to more
quickly integrate immigrant children into English-language schools in the US.
This knowledge will also allow us to improve our toolkits for helping children
who are challenged by language delays or by language impairments associated with
developmental disorders such as Specific Language Impairment, Down Syndrome, and
Autism Spectrum Disorders.

This project looks at the development of subject-verb agreement, which is the
element of grammar that allows us to distinguish between "The sheep grazes" and
"The sheep graze", for example. Research to date suggests that children can
produce subject-verb agreement accurately before they comprehend it. This
appears to be a paradox because it is generally assumed that children understand
language structures before they begin to produce them in speech. This study will
investigate how English-speaking preschoolers' brains process this grammatical
feature, and how well children produce and comprehend it, to develop a model of
the relationship between these abilities as they develop between the ages of 3
and 5 years. Children's number skills will also be measured to look at whether
their conception of the number line influences how well they comprehend the
singular-plural distinction of subject-verb agreement, which is marked on
English regular verbs by "-s" or no "-s". This dissertation grant will support
the first study to investigate this question with a comprehensive approach that
takes into account neural processing, production and comprehension of the
sentences, as well as cognitive maturational factors, including maturation of
numeracy skills. The results of this study will help us to understand
grammatical development in English-speaking children and validate an approach to
research on child language development that can be extended to other languages
in which the same apparent paradox has been observed, including, German, French,
Spanish, and the Bantu language Xhosa.