* 1628126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intergenerational Consequences of Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Samuel Norris, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,664.00

This project will provide new evidence on the effect of parental incarceration,
addressing issues of statistical bias (endogeneity) with a quasi-experimental
design that compares children whose parents, upon arrest, were randomly assigned
to judges with differing propensities to incarcerate. Random assignment ensures
that the differences in child outcomes can be attributed directly to parental
incarceration (because the defendant was assigned to a harsh judge) versus a
warning or probation (because the defendant was assigned to a lenient judge).
This approach allows identification of the causal effect of parental
imprisonment (and of incarceration length) for individuals with parents on the
margin of incarceration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design will be
executed in two samples. For the first, the investigators will use historical
prison rosters from the turn of the 20th century linked to the Censuses of
1890-1940 to estimates the very long-term income and criminal effects of
parental incarceration. In the second, the investigators will use modern court
records from Cook County to estimate the contemporary effect of parental
incarceration on family structure, earnings, education, and criminal outcomes.
Both sets of estimates will contribute to the current policy debate surrounding
the long-term costs of both increased incarceration and longer sentence lengths,
and to the academic understanding of intergenerational transmission of parental
traits to their children.