* 1628014
* Investigating the Potential for Decentralized Institutions, Technologies, and Governance to Meet the Wastewater Challenge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Peter Brown, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 252,798.00

Increasing water shortages and contamination have pushed communities and policy
makers to reconsider their reliance on centralized wastewater treatment systems
and to experiment with decentralized ones. A decentralized project is a small-
scale treatment system operated in a city drain, a neighborhood, or an
institutional setting without long distance transfers of wastewater through
underground and above-ground pipes. But the planning and effective operation of
these projects require wholesale changes not only in technology but also in
institutional frameworks and systems of governance, which produces a nexus of
effects across scales that is not yet well understood. The research funded by
this award will address this information gap. Anthropologist Dr. Kelly D. Alley
(Auburn University) and her team will study the interactions between
institutional structures, governance mechanisms, geophysical landscapes of
wastewater flows, and cultural practices in the context of decentralized
responses to water contamination and shortage. Their project will also produce
case studies in treatment, recycling, water monitoring, and environmental
regulation that can be shared across communities and countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken in India, where a wide
range of decentralized water reuse and pollution reduction experiments and pilot
programs are planned or underway in the heavily polluted Ganges river basin.
Cleaning up the Ganges is complicated by the fact that the river is, on the one
hand, culturally significant as a Hindu Goddess while, on the other, it is being
diminished by escalating extractions for agriculture, industry, power, and
urbanization. It is the combination of these factors that makes a sample of
Ganges-related projects ideal for investigating the intersectional effects of
decentralized wastewater treatment approaches. The cross-project comparison will
allow the researchers to identify the cultural, institutional and political
conditions and constraints that make decentralized projects institutionally
feasible, financially viable, and culturally acceptable. The researchers will
focus on projects connected to a sample of the 144 drains that pour wastewater
into the river system. The researchers will collect data through site visits and
mapping of wastewater drains and treatment facilities. They will carry out
structured interviews with industry and government representatives. They will
conduct surveys in neighborhoods with large drains to assess cultural and
political understanding of wastewater problems and acceptability of experiments
and pilot projects. Findings from the research will inform policy makers
anywhere who plan to undertake decentralized wastewater treatment systems.
Findings will also contribute to improved social science theory of the role of
infrastructure in social and cultural systems. Funding the research supports two
graduate students and enhances international research collaboration.