* 1628937
* DIP: Game-based Assessment and Support of STEM-related Competencies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Valerie Shute, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,066,257.00

Well-designed educational games represent a promising technology for increasing
students interest in and learning of STEM topics such as physics. This project
will research how to optimally combine and embed dynamic assessment and adaptive
learning supports within an engaging game design to build effective educational
games. The project will add enhancements to a physics game called Physics
Playground. The general goal of this research is to test a valid methodology
that can be used in the design of next-generation learning games. The
enhancement of Physics Playground will leverage the popularity of video games to
capture and sustain student attention and teach physics to a much broader
audience than is currently the case in traditional physics classrooms. To be
most effective, this new genre of learning games needs to not only be highly
engaging as a game but also to provide real-time assessment and feedback to
students; support understanding of science content (i.e.,Newtonian physics); be
accessible to beginners; accommodate a range of proficiencies and interests; and
support equity. The research will have particular relevance to designers
developing other science games and simulation by providing information about the
kinds of learning supports and feedback to students are most effective in
promoting engagement and learning. The project is supported by the Cyberlearning
and Future Learning Technologies Program, which funds efforts that will help
envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will systematically develop, test,
and evaluate ways to integrate engaging, dynamic learning supports in Physics
Playground to teach formal conceptual physics competencies. More generally, the
project aims to advance the learning sciences, particularly in the fields of
adaptivity and assessment in educational technology. Using a design-based
research approach spanning three years, the research team will: (1) develop and
test the effectiveness of various learning support features included in the game
in Year 1; (2) develop and test an adaptive algorithm to manage the progression
of difficulty in game levels in Year 2; and (3) test learning supports and
adaptive sequencing in a controlled evaluation study. This research will provide
evidence of the instructional effectiveness of an educational game designed
using principles of instructional, game, and assessment design. It will advance
understanding of the contributions of different kinds of learning supports
(e.g., visualizations and explanations) and adaptivity to game-based learning
and contribute to the design of next-generation learning games that successfully
blur the distinction between assessment and learning. The project will generate
research findings that can be incorporated into other types of STEM learning
games.