* 1628820
* Relational Beliefs and Expectations in Early Adolescence as Predictors of School and Social Competence
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Tuppett Yates, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,998.00

Children's beliefs and expectations about their relationships with their parents
are related to their ability to adapt to new situations, experiences, and
relationships, including those with peers and teachers. The goal of this project
is to investigate the link between children's understanding of their
relationships with their parents and their ability to adapt to the challenges of
early adolescence. Early adolescence is a period of significant change in
children's family dynamics as they begin to pursue autonomy and an independent
identity. Young adolescents also encounter new social and academic challenges as
they navigate the transition to middle school. This project will evaluate how
youths' thoughts and feelings about their relationships with their mothers
relate to their own self-concept, self-regulation, school adjustment, and social
competence. The outcomes will be compared to these children's same measures at
earlier points in their development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
extend an ongoing NSF-supported study of 250 mother-child dyads (50% female
children; 95.2% longitudinal retention) from multiple ethnoracial groups (88.8%
non-White) and variable risk backgrounds (e.g., 36.7% poverty, 28% maltreated)
who completed laboratory and school assessments of representation, adjustment,
and parent-child relationship quality at ages 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10. The current
funds will support an early adolescent data wave at age 12 to assess multiple
facets of youths' representations in terms of what they think and feel (i.e.,
the content of their representation) and how they organize their thoughts and
feelings (i.e., the coherence of representation) to understand how
representational processes may carry experience from the family setting to
broader educational and social contexts. In addition to evaluating core
developmental assumptions, expected scientific tools and findings will refine
contemporary risk identification and screening approaches by providing efficient
and culturally valid assessment tools that can be readily transported to
clinical and field (e.g., school) settings.