* 1628217
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Does priming honesty elicit truthful disclosures from children regarding adult wrongdoing?
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Allison Mugno, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 26,100.00

Children are often involved in the legal system as maltreatment victims, and
their disclosure of adult wrongdoing is necessary to initiate effective legal
responses and protect them from continued abuse. Current techniques for
promoting children's honesty rely on explicit or direct requests that children
tell the truth, such as eliciting a promise to tell the truth. However, the
effectiveness of these techniques has differed across research studies. The
proposed study will test the benefits of priming honesty (indirectly or non-
consciously activating the goal of honesty) on children's disclosure of an
adult's minor act of wrongdoing.

Children (ages 6-9) will individually participate in a first aid/safety event
during which an adult (parent or stranger) will engage the children in play with
forbidden puppets, supposedly "break" a puppet, and request that children keep
it a secret. Before responding to event-related questions, children will be (1)
primed for the goal of honesty by hearing a story laden with words about
honesty, (2) asked to promise to tell the truth, or (3) reassured that many
children play with the puppets and disclose the truth when asked. Then, children
will be asked different types of questions about the event. Results will inform
legal practitioners about whether priming, a simple, yet theoretically-based and
novel technique for promoting children?s honesty, encourages children's true
disclosures of adult wrongdoing. Results will also advance theory concerning
children?s willingness to disclose wrongdoing committed by parents versus
strangers, an important practical consideration.