* 1628530
* Field and Laboratory Study of Rural Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) Oxidation and Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Formation Utilizing Measurements of Formaldehyde and Glyoxal
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Frank Keutsch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 88,997.00

Aerosol and ozone (O3) affect human health, the environment, and climate.
Oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), in particular via the hydroxyl
radical (OH), is directly coupled to the formation of O3 and it contributes to
secondary organic aerosol (SOA), an important component of ambient aerosol. As
part of the Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS) the principal
investigators (PIs) planned comprehensive laboratory and field studies focused
on improving the detailed mechanistic understanding of the processes controlling
OH and isoprene, the most important VOC, especially in rural environments. A
goal is to specifically study the anthropogenic impact on biogenic VOC (BVOC)
oxidation and resulting SOA formation. The project addresses the following
questions: 1) How well do current mechanisms represent VOC oxidation, especially
for isoprene, and in particular under low-NO conditions? 2) How well do current
mechanisms/models represent OH photochemistry in view of recent findings of
potential measurement interferences? 3) What are the dominant mechanisms of
anthropogenic influence on rural VOC oxidation and resulting O3 and SOA
formation?

This research is designed to contribute ultimately to improved prediction of
secondary pollutant effects from precursor emissions, and an improved ability to
mitigate the anthropogenic effects of emissions on climate, human health, and
the environment. The PIs also will develop a Library of Organic Standards for
Atmospheric Chemistry (OSAC) that will be a publicly available online database
aimed at enabling improved access to starting materials for laboratory studies
and standards for calibrations.