* 1628403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mining at the Margins: Extractive Industry and Local Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Emma Banks, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2018
* USD 25,150.00

In frontier regions worldwide, natural resource extraction often displaces and
resettles rural communities. Because the institutional state may be distant from
these territories, claims to sovereignty and the right to exert regulatory power
often get worked out locally. These evolving relationships raise important
questions about the nature of government in the contemporary world and the
capacities of communities to establish and evaluate political legitimacy. The
research funded by this award addresses these questions by taking advantage of
an interesting natural experiment in a coal-mining region in northeastern
Colombia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt University doctoral student Emma
Banks, under the supervision of Dr. Lesley Gill, will undertake the research in
a frontier region of Colombia that, for over two decades, has been home to a
major open pit coalmine. The mine has displaced communities from their communal
rural territories and resettled them in peri-urban villages. Usefully for
research purposes, these communities contrast with each other along two
significant axes: how recently they have been displaced and whether they are
ethnically Afro-descendant or indigenous Indians. Taking advantage of these
contrasts, Banks will gather data in four communities that contrast along those
lines: two communities resettled earlier, one of each ethnicity; and two
resettled more recently, again, once of each ethnicity. This will allow her to
see how local political processes evolve over time and how this evolution is
affected by the resources accessible by people in different social positions.
Banks will compare the legal resources, ethnic identity politics, and alliance
networks used by each community to legitimize authority, make the impacts of
resettlement visible, and influence resettlement outcomes. To find and compare
evidence of legitimacy building, she will conduct participant observation at
roundtable meetings between the mine and communities, and interview mine
officials, state officials, and community members. To contextualize these
findings, she will also carry out archival research and conduct in-depth life
history interviews with community members. These data will allow her to better
understand a phenomenon found worldwide, including in the United States: how
communities and natural resource corporations, away from the direct government
control, negotiate legitimacy and influence each other. Findings from this
research will inform social science theory of how local politics functions at
the local level in the contemporary world. Findings will also be of use to
policy makers who seek to devise ways to support resource extraction without
disadvantaging citizens and communities.