* 1629446
* Collaborative Research: Multiplexing: Theories and Tests of Interactions Between Types of Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Matthew Jackson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2020
* USD 277,996.00

Friends and acquaintances rely on one another for many important economic needs:
They informally borrow and lend. They share information about jobs, consumer
products, and government programs. They offer and seek help with emergencies and
daily tasks such as childcare. These interactions are all quite different, and
so the partners who are best for each need may differ. Nonetheless, in practice,
people layer many of their relationships. For example, they rely on the same
friends for loans and for information about new products or job opportunities.
The PIs investigate how people choose which relationships to layer, and how this
affects their welfare. How much of layering is explained simply by the
compatibility of friends across many different activities, and how much is due
to the fact that bundled relationships work better? How does the network used
for daily favor-trading shape who talks to whom, and how information flows in
society? Are wealthier individuals able to get more useful information because
their networks are less constrained by meeting daily needs, especially financial
ones? How does this affect job search and inequality? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs develop first foundational theory for multi-relational network formation,
which is not covered by existing models. They present four reasons for the
layering of different kinds of connections on top of each other: (1) cost
savings, (2) synergies, (3) coordination, and (4) compatibility. They then
examine some of the implications of these theories, propose empirical tests of
the resulting models, and conduct preliminary analysis using existing and new
field data.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project focuses on a particularly
policy-relevant aspect of multi-relational networks. Wherever access to
financial services is limited - in the developing world and also in many
communities in the developed world - a fundamental network that underlies the
formation of many others is that of risk-sharing: informal borrowing and
lending, for emergencies and for ordinary activities. Due to layering, the risk-
sharing network becomes a crucial driver of the social structure of a community,
including, for example, its informational links. Risk-sharing therefore
influences outcomes well beyond mutual insurance, such as who is informed about
various topics and how people form opinions. Poverty traps caused by limited
access to financial services affect much more than investment and consumption
behavior, and can exacerbate inequality by biasing access to information. For
instance, if people only obtain information about the availability of jobs from
their unemployed neighbors, they will find it harder to search for a job. Thus,
changes in the motives to share risk within a network - say, through the
availability of crop insurance, bank accounts, or other means of income
smoothing - has profound implications for how a society is able to process
information. Financial burdens that people face can bias their networks in ways
that lead to inefficient social learning; freeing individuals from having to
share risk may result in more efficient information networks. The PIs will be
developing theory that speaks to these issues and performing field and lab
experiments to test the theories and potential policies for
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;A final component of the proposed research digs deeper
into information networks, whose functioning is critical to the questions raised
above. In this part of the project the PIs plan to examine a tension between
motives to share information and motives to conceal it. A person may wish to
tell her friends about a valuable opportunity, such as a new insurance program.
However, if only a limited number of people can benefit from a piece of
information, for instance regarding a job opening, a person may not want it to
spread too broadly. This has major implications for information-sharing, but
there is very little theoretical or empirical study of these issues. The PIs
propose theoretical investigations and field experiments to understand how the
nature of a new economic opportunity - e.g., whether it is rivalrous - affects
its diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of empirical work, the proposed research will
collect network data across a large set of rural communities and conduct several
field and lab experiments to investigate these topics.