* 1629770
* II-EN: Enhancing Secure Virtual Architecture for Advanced Operating System Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* John Criswell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 493,174.00

Commodity operating system kernels employ designs that are efficient but
insecure. As a result, modern computing systems are insecure at their core.
Fortunately, the Secure Virtual Architecture (SVA) infrastructure has allowed
researchers to develop strong defenses for existing operating systems on
existing hardware. This work seeks to improve SVA so that researchers can use it
to develop defenses against increasingly sophisticated security attacks and
build tools that evaluate the efficacy of those
defenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SVA is a compiler-based system that, to date, has
been used to thwart memory safety errors and to protect applications running on
a compromised operating system kernel. This research will make three primary
enhancements to SVA to enable it to perform advanced security research. First
will be to enhance SVA?s static analysis features to handle flexible and
changing code generation and optimization techniques in existing compilers and
to handle difficult-to-analyze source code constructs commonly used in operating
system kernel code. Second, this work will enhance SVA?s ability to analyze
operating system behavior at run-time via arbitrary metadata attached to memory
objects. Finally, the plan is to enhance SVA to analyze machine code; this
feature will enable SVA to be used in research on the efficacy of defenses
against attacks.