* 1629894
* CI-SUSTAIN: Collaborative Research: Sustaining Successful Smartphone Testbeds to Enable Diverse Mobile Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Chunming Qiao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2018
* USD 74,980.00

Today, smartphones are everywhere: connecting, informing, guiding, quantifying,
and entertaining us. Vibrant smartphone software marketplaces put million of
useful apps created by developers around the world at our fingertips. But while
anyone can develop and deploy a smartphone app, apps rely on functionality
provided by the underlying smartphone platform and operating system. The
smartphone platform software is responsible conserving energy and prolonging
battery lifetime, determining what network connection to use to balance speed
and cost, accurately and efficiently determining the device?s location, and
other critical tasks. Yet, the smartphone platform is closely controlled by
smartphone vendors and so very difficult for researchers to modify or improve.
PhoneLab addresses this experimental gap by allowing systems and networking
researchers to modify the smartphone platform installed on several hundred
users? primary smartphones. This project provides continued support for the
PhoneLab community infrastructure testbed to operate for another year, while it
pursues longer-term sustainability options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PhoneLab
consists of several hundred University at Buffalo affiliates who act as
participants. Participants carry smartphones running a custom Android platform
image maintained by PhoneLab administrators. The PhoneLab platform image is
maintained in collaboration with the mobile systems and networking community. At
any point it contains a mixture of instrumentation to generate datasets as well
as novel features and new capabilities that are being evaluated. Once projects
are reviewed for human subjects safety, researchers can download datasets
generated by their experiments or by previous experiments. During the period of
the award, PhoneLab participants will be incentivized to join ongoing
experiments by a discounted service plan provided by Sprint. During this project
period, PhoneLab will be continuing to migrate from external to community
sustainability while also improving the existing Android instrumentation.