* 1629989
* CI-NEW: Multilingual FrameNet: A Resource Enabling Cross-Lingual Research for the Natural Language Processing Community
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Collin Baker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2020
* USD 607,574.00

The FrameNet lexical semantic database records the meanings of words (and multi-
word expressions) in everyday English; it is a sort of "super dictionary" that
is both human-readable and machine-readable. This database is based on the fact
that individual words can evoke and entire situation in our minds, complete with
roles for people and things that participate in the situation. For example, the
word hire evokes the situation of Employment, with roles for the Employer, the
Employee, the Position, etc.; both the word vengeance and the expression get
back at evoke Revenge, with the roles Avenger, Injured party, Injury, Offender,
and Punishment. These situations are called semantic frames, and the project is
guided by the theory of Frame Semantics, developed by the late Prof. Charles J.
Fillmore of UC Berkeley. The FrameNet lexical database currently includes
descriptions of more than 1,000 semantic frames, more than 13,000 senses of
words and expressions (called Lexical units), and more than 200,000 manually
annotated examples which show how the various roles are expressed by different
parts of a sentence.&lt;br/&gt;The FrameNet database is widely used in natural
language processing; it helps engineers create software to analyze written texts
into semantic frames and participants, so that computers can reason about the
situations described. Thousands of researchers and companies are already using
such software for applications such as automatic analysis of reports from combat
or natural disaster situations, understanding financial news reports,
recognizing expressions of opinion on blogs and product websites, and searching
clinical records and medical research reports. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
the frames were mainly created for English, most of them have been shown to be
useful for other languages as well, and researchers around the world are now
creating FrameNet databases for many other languages. The Multilingual FrameNet
project will align the databases for different languages, both at the level of
semantic frames and at the level of lexical units. The aligned database will
help to improve applications such as foreign language teaching, cross-linguistic
information retrieval, and machine translation. The new project also includes
setting up a website and software so that teachers and students everywhere can
participate in the project by adding to English FrameNet, creating a more
complete and more useful FrameNet for its many users.