* 1629450
* XPS:FULL: New Abstractions and Applications for Automata Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ahmed Abbasi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 875,000.00

As society collects more and more data about the world around us, and digitizes
more and more artifacts, "big data" promises unparalleled potential, but also
poses new and unique computational challenges. Turning data into useful
knowledge at or near real-time can have significant impacts, such as enabling
timely intervention in healthcare and fast response in cybersecurity. As
technology constraints limit CPU performance, researchers and practitioners are
increasingly looking to specialized processors to accelerate data analytics. The
ability to extract patterns from unstructured data is an especially important
task. This research project carries out a cross-stack investigation to evaluate
the effectiveness of the automata computing paradigm to accelerate pattern
mining of unstructured data.

Specifically, by leveraging the industry's new Automata Processor (developed by
Micron Technology), this project is (1) developing benchmark suites of truly
diverse automata for performance comparison of real and simulated, existing and
future automata engines, (2) developing new tools, including programming
languages, systems, and architectural enhancement to make automata computing
intuitive and easy to adopt, (3) evaluating automata computing solutions to
address real-world big-data applications, and (4) developing a set of
educational and community-building activities to maximize the broader impact of
the project outcome. Successful implementation of this project enable new
automata-based abstractions to shed light on the performance of AP technology
for various applications, such as pattern mining. This project will build the
the intellectual foundations to support and catalyze research, education,
training, and adoption of automata-based solutions to address big-data
challenges in industry, government, and society.