* 1629397
* XPS: FULL: A Cross-Layer Approach Toward Low-Latency Data-Parallel Applications in Rack-Scale Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mosharaf Chowdhury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 825,000.00

Although many modern applications, e.g., exploratory analytics and scientific
visualization, come with stringent latency requirements, today's in-memory and
scale-out solutions often provide only best-effort services. A root cause of
unpredictability lies in the traditional design principle of minimizing I/O
operations. With the advent of faster storage and networks in rack-scale
computing, however, I/O may no longer be scarce anymore. This project revisits
the tradeoffs and design principles of scale-out, low-latency applications in
this emerging context. Bounded response times will reduce over-provisioning and
foster new applications (e.g., business intelligence, robotics, and intensive
care units) that require consistent performance. Project findings will be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate curricula, and software artifacts
will be open-sourced for the wider community across academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to leverage the influx of new hardware
capabilities to enable applications based on bounded response times as their
primary design criteria. Specifically, the project leverages approximation,
speculation, and scheduling to mask variabilities in latency-sensitive
applications. The key technical challenge in realizing this vision lie in making
a set of tradeoffs different from the norm: (i) rather than striving for less
I/O, this project trades I/O off for better memory locality and aggressively
speculate to reduce response times; (ii) when needed, it resorts to
approximation techniques for bounded response times; and finally, (iii) it
develops new approximation- and speculation-aware schedulers to increase
resource efficiency. The project also investigates theoretical and empirical
boundaries of approximate and speculative processing as well as new
spatiotemporal scheduling techniques in rack-scale computing.