* 1629915
* CI-New: GEMDROID: A Comprehensive Platform for Studying Architectural Issues for Next Generation Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

As the demand for feature-rich mobile systems such as smart phones and wearables
has outpaced other computing systems and is expected to continue at a faster
rate, it is projected that mobile systems with tens of cores and hundreds of
accelerators (IPs) will be designed to provide unprecedented level of features
and functionality in future. Design of such systems with the required QoS and
power budgets along with other design constraints will be a daunting task for
computer architects, since any ad hoc, piece-meal solution is unlikely to result
in an optimal design. This requires early exploration of the complete design
space to understand the system-level design trade-offs. Unlike a rich set of
simulation tools available for conducting architecture research, there is no
publicly available simulation infrastructure for design and evaluation of
existing and emerging handheld platforms that covers the complete hardware and
software stack.

The goal of this CRI Community Infrastructure (CI) project is to develop an
open-source simulation tool, called GEMDROID, for facilitating architectural
research on mobile platforms. The project encompasses the following tasks:(i)
Integrate the open-source Android emulator, GEM5 architecture simulator and a
wide variety of IPs and sensors to faithfully simulate a wide variety of mobile
applications on a target SoC platform; (ii) Incorporate power modelling tools in
GEMDROID for power/energy analyses; (iii) Extend GEMDROID to simulate
wearables/IoTs; (iv) Validate the performance and power models with detailed
measurements; and (v) Develop a benchmark suite for handheld platforms.The
proposed GEMDROID simulator is expected to be the first open-source tool for
researchers and practitioners to conduct a wide variety of design and evaluation
work on mobile systems. The platform would be disseminated to the broad research
community, with regular workshops and tutorial organized for building a
community of users and developers for this toolset. The infrastructure would
serve as a teaching aid in our undergraduate and graduate courses on mobile
architectures. The outreach activities include participation in the U-Science
program at Penn State to engage K-12 students, educators, undergraduate and
graduate students, and interested community members in the STEM fields and the
VIEW (Visit-In-Engineering Weekend) program to expose them to this important
area.