* 1629586
* EAGER Germination: A Seed-Funding and Analytics Platform for High-Risk/High-Impact Research
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Eric Isaacs, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 11/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

This award will develop a novel online seed funding and analytics platform at
the University of Chicago designed to identify and benefit early and mid-career
faculty who want to engage in transformative research. This system will provide
(1) easy access to a variety of internal seed funding opportunities, which often
reward early-stage, risky research; (2) use proprietary algorithms to match PIs
to potential collaborators, research tools, and significant external funding
opportunities; and (3) include metrics to track long-term societal and
scientific value generated by such research. The platform will provide a
comprehensive set of institutional, financial, collegiate, and intellectual
incentives for faculty to engage with creative research agendas that could have
a transformative impact. It will integrate cutting-edge technology with social
incentives to identify big opportunities and form novel collaborations across
diverse fields, accelerate the pace of research, and measure the academic and
financial impact of emergent research. Most importantly, it will track the
societal impact metrics of such research for years to come and elevate its
importance in the academic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seed-funding and
analytics platform will serve as a proof-of-concept and initial data-collection
for systematizing and tracking the scientific and societal impact of early-
stage, transformative research ideas. The platform can then be replicated at
other universities to foster the environment of research innovation with broad
impact that will be accessible to scientists, university administrators, funders
at the private (foundations and donors) as well as federal level (federal
agencies), and the public at large. It will allow research institutions and
funders to quantify the impact of transformative ideas on pressing societal
issues.