* 1629526
* EXP: Linking Complex Systems: Promoting Reasoning within and Across Interconnected Complex Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Carolyn Staudt, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 541,430.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. Citizens and workers in tomorrow's world must be prepared to
approach what have been called "wicked" problems involving multiple, interlinked
complex systems, including issues such as climate change, crime, communicable
diseases, transportation, and many more. Preparing learners with the background
to face such problems is a primary challenge of our age. To gain a complete
understanding of such systems, learners need to understand both the high-level
aspects of a system's dynamics and the rules that govern its individual
interacting elements. In this project, the Concord Consortium, the MIT Scheller
Teacher Education Program and the Argonne National Laboratory Systems Science
Center will combine two different proven educational technologies used for
understanding complex systems to form a powerful hybrid technology. Using it
with learners and researching its value for learning about systems dynamics, the
project will shed light on how to foster deep understanding of multiple,
interlinked complex systems. The project will conduct research with diverse
school districts and project materials and technologies will be made available
free of charge to both researchers and practitioners nationwide. Additionally,
this project has potential to create tools and generate understanding of great
utility to the large field of professionals who currently use technology to
model and understand complex systems as part of their everyday
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two main approaches and technologies exist currently
to aid learning to reason about complex systems. Systems dynamics approaches
offer a broad, "eagle's eye view" of a system that facilitates an almost-
immediate sense of the structure and interactions within a system and its
components, while agent-based approaches offer an "ant's eye view" that lays
bare the details and mechanisms behind the system's interactions. Interactions
with these two approaches occur at similarly different grain sizes, with systems
dynamics views offering the ability to instantiate and easily recast large-scale
connections among components quickly and agent-based approaches offering a
"fine-control knob" that enables subtle tweaking of the intricate rules
underlying the system's individual actors--fine tweaks that, in complex systems,
can often result in surprisingly large and anti-intuitive changes in the overall
system itself. Without an explicit connection between these levels of
interpretation, learners are left with fragmented experiences and understanding.
Merging the agent-based modeling capabilities of MIT's StarLogo with the systems
modeling and diagramming capabilities of the Concord Consortium's SageModeler
software, the project will develop an important new genre of educational
technology termed linked-hybrid modeling and test it in K-12 science classrooms.
This new technology genre, capable of permitting learners to move between
detailed individual models and global views of stocks and flows for the first
time, will enable whole new modes of experimentation and should ultimately
foster levels of learner reasoning about complex systems and systems dynamics
that are not currently possible. The project research will combine theoretical
frameworks for both systems dynamics and systems emergence, applying a design-
based research approach to study student reasoning of complex systems. By
examining how use and design affordances of this new genre lead to productive
complex systems reasoning and thus better understanding of systems, the project
will lay the groundwork for understanding how to foster powerful learning in the
context of wicked problems.