* 1629875
* ADVANCE Institutional Transformation at Seattle University
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Jean Jacoby, Seattle University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,333,846.00

The ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of women faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in areas such as policy,
practice, culture, and organizational climate. The ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation (ADVANCE-IT) track supports the development of innovative
organizational change strategies within an institution of higher education to
enhance gender equity in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seattle University (SU) will implement an
ADVANCE-IT project that will align institutional core values of teaching,
service, and engagement with the standards for faculty evaluation and
advancement. SU is a predominantly undergraduate institution and a university
whose values emphasize service and community engagement. They plan a number of
initiatives to ensure alignment of these values with faculty related programs,
policies, and practices. These strategies include: assessing and revising the
current standards for promotion including options for multiple tracks to
success; working with faculty leaders and university administrators in the
articulation of the central themes of the project and strategic communication;
implementation of formal training programs for faculty mentors; and training for
promotion committees by adapting the Georgia Tech strategy called Awareness of
Decisions in Evaluating Promotion and Tenure (ADEPT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is grounded in a theory of change that views gender as a part of
organizational structures, and that aims to change university policies,
practices, and culture in ways that foster equity for faculty. The focus on the
connection between institutional mission, evaluation practices, and gender
equity is innovative. This project could provide a model for restructuring
standards of academic advancement in ways that recognize the work of
institutional service that often falls disproportionately on women and
underrepresented faculty. The project includes a research component that will
contribute to the literature on the relationship between gender equity and
standards of faculty evaluation and promotion.