* 1629276
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Semiconductor Heterostructure Platform for Active Nonlocal Plasmonic and Hyperbolic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Evgeniy Narimanov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 302,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Multilayered composites, designed to combine the
properties of reflective metals and transparent dielectrics, have the potential
to revolutionize optical microscopy, control emission of molecules, and even to
enable cloaks of invisibility. However, until now the advantages achieved with
multilayered structures have been limited. Decreasing layer thickness, reducing
absorption, and implementing optical gain have been named as some of the
possible ways to advance the optics of multilayered media towards its
revolutionary potential. In this project, our collaborative team will aim to
understand, through carefully designed experimental, computational, and
analytical studies, the optical response of free-electron plasma that underlines
the photonics of multilayered composites. Of particular interest will be the
limits of small layer thickness where quantum-mechanical effects are expected to
manifest themselves, and the interaction between optical gain and loss. The
program will present new opportunities for engaging students in
interdisciplinary research and thus improve competitiveness of the US high-tech
workforce. The team members will also implement a number of outreach events to
broaden participation of school-aged and undergraduate students in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Plasmonic metamaterials --
nanostructured composites with tailored optical response resulting from metallic
or highly doped semiconducting components -- promise to revolutionize our
understanding of light-matter interactions, enabling new applications that
include perfect light absorbers, invisibility cloaks, sub-wavelength imaging,
focusing, and guiding. In this project the team will perform a comprehensive
interdisciplinary study of semiconductor layered metamaterials, with a vision
towards understanding the fundamentals of light-matter interaction in
heterogeneous mesoscale plasmonic systems. Of particular interest will be (i)
understanding the optical response of plasmonic systems where the motion of the
free charges is confined by the geometry, leading to nonlocal electromagnetism
and to (ii) fundamentals of light propagation, emission, and absorption in
coupled nonlocal nanoplasmonic systems. The developed description of active
nonlocal plasmonics will be applicable to multiple material platforms operating
throughout optical spectrum. The proposed program will provide multiple
opportunities for educating the next-generation interdisciplinary workforce and
will serve as a platform for outreach activities targeting undergraduates,
school students, and school teachers.