* 1629324
* International Collaboration for Smart Health
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael Pavel, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2018
* USD 48,057.00

Changing demographics, poor health behaviors, concomitant increase in non-
communicative diseases combined with escalating costs are increasingly
challenging healthcare delivery on a global scale. To counter these trends,
healthcare needs to be transformed to be more widely available and less resource
dependent. An emerging precision healthcare solution based on advances in high
throughput and connective computing appear to have the potential to transform
medicine and healthcare by accelerating discovery, improving patient outcomes,
decreasing costs, and addressing the complexity of challenging health problems.
The anticipated solutions will include novel data acquisition and processing
approaches, combined with advances in computational statistical learning. These
data acquisition approaches will be combined with the utilization of diverse
information and data to provide automated and augmented insight, discovery, and
evidence-based decision support and health services on a global scale. A
successful application of technology to achieve the necessary transformation
requires collaboration between computing and engineering expertise and the
health domain knowledge. This workshop will introduce computing and information
science researchers from the United States (US), funded by the NSF SCH program,
to health researchers in Finland to foster international interdisciplinary
collaborations in the area of Smart and Connected Health (SCH). In Finland, the
Academy of Finland in concert with Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for
Innovation, has nine multidisciplinary research consortia designated to tackle
complex health topics utilizing methods of personalized health (pHealth). The
participants will explore opportunities and challenges to transform health
research while advancing fundamental science and fostering international
collaboration. Realizing the promise of disruptive transformation in health and
healthcare, this workshop aims to drive innovation in computer science and
engineering in the health domain through new perspectives and international
collaborations. The funding is provided from Smart and Connected Health and the
Office of International Science and Engineering..