* 1629094
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Interface-promoted Assembly and Disassembly Processes for Rapid Manufacture and Transport of Complex Hybrid Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 552,901.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The intimate combination of inorganic nanoparticles
and organic polymers within nanoscopic packages of controlled sizes and shapes
includes many challenges with the processes for their production and many
opportunities for unique materials properties. Organic polymers are typically
considered as plastics and they have physical and mechanical properties that
allow them to serve common roles, such as elastic materials (clothing, tents,
parachutes, etc.), containment vessels (cups, plastic bags, etc.), and high
technology needs, such as optical materials (eye glasses, OLED devices, etc.),
engineering materials (airplane parts, football helmets, etc.), among many
others. Inorganic nanoparticles are typically rigid and often possess
characteristics of magnetism, optical signaling or catalytic reactivity. This
project will develop computational methods to guide approaches to rapidly
discover and manufacture hybrid inorganic-organic nanostructured objects (HIONs)
possessing complexity of compositions, structures, properties and functions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The primary hypothesis driving our
project is that the contrasting interactions of polymers vs nanoparticles vs
HIONs with each other and with surfaces and flow fields in porous media and
other designed interfaces can be harnessed to develop methods for scalable
production. The assembly of organic polymers or inorganic particles or their co-
assembly is usually conducted in either the solution state or in the bulk.
Although simulations have guided polymer and particle assembly processes, this
research activity adds the complexity of assembly/disassembly in a flow field
and in an adaptive resolution solvent(s) model, and will elucidate how
interfaces impact assembly/disassembly. Experimentally, HION
assembly/disassembly at solution-solid substrate interfaces in a flow system or
at solvent-solvent interfaces represent new frontiers. Only recently has
incorporation of discrete nanoscale heterogeneity on surfaces been demonstrated
to allow quantitative mechanistic prediction of particle retention on
unfavorable surfaces, as well as mechanistic prediction of release in response
to perturbations in solution ionic strength and fluid velocity. Ultimately, the
primary goal is to be able to conduct high throughput, tunable manufacturing of
complex HIONs that exhibit compositions, structures, morphologies and properties
for diverse technological applications.