* 1629385
* The Fourth International Conference on Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering, Nanjing, China, May 31-June 3, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for US-based faculty and students to
attend The Fourth International Conference on Sustainable Chemical Product and
Process Engineering, Nanjing, China, May 31-June 3, 2016. This international
conference has a focus on chemical manufacturing technologies that promote both
energy and environmental sustainability. The organizing committee, which
consists of distinguished researchers with a broad range of skills in chemical
process systems and reaction engineering, will provide for a vibrant and diverse
atmosphere that fosters exchange of ideas on research and education. It is
anticipated that approximately 25 US-based researchers will receive partial
travel support to attend this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Depletion of nonrenewable energy resources, climate change,
environmental pollution, and population growth are creating global challenges,
whose solution heavily depends on the development of sustainable manufacturing
technologies. The scientific theme of this Conference is "Sustainable Design of
Materials, Process Innovations, and Energy-Water Sustainability". Meeting the
world's demands for energy, food, water, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals in a
sustainable manner while protecting the environment will be key topics of this
conference. Despite its importance, sustainability science is still far from
being exact, and there is a serious lack of sustainable engineering
methodologies and tools that can be implemented by the chemical industry. The
conference will provide a unique forum for researchers, scientists, and
industrial practitioners from around world to assess the current status of
research on sustainable manufacturing and discuss future directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The US-based conference
participants supported by this grant will have the opportunity to network with
leading researchers from around the world and exchange ideas about the current
status and future directions in research and education on sustainable
manufacturing practices. They will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and
presentations by leading experts and by debating controversial points with their
peers. The meeting will also provide an opportunity for interaction and
cooperation among industrial and academic researchers. The conference will
address global challenges in the field of sustainable manufacturing with
potentially significant benefits to society. The organizers plan to encourage
faculty researchers as well as graduate/undergraduate students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, to participate and receive partial support from
this grant. The conference will also include a workshop for catalyzing
international collaborations on sustainable chemical engineering research and
education. This will be especially beneficial to the young industrial and
academic researchers, who will have an opportunity to interact with each other
and with experienced researchers in the field from around the world, which could
positively influence their professional development.