* 1629763
* CI-SUSTAIN: Collaborative Research: Sustaining Successful Smartphone Testbeds to Enable Diverse Mobile Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Zhuoqing Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2021
* USD 366,000.00

Mobile and wireless devices such as smartphones are transforming many aspects of
our lives because of their computational and network capabilities. With the
development of Internet of Things (IoT) based sensing and actuation support,
wireless devices are also introducing a paradigm shift in various industry
sectors such as advanced manufacturing, transportation, and personalized health.
Despite this promise, it is still rather difficult to evaluate innovations in
mobile computing science at scale due to limited access to realistic software
and hardware platforms as well as user behavior. This award aims to support and
sustain an already successful global-scale live laboratory known as MobiLab to
further enable diverse mobile experiments in the long term. The proposed work
will help augment both undergraduate lab-intensive introductory courses as well
as graduate-level courses that expose students to various aspects in mobile
computing. The resulting infrastructure will have a lasting impact on both the
research community as well as industry by providing a rich repository of mobile
system data from realistic use cases, software artifacts, and results based on
the data. MobiLab will lighten the steep learning curve in mobile computing and
IoT, as well as engage more researchers in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MobiLab has been conceived as a mobile computing
analogue to the well-known planetary-scale networking testbed, PlanetLab, to
support global-scale smartphone-based mobile computing science experimentation.
Given many of the MobiLab open-source tools to support mobile experiments have
already been widely deployed either in the form of crowd-sourced applications or
as customized tools adopted in specific operational environment, this work
focuses on developing several key software infrastructure improvements to enable
long-term sustainability of the experimentation infrastructure. In particular,
the project investigates how to complement the active and passive measurement
support with a new programmable context-triggered measurement mechanism that
helps balance the overhead of the measurement and the accuracy of the data
captured. Another enhancement to the infrastructure is the design of metrics to
accurately measure user quality of experience (QoE) based on models to be
developed that allow QoE to be measured on unmodified devices and apps. QoE-
based measurement support is integrated with the other MobiLab tools and deploy
it at large scale via application marketplaces. Finally, this project also
focuses on three main sustainability activities along the dimensions of
community development, corporate sponsorship, as well as collaboration with
other organizations and events.