* 1629929
* II-New: X60: A Cross-Layer Reconfigurable Multi-Gigabit WLAN Testbed at 60 GHz
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Dimitris Pados, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2018
* USD 630,052.00

We are experiencing today an explosion in wireless network traffic driven by the
rapidly growing number of mobile devices and bandwidth hungry applications.
Industry research predicts a 1000-fold increase in aggregate bandwidth demands
by 2020. In spite of decades of research on improving spectrum efficiency in
WiFi and cellular networks, existing techniques can only offer short-term
solutions. The millimeter-wave (mmWave) technology, e.g., in the unlicensed 60
GHz band supported by the IEEE 802.11ad standard, has recently emerged as an
alternative to legacy WiFi, promising multi-Gigabits per second throughput.
Although the commercial use of 60 GHz hardware has been limited until recently
to short-range line-of-sight scenarios, e.g., wireless docking, due to the high
attenuation and vulnerability to blockage of mmWave signals, this project
envisions the use of mmWave technology for building general purpose, multi-
Gigabit wireless Local Area Networks for home and enterprise environments that
will offer always-on connectivity but an order of magnitude higher throughput
than today's 2.4/5 GHz WiFi networks. One major factor that has hindered
research efforts towards this vision is the lack of testbeds due to the
unavailability of 60 GHz hardware that can simultaneously offer both high
performance and high levels of reconfigurability and control. This project will
build X60, a software defined based 60 GHz testbed that will offer high level of
reconfigurability at the PHY, MAC, and network layer, and, at the same time,
support channel widths and speeds commensurate to those of the IEEE 802.11ad
standard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each testbed node consists of an FPGA-based
mmWave Transceiver from National Instruments integrated with a 12-element phased
antenna array from SiBeam Inc. With no other testbeds of similar capabilities
available in the wireless networking community, the use of FPGAs lends full
flexibility and enables one to implement a broader range of communication and
networking solutions, ranging from the current standard itself to radically new
communication and networking solutions. Starting from the broadband
characterization of the channel, innovative modulations that maximize the
spectral efficiency and new physical layer (PHY) synchronization mechanisms will
be developed as part of this project. At the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer,
novel beam forming/beam steering and rate adaptation algorithms as well as loss
differentiation algorithms will be studied. At the network layer, the project
will investigate the use of wireless relays and smart reflector arrays to
improve connectivity, coverage, and network capacity, as well as explore a
radically new integrated PHY/MAC cross-layer architecture founded on soft code-
division multiplexing/multiple access principles - an approach fundamentally
different from that of the IEEE 802.11 standards. The project will make the the
developed software for the X60 testbed and the measurement data generated from
research projects enabled by this infrastructure available to the wireless
networking community.