* 1629756
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2016
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2016,07/31/2017
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2017
* USD 229,771.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on R/V
Atlantis, a 274? general purpose Global vessel operated by Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System research fleet. The vessel is owned by the U.S. Navy, has
state-of-the-art instrumentation and supports all disciplines of oceanographic
research. The Global vessel and can accommodate a scientific party of up to 32
persons for as many as 60 days. The vessel works in all the world?s oceans
supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies. R/V Atlantis is
specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the human occupied
submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep Submergence Facility
(NDSF). In addition, the proposal requests funds for instrumentation of R/V Neil
Armstrong, a new, state-of-the-art, Ocean Class vessel. Armstrong has not begun
her science career yet but is scheduled to make her maiden science voyage in
2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, R/V Atlantis completed 286 days at sea. NSF
funded projects accounted for 90% of the total sailing schedule (259 days). In
2016, Atlantis is scheduled for 273 days with NSF accounting for 172 of those or
63%. R/V Armstrong is scheduled for 200 days, 60% of which (119 days) are for
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;USBL Software $52,884&lt;br/&gt;pCO2
Analysis System $108,795&lt;br/&gt;Video Plankton Recorder $112,650&lt;br/&gt;
$274,329&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.