* 1629660
* DMREF/GOALI: Novel 3D Experiments, Simulations, and Optimization for Accelerated Design of Metallic Foams
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Valerio Pascucci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,049,502.00

Open-cell metallic foams are an exciting class of structural materials that
comprise a network of interconnected metallic ligaments, resulting in an
interesting foam architecture. These low-density materials have garnered much
attention over the past two decades based on their recognized potential for use
in multi-functional applications. For example, in addition to serving as light-
weight, load-bearing structures, open-cell metallic foams have the potential to
serve concurrently as electrodes for energy-storage devices, as hosts for newly
generated bone and blood vessels in biomedical implants, or as impact absorbers
and noise insulators for advanced high-speed ground transportation. Despite
their potential, the widespread deployment of open-cell metallic foams for a
broader range of multi-functional applications remains hampered by inefficient,
trial-and-error manufacturing approaches. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports a joint academic-industry research
effort to enable more efficient and intelligent design of open-cell metallic
foams, and to achieve precise control over their performance for targeted
applications. The results will provide dramatic improvements for the industry by
increasing both the manufacturing efficiency and the tailorability of the foams,
which will help to expand deployment of the foams throughout the energy,
defense, biomedical, aerospace, and automotive industries. The research team
will host outreach activities to expose students in K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate school to this multi-disciplinary STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMREF GOALI award supports research to
enable an accelerated and performance-based design paradigm for open-cell
metallic foams through the integration of emergent methods in 3D materials
characterization with multi-scale modeling and Bayesian optimization. The new
design paradigm will be made possible through the discovery of process-
structure-property relationships in the foams. The specific objectives include:
experimentally modifying manufacturing parameters to produce variants of open-
cell metallic foams; performing 3D synchrotron-based crystal-orientation
measurements and in-situ X-ray computed tomography experiments to gain
unprecedented insight into the hierarchical structure and multi-scale
deformation mechanisms of the foam; using high-fidelity, multi-scale (grain-to-
continuum) finite-element modeling to investigate micromechanical behavior and
predict performance of the as-manufactured foams; conducting virtual tests on
synthetic-foam variants to further populate a metallic-foam design space; and
using Bayesian optimization on the simulation-based results to enable selection
of optimal hierarchical structures (i.e. topology and crystallography) for
targeted performance metrics. The research will be a first to decouple the
effects of ligament topology and underlying crystal structure on micromechanical
behavior of open-cell metallic foams (including microbuckling, local
accumulation of slip, and distribution of crack-nucleation sites), which is
postulated to influence its performance.