* 1629317
* The Effect of Mobility and Transport on Labor Market Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Erica Field, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2019
* USD 335,859.00

This research will provide a credible estimate of the impact of transport to
work for men and women on both the supply and demand side of the labor market at
the level of individuals and firms. Results from the study will shed light on
barriers to firm performance in many parts of the world where female workers
face mobility restrictions due to cultural or religious norms. Understanding
such barriers is increasingly important as countries become more economically
integrated and multinational firms take advantage of increasing openness in
trade. In particular, there are significant possibilities for US and other
foreign investors in countries such as Pakistan that have taken important steps
to liberalize trade and investment regimes in recent years; however, realizing
these opportunities will require sound policies to better develop human
resources such as female access to education and jobs. Unless they are well
understood and policy solutions identified, culturally-driven barriers such as
those facing female workers have the potential to dampen investor interest and
economic growth in such settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study tests whether
affordable, safe transport services can improve women's access to opportunities
in the workplace in Lahore, Pakistan. The proposed project builds on an existing
Randomized Control Trial (RCT), which tests the overall impact of women's-only
transport on women's mobility and labor force participation. Some areas have
started to implement public transport interventions targeted at women, but the
impact of such initiatives on economic outcomes has not yet been rigorously
evaluated, in part due to the difficulty of identifying an appropriate
comparison group or counterfactual. In this study, the researchers will randomly
allocate residential and employment areas in the city into three groups: T1,
which will have access to a women's-only transport service; T2, a mixed-gender
transport service; and a control group. This allows the study to test the impact
of transport on women's access to jobs; men's access to jobs; and to test
whether women benefit more from a women's-only service. &lt;br/&gt;The NSF
component of the project allows for surveys of employers in these areas at
baseline and endline, allowing the researchers to test the impact of randomly
allocated transport on employers. The firm survey component will substantially
enhance the research outcomes and the public policy applicability of the
findings from the project by shedding light on how firms are affected by random
variation in transport for their employees. It will allow the researchers to
analyze whether any change in labor supply represents a simple shift between
treatment and control groups of women in the same jobs, or if firms are actually
able to hire and retain more women as a result of the treatment.