* 1629193
* An Exploration of Behavior in Dynamic Games
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Emanuel Vespa, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2019
* USD 192,882.00

Economic models of dynamic environments are highly important for forming policy,
and applied theory for these settings has been influential across the entire
economic spectrum: public finance, environmental economics, macroeconomics,
labor economics, and industrial organization. However, while economic theory for
dynamic environments is well-developed, in general it does not provide a precise
prediction. Quite the opposite. General theorems instead indicate that most
anything can happen in a dynamic environments, dependent on how the participants
react to both contemporaneous features of the environment (prices, the number of
other competitors in an industry, atmospheric pollutants) and observed features
of the past (in particular, other actors behavior). To deal with indeterminacy
in the predictions applied economic theory has instead relied on strong
assumption - for the most part untested. These assumptions serve to examine both
theorized effects from a policy change, but also to produce estimates for use in
policy. While these assumptions can make complex environments tractable, failure
of the assumption has the potential to produce very different policy outcomes
than those posited. Where a societal gain was predicted, a loss may instead be
observed. This project's aim is to use controlled observations of human behavior
in dynamic environments to examine when these theoretical assumptions are likely
to hold true. Greater insight into what features of the environment drive will
allow for more-robust policy discussions, and a subsequent benefit to society
from better economic policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a topic
with growing applied interest in economics, but where theory does not
(generically) make precise predictions. It will provide evidence from human
behavior, with the overarching aim being the construction of predictive
selection criteria to indicate in which settings the standard assumptions are
likely to hold true. Further, in those settings where the standard assumptions
fail, the project aims to provide evidence for alternatives. Such alternatives
can provide greater power when specifying alternative hypotheses. In this
project, the PIs propose a series of experiments that will examine behavior in
dynamic strategic environments. Four sub-projects are proposed: i) an
examination of how uncertainty over other participants' strategic choices
affects selection; ii) an examination of the extent to which teams and
individuals behave differently in these settings; iii) an examination of the
information revealed by self-interested experts across a long-run relationship;
and iv) an examination of the effects on behavior from the number of active
participants in an environment. In all four sub-projects, the PIs construct a
simple baseline environment, and several modifications of it, each of which is
chosen to isolate and measure the effects from a relevant feature of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts from the study follow from a
greater understanding of which facets of a strategic environment lead humans to
focus on observations from the recent past (historical outputs, prices,
extraction levels, etc.) to determine their present actions, as opposed to
current conditions (input prices, demand, number of competitors, etc.). In terms
of policy, the results aim to produce evidence-based criteria for the most-
common assumptions in the applied literature on dynamic games. Greater insight
into what drives selection will allow for more-robust policy discussions, and
subsequent benefits to society.