* 1629196
* XPS: FULL: Collaborative Research: Rethinking Architecture Support for Memory Consistency
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Brandon Lucia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 481,096.00

Despite decades of progress, writing correct parallel software to realize the
value of modern parallel computer hardware remains extremely difficult. A key
problem is that today's computer systems do not give all programs clear
behavioral guarantees; "ill-synchronized" code, in which parallel computations
are incompletely or incorrectly coordinated, has ill-defined, often destructive
behavior. This problem is a key theoretical and practical flaw in nearly all
parallel computer systems. This proposal addresses this challenge, by proposing
a new class of parallel computer architectures with strong behavioral
guarantees, even for ill-synchronized code. The key idea is to make systems
safely terminate ill-synchronized program executions before they can cause
problems. To avoid degrading availability, the project includes mechanisms to
avoid terminating program executions when possible, by falling back to more
permissive, yet safe and predictable behavioral guarantees, and by resolving
potential errors caused by ill-synchronized code. The intellectual merits of the
project are that it provides crucial behavioral guarantees even to ill-
synchronized parallel code. The project eliminates outdated hardware models that
not only provide inadequate behavioral guarantees, but are also complex, and
power-hungry. The project is the first in this domain to directly address
availability and correctness together. The project's broader significance and
importance are that it will improve the reliability of all parallel systems,
which affects all aspects of life: medicine, energy, transportation, health,
defense, and business. The stronger guarantees provided by this project avoid
costly, dangerous failures and decrease the cost of application development,
even in mature languages. The project will generate results relevant to industry
and will influence academia through publication. The project will directly
influence secondary and higher education in computing, fostering a diverse,
future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide strong behavioral
guarantees to all code -- even if incorrectly synchronized -- the proposed
architectures provide region-atomic memory consistency guarantees for coarse-
grained code regions. In these architectures, a program's execution is either a
serialization of code regions, or it terminates with an exception that indicates
an error could have left memory inconsistent. The architectures provide this
strong memory consistency model to all program executions, departing from
mainstream approaches to coherence and consistency that favor weaker guarantees
without a clear benefit in complexity or performance. In systems executing ill-
synchronized code, frequent exceptions may too often terminate program
executions, degrading availability. The proposed architectures avoid degrading
availability by tolerating consistency violations with a well-defined snapshot
isolation semantics that avoids exceptions, but does not guarantee
serializability of code regions. The architectures further address availability
by resolving exceptions, leveraging commutativity of code to avoid unnecessary
exceptions for commutative operations, as well as using dynamic symbolic
analysis to resolve exceptions by combining symbolic memory updates.