* 1629839
* CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: Developing a Community Infrastructure for Reliability-Aware Cross-Layered Design of Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Limbrick, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Reliability analysis of integrated circuits (ICs) has become a greater concern
in the development of computing systems. Technology scaling offers more
transistors to enable system-on-a-chip (SoC) integration, but it also means more
transistors that can be affected by radiation-induced faults. Designers must
consider how those faults impact the entire computing system by including levels
of abstraction in both hardware and software. Reliability cannot be addressed by
considering the device, circuit, architecture, or application layer
individually. Cross-layered modeling and simulation enables a better
understanding of the complex interactions among particle physics, fabrication
technology, processor architecture, and the software stack in order to develop
reliable computing systems. With the increase in cost and time of the system
design process, pre-fabrication modeling of radiation effects has become a
critical field of research. By understanding these processes, designers can meet
traditional constraints of performance and power, while addressing concerns for
the soft error rate (SER). Potential application domains include, but are not
limited to, automotive embedded systems, high-performance computing, and
spaceborne environments.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;This project creates a research
infrastructure that links soft error simulations at the device, circuit,
architecture, and application levels. This infrastructure provides a testbed for
characterizing the resilience of algorithms for computer and computational
sciences. It also contains testbeds for evaluating the reliability of the
architecture and the design of computing systems. By providing up-to-date models
of the effects of single events on current and future technologies, it
facilitates the development of computing models and technologies based on
emerging scientific ideas from the research community. The infrastructure will
be accessible to a larger research community through web-based content (e.g.,
online tutorials and webinars) and interactive workshops at conferences and
symposia. This project broadens the participation of groups traditionally
underrepresented in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) through outreach to encourage students to enter the science
and engineering fields. The STEM Scholars Program at North Carolina A&amp;T
provides a computing skills workshop to African-American high school students.