* 1629367
* EAGER Germination: Crystallizing Transformative Ideas by Seeding a Diverse Knowledge Community
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal from the University of Illinois aims to develop a learning
framework and associated platforms that will increase the probability of
germinating transformative research ideas that will open new opportunities to
address important societal challenges. Although the framework is designed for
any research domain, for evaluation purposes this project focuses on the
interdisciplinary challenge of resilience to global climate change. The target
audiences are late stage graduate students, early stage faculty, and
postdoctoral scholars who show potential for engaging in cross-institutional
interdisciplinary research linking scholars from American Indian Tribal
Colleges, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving
Colleges and Universities, and Land Grant Universities.

Resilience to climate change is a fundamentally important issue and this project
has the opportunity to generate new approaches to this challenge. The inclusion
of minority serving institutions in a meaningful way that gives them true voice
breaks new ground in this area of inquiry as well. Procedures that facilitate
including multiple voices when addressing fundamental scientific challenges will
be a contribution to building a commonwealth among the many groups in the US who
have stakes in important scientific issues. Expected project outcomes will be:
(1) Cross-institutional, interdisciplinary proposals to funding agencies; (2)
Sustainable cross-institutional and interdisciplinary networks to promote future
research; (3) A procedure for facilitating the first two outcomes and evidence
for its efficacy, scalability, and adaptability beyond the institutions involved
in the study. A team composed of research and STEM directors and other personnel
from the American Indian Higher Education Council (AIHEC), the Hispanic
Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), and the National Association
for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO), and directors and research
scientists from the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA), as
well as other scholars and process experts will contribute to the development
and implementation of the framework.