* 1629370
* Threats to Peace: Development and Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2021
* USD 346,198.00

Economic growth in countries undergoing structural transformations often
involves a massive reallocation of resources, human and physical. Even if such
growth is warranted from a long-term perspective, it can bring hardship in the
short to medium run, and it can do so to individuals and groups who will never
be compensated for their pains, in their lifetime. It is not surprising, then,
that economic growth can be conflictual. This project explicitly brings an
economic perspective to the theory and empirical study of social conflict, as
opposed to simplistic pronouncements describing such conflict as a "clash of
civilizations."

Each of the three components of this project describes an interplay between
economic and social characteristics that could lead to conflict. The first
component studies how polarization across different ethnic groups can be
exacerbated by economic inequality within each group. The second component
studies whether small or large groups enter into conflict against the State, and
how these outcomes are influenced by the nature of the "conflict prize." The
final component studies the connections between trade liberalization and
violence.

A central theme (and earlier finding) is that social conflict, while
economically motivated, is often organized along ethnic lines: ethnically
polarized societies are conflictual. The first project extends this research by
interacting economic factors; specifically, within-group economic inequality,
with polarization. Such inequality synthesizes two different aspects of the
conflict process: the poor in a group supply their labor, the rich their
finances. This perverse synergy of finance and labor is typically unavailable in
class-based conflicts. It can make ethnic violence salient. The group-
inequality/conflict nexus appears to find strong empirical support. The second
project explores yet another aspect of the interaction between economics and
ethnicity. It combines and reconciles two very different views of conflict --
one, the "tyranny of the majority," in which large groups impose their
preferences on smaller groups, with another, the "Pareto-Olsen thesis," which
argues that smaller groups are more likely to initiate lobbies or conflicts
rather than larger groups. The two views are reconciled by varying the nature of
conflict payoffs: private payoffs encourage smaller groups to be conflictual,
while the opposite is true of public payoffs. These relationships are strongly
visible in the data. Another previous theme is that economic growth might be
highly conflictual in the near term, especially if that growth has been uneven
across sectors or groups. The final project studies trade liberalization and
gender-based violence in India. It shows that the reduction of trade barriers --
especially non-tariff^ quotas -- has had a significant and positive impact on
violence against women; specifically, on rape. The reduction of import quotas
has created large sectoral movements of labor; the same is not true when tariffs
change in the presence of quotas. The study connects liberalization with the
dislocation of male labor and with the new entry of female labor, and links
these processes to sexual violence.

While sustained growth in the long term could finally tame conflict, there is
every possibility that medium-term uneven growth, among groups or sectors, could
inflame it. The intellectual core of this research marries traditional economic
theory - rational individuals, strategic environments characterized by the
methodological use of game theory, and equilibrium solution concepts - to
generate and test predictions about one of the most significant phenomena in our
lifetime: internal social conflict, often demarcated along ethnic lines.