* 1629805
* Fold Dating in the Central Appalachian Valley-and-Ridge.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Ben van der Pluijm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 147,559.00

Folded rocks are common, highly aesthetic features of mountain belts and their
ages constrain the timing of mountain building events, regional patterns of
deformation, continental evolution and (economic) mineralization of the Earth?s
crust. This geochronological study will improve and test a novel fold dating
method based on the dating of illite clays, determine timing of folding in the
central Appalachian Mountains of the eastern United States, and demonstrate the
method?s potential for other locations around the world. In addition to the
scientific goals of the project, it is providing support for the research of a
doctoral scientist and is providing research experiences for undergraduate
students, thus contributing to educational work force development in an
important STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) discipline. In
addition, the principal investigators research and educational outreach will be
broadly distributed through professional publications and by presentations at
professional meetings and public presentations. The research will also be
feature in an online textbook, and will be used in class and field experiences
for undergraduate students. Illite dating also has direct application for
industry and societal resource needs, as fossil fuel and mineral industries
typically involve the same geologic setting and conditions that are examined in
this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal investigators have recently
developed a method for fold dating using argon geochronology of neocrystallized
illite and tested its application in a case study of the Mexican Fold-Thrust
Belt. The method relies on the quantification of illite in grain-size fractions
of a single sample, and their respective ages; extrapolation of dated grain size
fractions determines the ages of deformation and their errors. The Appalachian
Valley-and-Ridge project has two primary goals: (1) improve the illite dating
method by developing better clay quantification approaches that also reduce
error estimates; (2) determine fold ages in the well-known central Appalachians,
where forward fold progression has been hypothesized; currently, fold ages are
stratigraphically bracketed as Upper Paleozoic; (3) directly constrain the
timing of regional paleomagnetic remagnetization, mineralization and economic
deposits in the eastern United States.