* 1629790
* CI-P: Collaborative Project: Massively-Parallel Analog Co-Processors for Simulating Complex Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Soumyajit Mandal, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,997.00

Digital supercomputers have become exponentially faster in recent years, but
these general-purpose machines still leave much to be desired in terms of
computational speed for mathematically rigorous simulations of various physics-
based systems. Moreover, digital computer performance is beginning to saturate
due to fundamental limitations in transistor scaling and switching speed.
However, the analog performance of transistors continues to improve, and
frequency ranges exceeding 400 GHz are now available for applications such as
millimeter wave wireless communications, imaging, and radar. Hence there is a
lot of interest in high-speed analog co-processors that can rapidly perform
certain specialized simulations by taking advantage of modern nanoscale
integrated circuit technology. The overall goal of the project is to discover
the theory, design the circuits, and verify the operation of scalable analog
computation units with multi-GHz bandwidths that can be seamlessly integrated
into modern digital computation architectures, thus enabling novel hybrid
(analog/digital) computing paradigms.

This "planning" research is designed to obtain the foundational knowledge,
derive the requirements and specifications, and determine the teaming needs for
an eventual full project to the CRI program that will enable the CISE community
to more easily explore this "beyond Moore" computing paradigm. In particular, it
will provide shared resources for developing and using radio frequency (RF)
analog accelerators for various scientific computing applications. This CI-P
planning activities will explore several mathematical models that can be
efficiently mapped to massively-parallel integrated analog accelerators. The
mathematical models may include simplified versions of difficult scientific
computing problems (e.g., the shallow-water version of the Navier-Stokes
equations) and important problems in engineering (e.g., Maxwell's equations of
electromagnetism). The planning stage will include a one-day "Ideas Workshop" to
facilitate informal discussions between CISE researchers belonging to several
universities who are either experienced in analog and hybrid computing, or have
significant interest in the topic. The project includes significant educational
and outreach activities, including outreach activities at local high schools in
the Cleveland-Akron area, summer workshops at the lead-PI's laboratory at the
University of Akron, and mentorship/research experiences at Case Western Reserve
University.