* 1629976
* CI-New: BugSwarm: A Large-Scale Repository of Replicable Defects, Tests, and Patches to Support the Software Engineering Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Premkumar Devanbu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,058,155.00

Improving software quality is a central priority of our
time.&lt;br/&gt;Approaches to understand, diagnose, localize, and fix software
defects&lt;br/&gt;are usually empirically grounded in datasets of past
defects/repairs.&lt;br/&gt;A few such datasets are available; however, these
datasets are&lt;br/&gt;difficult to create, and are typically not of the size,
scale, and&lt;br/&gt;diversity that is representative of the software in use.
The goal of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to create BugSwarm, a large-scale
repository of&lt;br/&gt;replicable defects, tests, and patches. We propose to
draw from the&lt;br/&gt;recorded history of defects in open-source projects, to
create this&lt;br/&gt;dataset of unprecedented size and diversity, while
retaining&lt;br/&gt;sufficient fidelity of detail to allow careful study and
replication&lt;br/&gt;of these historical defects. BugSwarm will amplify the
size of&lt;br/&gt;available defect datasets by several orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous integration (CI) development
practices, where build and&lt;br/&gt;test processes are carried out in the
cloud, with archived results,&lt;br/&gt;offer a novel opportunity to construct
defect datasets. We propose to&lt;br/&gt;exploit CI coding practices to create
BugSwarm. Continuous, online&lt;br/&gt;integration practices inherently create
archived records of build and&lt;br/&gt;test attempts, including those that
result in build and/or test&lt;br/&gt;failures, and subsequent repairs. These
practices emerged from the&lt;br/&gt;imperatives to: a) rigorously and
automatically build, integrate, and&lt;br/&gt;fully test numerous code
submissions from volunteer developers; and b)&lt;br/&gt;the need to test these
submissions at large volumes, in virtualized,&lt;br/&gt;configurable, cloud-
based settings. The virtualized, cloud-based&lt;br/&gt;testing makes these
defects much more available and replicable. We&lt;br/&gt;will exploit these
archived records to create DRPs (Defect Replication&lt;br/&gt;Packages) and
DFRPs (Defect &amp; Fix Replication Packages), comprising&lt;br/&gt;buggy
versions of the code, failing regression tests, and bug fixes.&lt;br/&gt;DRPs
and DFRPs will include complete virtual machines to reproduce&lt;br/&gt;real
test failures. BugSwarm will facilitate experimentation, and&lt;br/&gt;avoid the
duplication of a tremendous amount of work among researchers&lt;br/&gt;in
programming languages, and software engineering.