* 1629006
* DMREF: Design Rules for Flexible Conductors: Predicting Chain Conformations, Entanglements, and Liquid Crystalline Phases of Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Flexible electronic devices have the potential to
transform our society, such as in distributed power, solid-state lighting,
personal electronics, and biomedical devices. The objective of this program is
to accelerate the development of conjugated polymers for flexible electronics.
The project will generate tools to predict fundamental properties of conjugated
polymers, such as the stiffness of the chain backbones, their ability to form
liquid crystals, and the likelihood that chains will entangle, all from the
chemical structure. As such, the combination of theory, simulation, and
experiment will provide opportunities to refine design concepts in conjugated
polymers and therefore create an accelerated materials design framework useful
for both academic and industrial efforts. Beyond flexible electronics,
developing a theoretical description for semiflexible polymers will be
transformative across many applications of biopolymers, engineering
thermoplastics, and liquid crystals. Furthermore, this program will create a
pilot program aimed at improving the retention of students in STEM fields. Penn
State's unique structure will be leveraged, where a large central campus is
closely linked to smaller commonwealth campuses, to explore the use of remote
research activities as a recruiting and retention tool.

Technical Abstract: This program encompasses the development of three
computational tools. Recent work by the PIs suggests a computationally
inexpensive approach to predict the persistence length of conjugated polymers.
The work of this program will validate this approach, with experimental
measurements on synthesized polymers using neutron scattering in the melt or
light scattering in dilute solution. Furthermore, the combination of simulations
and experiments will generate values of the persistence length for various
conjugated polymers that are of interest to the community. The PIs will also
leverage their development of a new approach combining MD simulations and SCFT
to predict the nematic coupling parameter and the nematic-to-isotropic
transition temperature. Predictions of the phase behavior of various conjugated
polymers that vary in stiffness will be compared with results from rheology,
light microscopy and depolarized light scattering. Finally, the work will test
scaling relationships for the entanglement length versus packing length, to
predict the entanglement length of any conjugated polymer from the molecular
structure, and test these predictions with rheological measurements. The
combination of theory, simulation and experiment provides an opportunity to
refine design concepts for conjugated polymers. Preliminary studies suggest that
stiff chains align near interfaces, potentially enhancing charge transport in
devices such as thin-film transistors that rely on transport near dielectric
interfaces.