* 1629771
* CI-P: Collaborative Research: Planning and Prototyping a Community-Wide Software Architecture Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Sam Malek, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 29,962.00

The effort and cost of maintenance dominate activities in a software system's
lifecycle. Over the past two decades, software architecture research has yielded
many tools and techniques for understanding and maintaining the architectures of
software systems. However, empirical research and technology transfer are
impeded by myriad disjoint environments, lack of a shared research
infrastructure, the costs of making tools robust, and lack of datasets needed to
conduct architecture-oriented empirical research. Consequently, researchers and
practitioners often repeat each other's efforts, thus limiting potential
breakthroughs. This projects develops the plans and an initial prototype for an
integration framework that assembles architecture-related techniques to enable
maintenance-focused empirical research. The framework revolutionizes the future
of software systems research and development. It facilitates the discovery and
adoption of cutting-edge techniques and tools, and fosters much more effective
university-industry collaboration than exists today.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
planning project elicits and prioritizes the requirements, collects the
community feedback, and develops a prototype for the Software Architecture
INstrument (SAIN), a first-of-its-kind integration framework. SAIN comprises
three principal components: (1) a catalogued library of tools for reverse
engineering and analyzing software architectures; (2) a plug-and-play instrument
for integrating the techniques to enable architecture-oriented empirical
studies; and (3) a repository of Web-accessible software-architecture datasets
and benchmarks. This planning project develops a proof-of-concept solution that
demonstrates the feasibility of the proposed instrument, as well as the research
activities enabled by this instrument. SAIN provides an effective, community-
wide platform for software architecture research and practice through continuous
integration of diverse tools. It supports architecture's central role in a broad
range of software engineering activities. The framework comprises the first
repository hosting large numbers of recovered architectures to enable
researchers to effectively evaluate their techniques, and is aimed at
reinvigorating empirical research in software architecture.