* 1629195
* The Economics of Rush-Hour Traffic Dynamics: Beyond the Bottleneck Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Richard Arnott, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,364.00

Traffic congestion is one of the banes of modern life. Surprisingly, however,
until recently very little systematic data had been collected on traffic
congestion on urban streets (in contrast to freeways), which has hampered the
development of well-informed policies for the alleviation of downtown traffic
congestion. The recently collected data have generated an important finding: the
performance of the urban street system deteriorates sharply under heavily
congested conditions -- more sharply than freeways. This has two important
policy implications. First, it is important to implement policies that nip
traffic jams in the bud. Second, congestion pricing in downtown areas generates
even larger social benefits than previously believed. This research effort
develops models of rush-hour traffic congestion on urban streets that account
for this finding and applies them to analyze the effects of alternative
congestion-relief policies. The research will support one Ph.D. student in
applied mathematics, and encourage other such students to apply their technical
skills to the study of downtown traffic congestion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
bottleneck model has been the workhorse model for the study of rush-hour traffic
dynamics for a quarter of a century. While it has generated many insights, it
has a serious flaw -- it assumes that traffic flow remains constant under
heavily congested conditions. Recent empirical study of the MFD -- macroscopic
fundamental diagram -- in downtown areas has shown, to the contrary, that flow
falls sharply under heavily congested conditions. Previous work has developed a
model of rush-hour traffic dynamics that accommodates the empirical MFD -- the
isotropic model of downtown traffic congestion. Unfortunately the model has
proven analytically and numerically intractable. The project aims to develop
tractable algorithms to solve the model and also make progress in its analytical
solution. These tools will lead to more accurate analysis of policies aimed at
alleviating downtown traffic congestion, including not only congestion pricing
but also parking and congestion management policies.