* 1629361
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Tackling Disorder and Ensemble Broadening in Materials Made of Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Eran Rabani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 09/30/2020
* USD 333,313.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In modern science and technology, semiconducting
materials play an enormous role in solid-state lighting, photovoltaics, light
harvesting, and electronics. The work performed in this project will help unlock
the full potential of nano-engineered semiconductors currently hidden by the
effects of disorder. The proposed work will develop new experimental and
theoretical techniques that eliminate negative effects due to non-uniform
particle size and shape. The nanoscale semiconductors developed in this project
will be used for color enhancement and energy efficiency improvement of
television and electronic displays, light detectors, solar cells, and printable
electronic circuits. The program will attract undergraduate and graduate
students, and post-doctoral scholars who will be trained and prepared for
academic and industrial careers. The PIs will also continue to integrate
outreach into local programs, taking part in science club initiatives and
demonstrations that focus on hands-on science experiences for public school
students. The PIs will create and make publicly available a series of lecture
notes for graduate students explaining computational stochastic methods to
reduce the language barrier frequently experienced by quantum chemists working
with this formalism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This research
program will focus on the chemistry and physics of colloidal semiconducting
nanoplatelets (NPLs), a novel class of quantum confined semiconductors combining
beneficial aspects of the electronic structure of quantum wells and quantum
dots. NPLs represent a promising platform to enter a new regime of modular
materials, resonant couplings, and coherent transport phenomena. Experimental
and theoretical efforts will build upon each other to achieve a fundamental
understanding of optical and electronic phenomena, the role of electron-phonon
coupling at the single NPL, formation of superradiant states, and charge and
exciton transfer at the ensemble levels. New synthetic techniques will be
developed to fabricate unprecedented NPL heterostructures. Accurate
computational tools based on the notion of stochastic orbitals will be
introduced to uncover the interplay between moderate and strong electron-hole
correlation effects. Theoretical models will be benchmarked to the optical and
electronic properties of NPLs measured by steady-state and transient techniques.
Charge and exciton transport in assemblies of NPLs will be iteratively predicted
and measured in order to gain a deep understanding of the emergent phenomena.
The collaborative effort will provide means to develop new functional materials,
uncover their properties, and reveal emergent behavior in the regime of strong
electronic coupling. Beyond NPLs, the anticipated development of synthetic
methods, optical techniques, and large-scale developed computational tools will
impact broad areas of nanomaterials (graphene, nanoribbons) where strong
correlation-induced confinement governs emergent electronic properties.