* 1629548
* XPS: FULL: Collaborative Research: PARAGRAPH: Parallel, Scalable Graph Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 546,875.00

Many real world problems can be effectively modeled as complex relationship
networks or graphs where nodes represent entities of interest and edges mimic
the interactions or relationships among them. The number of such problems and
the diversity of domains from which they arise is growing. However developing
high-performance applications to extract useful information from such datasets
is very challenging. Graphical processing units are very attractive for such
applications because they offer higher computational performance and energy
efficiency than standard multi-core processors. However, the development of
high-performance applications for them is currently much more challenging than
parallel program development for standard multi-core processors. Effective
application development to use graphical processing units generally requires
that developers possess considerable expertise on their architectural
characteristics and use specialized programming models and performance
optimization techniques. Thus, simultaneously achieving high performance and
high user productivity for data analytics applications for such devices is a
daunting challenge.

This project proposes a scalable high-level software framework to enable the
productive development of high-performance applications for graphical processing
units. It features two distinct abstractions to address the performance and
productivity challenges in developing graph/data analytics applications: 1) a
frontier-centric abstraction that is based on a common iterative characteristic
of many of these applications, with a dynamically moving active frontier of
vertices (or edges) where computation is centered, and 2) an abstraction based
on sparse linear algebra primitives, exploiting the dual relationship between
sparse matrices and graphs. A benchmark suite of graph analytics applications
will be developed and evaluated using both abstractions, enabling insights into
the effectiveness of these alternate high-level abstractions for a range of
analytics applications. The benchmark suite and the software framework will be
publicly released.