* 1629659
* EAGER Germination: Aligning Stakeholders and Structures to Enable Risk Taking (ASSERT)
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Donna Llewellyn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 99,991.00

This award will create a community at Boise State University to germinate
transformative research ideas and questions to address critical societal needs
by Aligning Stakeholders and Structures to Enable Risk Taking (ASSERT). This
community will germinate, cultivate, and celebrate transformative research ideas
and questions among all academic ranks. This will be achieved by improving the
academic structures, addressing the cultural issues at the university that
inhibit academic risk taking, and supporting the personal development of
individual faculty to facilitate their readiness to conceive transformative
research ideas. ASSERT will encourage and coach faculty to take risks in order
to tackle large societal issues in their research. The plan includes three
components aimed at creating an ASSERTive community: (a) create a learning
framework for a cohort of faculty who are at various stages of their careers and
who are in danger of not taking risks in their research strategies for a
spectrum of reasons; (b) address the structural and cultural issues at the
university in order to create a more nurturing environment that encourages
faculty to take strategic intellectual risks in their research; and (c) work on
a sustainability plan within Boise State that expands the program to other
research teams while also creating guides for other universities.

This project will enable necessary conversations about university policies (such
as tenure and promotion, funding of student research, and rewarding team science
and intellectual risk taking) to the forefront at Boise State. It will have an
immediate impact on the research environment and infrastructure on campus, at
all levels. Students will have access to projects that cross disciplines and
will be led by intellectually vibrant mentors. This will create a pathway to a
future of researchers who are excited and inspired about doing science. By
addressing the culture within the academic departments and the personal
development of the participants through retreats, workshops, and one-on-one
coaching, this project will be creating a community of faculty who are willing
to tackle large societal questions in their research portfolios.