* 1629786
* Collaborative Research: Mesozoic Tethyan paleocommunity dynamics: Modelling complexity and stablity during times of biotic escalation and community restructuring
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Carrie Tyler, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 70,240.00

Collaborative Research: Mesozoic Tethyan paleocommunity dynamics: Modelling
complexity and stablity during times of biotic escalation and community
restructuring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mesozoic Era began in the aftermath of
Earth's largest mass extinction 251 million years ago, ending 66 million years
ago with another mass extinction. The current project focuses on ecosystems of
an ancient ocean which covered much of western Europe during the Mesozoic and
left behind a rich, well-documented fossil record. The groundwork for modern
oceans was laid during this time with increasingly complex ecosystems. The
relationship between the complexity and stability of ecosystems is, however,
poorly understood. The project will examine that relationship by modeling the
complex dynamics of Mesozoic marine ecosystems using food webs, which capture
the interactions and energy transfer between species in biological communities.
Food web reactions to environmental disturbances are informative of ecosystem
resilience. Analyzing ancient food webs will be accomplished with a suite of
mathematical and computational models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystem responses
to changes in biological complexity and environmental disturbance remain poorly
understood. Anthropogenically-driven global biological change is currently
resulting in catastrophic losses of biodiversity. To anticipate ecosystem
responses and effectively manage resources, we must understand how ecosystems
respond to extreme changes; yet there are no precedents in human experience to
guide us. The fossil record documents extreme ecosystem changes and this project
will provide analogs from the past to enable better forecasts for modern marine
ecosystems. This information will be distributed to the public, educators and
students through a variety of programs at the California Academy of Sciences.