* 1629392
* XPS: FULL: Integrating Programming Model, Runtime, Algorithmic, and Architectural Support To Use Inexact and Heterogeneous Hardware for Scientific Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 875,000.00

As the High Performance Computing (HPC) field moves towards even more powerful
(Exascale) systems, it faces two key challenges: resilience and power
efficiency. Increasing computing power while not significantly increasing the
power budget potentially involves new architectural designs, such as the ones
with low power and/or low margins. Though future systems are expected to
experience an increase in the number of faults (because of increasing number of
cores and decreasing feature sizes), energy efficient designs will likely suffer
even more errors due to tighter margins and other design compromises. Of
particular concern are the errors that escape hardware detection: such errors
are said to cause Silent Data Corruption (SDC). Maintaining correctness of a
numerical simulation in the presence of SDCs is a very challenging problem. The
intellectual merit of this project is in combining ideas from numerical methods,
programming model design and architecture design to address the correctness of
numerical simulations. The broader significance and importance of the project
includes impact on scientific and high performance computing, system software
for parallel computing, and architectural designs and research. This project
will also make several contributions towards education, human resource
development, and increasing diversity, with activities like teaching parallel
computing (and programming) to diverse audience, mentoring of doctoral students,
including those from underrepresented groups, and an interdisciplinary training
program in Mathematical Biology for undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the project addresses the challenge of
developing and executing scientific applications with energy efficient low-
power/margin architectures that experience occasional faults, while maintaining
programmer productivity and accuracy of results. This project develops a
synergistic research program combining advances in HPC programming models,
runtime systems, Near Threshold Voltage (NTV) architectures, and numerical
methods (algorithms). Specifically, the project involves close collaboration
between researchers from three areas: (a) parallel programming models,
applications, and runtime systems, (b) architecture, and (c) finite difference
and finite volume numerical models.