* 1629291
* XPS: FULL: Collaborative Research: Maximizing the Performance Potential and Reliability of Flash-based Solid State Devices for Future Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Feng Chen, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 290,000.00

Solid-state data storage built upon NAND flash memory is fundamentally changing
the memory and storage hierarchy for virtually the entire information technology
infrastructure. Nevertheless, there have been several fundamental and
challenging issues to be addressed before the industry can explore the flash
memory to its full potential. First, as flash memory technology scales down, its
reliability degradation approaches to an alarming level, leading to serious
concerns and skepticism of storage system architects and users in many
applications. Second, system and application development of solid-state storage
has been independently conducted, resulting in isolation, duplicated operations,
and an inefficient management among these layers. Due to the technology scaling
and information loss in existing simple interface with storage devices, flash
memory has not been efficiently and reliably utilized in practice, and the
situation will become worse with the technology scaling. The PIs of this project
will apply a holistic system design methodology to cohesively address the
challenges preventing wider adoption of flash memory. By innovating well-
orchestrated cross-layer information sharing and utilization, this design
methodology enables seamless utilization of system-level workload and physical-
level device characteristics across the entire software/hardware stack without
complicating overall system design. An integrated software and hardware
prototyping infrastructure will be developed to demonstrate the potential using
major and widely used software systems, such as Hadoop, virtual machines, and
database. This project will achieve a high broader impact by transforming basic
research results into storage systems, and by training both undergraduate and
graduate students with research activities, and by timely integrating new
research results to classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will carry out several closely related tasks: (1) It will develop techniques
that can learn and predict the varying characteristics and their correlations of
individual flash memory devices. This will provide run-time information that
makes it possible to optimize the use of flash memory for alleviating the
reliability crisis and adapting to varying system-level workload
characteristics. (2) It will develop techniques that enable critical information
exchange across the storage hierarchy in order to facilitate cross-layer
information sharing. (3) It will further develop a set of techniques across the
design hierarchy that can effectively utilize these runtime collections and
predictions to improve the overall system reliability and performance.