* 1629811
* CI-EN: Collaborative Research: Enhancement of Foldit, a Community Infrastructure Supporting Research on Knowledge Discovery Via Crowdsourcing in Computational Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jens Meiler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 230,165.00

The focus for this project is the combination of crowdsourcing and computational
biochemistry through the crowdsourcing video game Foldit. Foldit is an online
multiplayer game that allows players to compete and collaborate to
computationally fold and design proteins. Since its launch in 2008, it has had
over 400,000 players, and demonstrated that by leveraging human problem solving
and creativity, humans and computers can work together to solve previously
unsolvable problems in computational structural biology. Foldit players have
contributed toward solutions for two of the "holy grail" problems in
computational structural biology: the protein folding problem and the protein
design problem (also known as the inverse folding problem). The design of novel
synthetic proteins is one of the most important tools in protein engineering,
possibly leading us to a better understanding of the processes that underlie
life and allowing the discovery of molecules with applications in health,
energy, materials, and nanotechnology. As a new approach to addressing the
challenges of purely computational approaches in biochemistry, the field of
scientific discovery games has recently arisen to crowdsource solutions to
computational biochemistry problems, by using human problem solving and
creativity from members of the general public. The infrastructure supported by
this project will enable new research in crowdsourcing and citizen science. The
broader community will benefit from this infrastructure as a platform for
crowdsourcing computational biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to enhance the existing infrastructure of the Foldit game, and allow us to
recast Foldit to tackle the next big challenges in computational structural
biology (including design of enzymes and small molecules), while broadening the
community of scientists involved and continuing to engage and educate the
public. This project will support equipment and personnel needs for cloud
hosting and maintenance, allowing improved robustness and collaborative access
to resources, along with continued community outreach. Additionally, support
will be provided for developing in-game tools for new applications in protein
and small molecule design, new interfaces for scientists, touchscreen and multi-
touch support, and a new pipeline for crowdsourced biochemistry challenges.
Enhancements made to the game client will be made available via Foldit
Standalone -- a non-competitive version of the game that allows researchers to
load in and work on their own structures. Educators will be able to use the game
as a teaching tool for introducing biochemistry to classrooms, where it is
already being used for lectures, lab exercises, homework assignments, and even
in textbooks and MOOCs. Foldit has been used by winning student teams in iGEM --
the premiere international design competition for students in synthetic biology.
The Foldit website (http://fold.it/) provides access to the online multiplayer
game and resources for educators and researchers.