* 1629807
* CI-NEW: Collaborative: Building the Core NDN Infrastructure to Advance Information-Centric Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Patrick Crowley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,960.00

The goal of this project is to support the evaluation, experimentation, and
further development of the Named Data Networking (NDN) architecture through
building the core NDN infrastructure as a community resource, serving to advance
research in the Information-Centric Networking (ICN)
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Named Data Networking (NDN) is a new Internet
architecture that replaces today's architectural focus on ``where'', i.e., the
addresses and hosts of Internet Protocol (IP), with ``what'', i.e., the content
that users and applications care about. This fundamental shift brings profound
impacts on enhancing Internet security, enabling mobility support, scaling
content distribution, and facilitating new application development. NDN has
attracted researchers from around the world, both in academia and industry, to
explore all aspects of its design, implementation, and applications. It is a
very prominent realization of the vision for Information-Centric Networking
(ICN), around which a growing research community has formed over the past
several years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A full exploration and examination of
future Internet architecture designs like NDN, and ICN more broadly, require
working prototypes, evaluation tools, and experimentation platforms, which are
the core infrastructure that this project aims to develop. More specifically,
building upon the existing NDN research, this project will develop for the
research community more robust, extensible, and well-documented implementations
of the (i) NDN software forwarder providing core network functionality, (ii)
libraries of essential features to support application development, (iii) a
routing protocol to connect NDN nodes, (iv) NDN simulator and emulator packages,
lab testbed, and global testbed for realistic evaluations and experimentation,
and (v) demonstration kits, tools, documentations, and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As the first comprehensive
infrastructure to support NDN and ICN research, it will make significant impacts
in several ways. First, by making NDN systems available on multiple platforms
and accessible to all interested researchers and students, this infrastructure
will enable new research opportunities and help grow the research community.
Second, through venues such as academic conferences, community meetings, and the
open-source development approach, the research community will be involved in
both the development and the use of the infrastructure, contributing to and
benefiting from the success of the project. Finally, the development and the use
of the infrastructure provide a great education opportunity to train graduate
and undergraduate students in thinking forward while experimenting with a
running system.