* 1629358
* DMREF: Analysis and Optimization of Polymer Networks for Emerging Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeremiah Johnson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Polymers are ubiquitous in our world. Many applications require the use of
materials with lightweight, but high mechanical strength. For this purpose,
polymer networks are made by interconnecting the individual polymer fibers. To
enable the fabrication of network materials with fewer defects and superior
properties, Professors Johnson and Olsen of Massachusetts Institute of
Technology seek to develop experimental and theoretical strategies for preparing
new polymer networks and understanding their structures at the molecular level.
The project aims to gain important fundamental knowledge for guiding the design
of next-generation materials for biomedical applications, light harvesting, and
membrane technology. The broader impacts of the project involve
interdisciplinary research training of graduate and undergraduate students
through a strong collaboration between experiment and theory. The research team
also develops hands-on teaching modules on polymer gels for middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three complementary research components
in this project that are co-funded by the NSF Division of Chemistry and the
Division of Materials Research. The first part aims to develop experimental
techniques for quantitative analysis of defects in polymer networks. The second
part seeks to understand the relationship between network topology and monomer
feed rate and to develop new theoretical and computational methods to predict
how network topology relates to processing conditions. The final aim focuses on
the development of a new method for controlling network topology using light.