* 1629376
* XPS: EXPL: Write Locality Theory and Optimization for Hybrid Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Chen Ding, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 349,999.00

A limit on extreme scale computing is the capacity, speed, durability and most
importantly, energy efficiency of memory. Persistent memory is a disruptive
technology that drastically reduces memory cost and static power but introduces
the problems of slow writes and limited write endurance. An effective solution
is caching. However, existing caches have been designed for fast reads: they do
not minimize the number of write backs from cache to memory. The intellectual
merits of this project are sufficient theories and efficient techniques for
optimal write caching in future systems that use persistent memory. Caching, in
both software and hardware, is increasingly prevalent. Hardware caches serve
most of the memory accesses on commodity machines as well as super computers.
Software caches, e.g. Memcached used by Wikipedia and Facebook, serve most of
the data requests from online users. The project's broader significance and
importance are the broad benefits of cache optimization in scientific and
consumer computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the formal
concept of write locality and the theory and techniques to characterize locality
and optimize the cache. It has three parts. The first is write locality
modeling, which includes a set of metrics that can derive the amount of modified
data in cache and the write backs from cache to memory in cache of all sizes and
degrees of sharing. The second is deductive optimization, which mathematically
derives the cache performance of different task and data organizations and
selects the best solution among a combinatorial number of choices. The last is
system modeling and application optimization, which use write locality to model
software and hardware cache and to optimize a program.