* 1629045
* EXP: Inq-Blotter - A Real Time Alerting Tool to Transform Teachers' Assessment of Science Inquiry Practices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Janice Gobert, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects design and build new kinds of learning technologies
in order to explore their viability, to understand the challenges to using them
effectively, and to study their potential for fostering learning. This EXP
project addresses the need for real-time diagnostic tools for teachers that can
assess students' needs, i.e. provide formative assessment, in order to improve
science instruction. The project will extend, pilot, implement, and study Inq-
Blotter, a scalable, web-based alerting system that enables teachers' formative
assessment of middle school students' Physical Science scientific practices,
aligned to the newly released national framework Next Generation Science
Standards. The Inq-Blotter alerting system will be used in conjunction with Inq-
ITS (Inquiry Intelligent Tutoring System), in which students "show what they
know" by conducting inquiry with simulations. Students form questions, design
and conduct experiments, interpret data, warrant their claims with data, and
communicate their findings. As students work, they are assessed in real-time by
the algorithms of Inq-ITS. To complete the formative assessment loop, the Inq-
Blotter alerting tool sends real time alerts to teachers' laptops and
smartphones on students' inquiry skills so that the teachers know who needs the
most help and on which skills. Discourse between teachers and students will be
analyzed to better understand how this alerting system can support teachers'
real-time instruction of inquiry and how it can foster students to learn inquiry
practices in real-time and transfer them to subsequent activities, thereby
contributing to practical knowledge about how science inquiry is taught and
learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unique to Inq-ITS is its ability to automatically
assess inquiry using algorithms based on knowledge-engineering and data mining,
making reliable alerting possible. By adding logging and timestamping to Inq-
Blotter of every interaction a teacher has with its interface, the PIs will
introduce the ability to capture and analyze teacher-student interactions on an
extremely fine-grained scale, in turn allowing for maximum leverage of the
algorithmic assessment capability of Inq-ITS. This combination of measuring
students' inquiry practices in real-time at scale with a technological tool that
facilitates real-time, targeted instruction could revolutionize how teachers
interact with students during inquiry-based science instruction. The project
will advance the state of the art of using a technology-based approach to close
the formative assessment loop for the ill-defined domain of science inquiry.
This research will also evince the broader principles surrounding this
technological genre so as to guide the design of human-computer interfaces of
other alerting tools for teachers and inform how learning-analytics techniques
can best be utilized in such tools.