* 1629439
* Role of protein nanowires in metal cycling and mineralization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gemma Reguera, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2021
* USD 152,021.00

Geobacter bacteria are recognized as important agents in the cycling of iron and
manganese. These bacteria "breath" iron and manganese oxides, a process that
requires the cells to produce hair-like filaments (pili) to bind the minerals
and discharge onto them electrons generated in their metabolism. The surface of
these biological "nanowires" is decorated with pockets that could trap many
other metals, particularly those that are positively charged (cationic metals).
This suggests that the range of metals that Geobacter bacteria can cycle and
mineralize is far greater than currently acknowledged. This project will
investigate the metal spectrum that Geobacter cells can bind and mineralized
with their conductive pili. This research will advance NSF's Mission "to promote
the progress of science" by studying a novel form of microbial energy
transduction that has global implications in nature. Not only are the metals
targeted in these studies naturally abundant, they are also byproducts of many
industrial activities and accumulate at toxic levels as highly mobile forms,
which are rapidly introduced into the food chain and increase the risk of
exposure. Investigating biological mechanisms for their immobilization will
provide the fundamental knowledge needed to develop technologies for biomining
and bioremediation, thus addressing a national need. The research is also
intertwined with educational efforts directed at training young professionals at
the interface of biology and geology, but with deep understanding of physics,
chemistry, and engineering. Efforts are also aimed at training future educators
and stirring their motivation to engage in outreach projects that promote
science communication and inclusion.

This project will focus on Geobacter bacteria, the only microorganisms described
to date that use protein nanowires as electronic conduits between the cell and
extracellular metal electron acceptors. Each pilus fiber is an assembly of the
same peptide subunit (the pilin) and exposes on its surface many carboxyl side
chain ligands, which could bind cationic metals and position them optimally for
their reduction. The investigator will test this in a series of experiments that
evaluate the effect of piliation, pilus conductivity, and charge of the putative
metal traps to bind and reductively precipitate trivalent cobalt (Co3+),
divalent cadmium (Cd2+) and monovalent silver (Ag+) metal cations. These
cationic metals are found in environments where iron reduction by Geobacter spp.
is an active process, a process mediated by protein nanowires, and mineralized
concomitantly to the reduction of iron oxides. This suggests that the Geobacter
pili also mediate the reductive precipitation of the soluble metal cations,
which one can assess in biological assays coupled to microscopic examination of
the cells and bulk X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES) spectroscopic
analyses. The researcher will also collect the LIII-edge extended X-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra from the pili-associated mineral to
model the atomic coordination about the metal. This will allow to characterize
the mineral phase and identify the nanowire ligands that are responsible for
metal mineralization.