* 1629398
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Integration of Computation and Experiments to Design a Versatile Platform for Crystal Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 969,570.00

1629398/1628960&lt;br/&gt;Palmer, Jeremy/Rioux, Robert
M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses improved designs of crystalline
zeolite materials used in applications ranging from catalysis and energy storage
to electronics design. The nanometer sized pores of the zeolite materials are
ideally suited for a wide range of separations and selective catalytic
conversions in the chemical and petroleum industries. A promising strategy for
improving the properties of zeolites is to tune crystal shape and size using
targeted synthetic approaches. The overall goal of this project is to develop
computer simulation methods for rapidly identifying small-molecule compounds
known as growth modifiers that can be used to control zeolite crystal shape and
size. This will accelerate the development of new catalysts, adsorbents, and
separations materials for converting inexpensive and abundant sources of natural
gas into fuels and high-valued compounds while simultaneously lowering toxic
emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technique that is broadly utilized in both
natural and synthetic crystallization to control crystal habit and morphology is
the use of modifiers, which are molecular (or macromolecular) additives that
possess an affinity for selectively adsorbing on specific crystal faces and
altering the anisotropic rate(s) of growth. The most critical challenge in this
field of research, irrespective of the material and application, is the
incomplete understanding of the molecular-level interactions and thermodynamic
driving forces that govern the adsorption and binding specificity of modifiers
to different crystal surfaces. The focus of this project is to integrate zeolite
synthesis, characterization, and modeling to develop an experimentally-validated
computational platform for characterizing growth modifier effects on
crystallization based on equilibrium adsorption properties. This will be
achieved by addressing three specific aims: (1) develop, validate, and
iteratively refine density functional theory and molecular simulation models for
predicting modifier adsorption using experimental benchmark data; (2) assess
model predictability and transferability to other modifier-zeolite systems; and
(3) elucidate structure-property relationships as a means of establishing
guidelines for modifier selection. This computational platform will improve our
understanding of the mechanisms governing modifier efficacy and specificity,
thereby providing a foundation for identifying effective modifiers and
potentially accelerating their discovery by two orders of magnitude. The
fundamental knowledge gained from this project will serve as a translational
guide for the rational design of growth modifiers, fostering the development of
improved strategies for controlling crystallization processes relevant to
applications ranging from catalysis to separations and adsorption. The project
will also provide educational and outreach components to K-12 students and
undergraduates, including opportunities for Houston-area high school students to
build molecular zeolite models.