* 1629819
* 2016 Summer School and Dynamical Core Model Intercomparison Project; Boulder, Colorado; June 6-17, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Paul Ullrich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

To advance the Dynamical Core Model Intercomparison Project (DCMIP) project and
provide a unique educational opportunity for students, a multidisciplinary two-
week summer school and model intercomparison project, will be held at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) June 6-17, 2016. It will build
on previous intercomparison efforts by addressing key outstanding issues in
global atmospheric models, incorporate international participation, and provide
a unique training experience for the future generation of climate scientists.
Special attention is paid to the role of simplified physical parameterizations,
physics-dynamics coupling, non-hydrostatic atmospheric modeling and variable-
resolution global modeling. The summer school and model intercomparison project
promote active learning, innovation, discovery, mentorship and the integration
of science and education.

The workshop will advance our knowledge of (a) the relative behaviors exhibited
by atmospheric dynamical cores, (b) differences that arise among mechanisms for
coupling the physical parameterizations and dynamical core, and (c) the impacts
of variable-resolution refinement regions and transition zones in global
atmospheric simulations. Notably, the use of idealized test cases isolating
specific phenomena gives us a unique opportunity to assess specific differences
that arise due to the choice of dynamical core. A key outcome of the workshop
will be the development of a standard test case suite and benchmark set of
simulations that can be used for assessment of any future dynamical core.

The NSF funding is primarily for the attendance of graduate and/or postdoctoral
students.