* 1629935
* II-EN: Radio Testbed Upgrade to Enable Wideband and MIMO Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Vuk Marojevic, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 616,000.00

The project upgrades the Cognitive Radio Network Testbed (CORNET) at Virginia
Tech (VT) by adding new processing, networking and radio frequency (RF) hardware
and software and redesigning the testbed architecture to enable cutting edge
research across many engineering and science disciplines. CORNET currently
comprises 48 software programmable radio nodes that have facilitated
experimental research and education in wireless communications for seven years.
The upgrade will add the necessary radio and computing infrastructure to support
compelling CISE research and experimentation in emerging and new
technological/regulatory/economic areas in communications, computing and
transportation, among others, through collaborations with computer science,
electrical and computer engineering and aerospace and ocean engineering
researchers at Virginia Tech. The new CORNET testbed enables advancing research
in radio frequency (RF) spectrum access, resource virtualization for effective
on demand service provisioning through sharing, and federation of distributed
resources (RF spectrum, radio nodes, computing nodes, testbeds) with
applications to coexistence of government commercial&lt;br/&gt;communications
systems and radars, autonomous vehicles, fifth generation (5G) cellular
communications, Internet of Things, and many others. The proposed upgrades are
needed to enable CORNET to continue to serve cross department and
interdisciplinary research needs at Virginia Tech. The testbed allows a diverse
student and faculty population to learn, cooperate and innovate in science and
technology across several disciplines. The educational activities include
extending undergraduate and graduate classes at Virginia Tech with experimental
hands on sessions that leverage the new testbed
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three core
thrusts: (a) Hardware upgrade, (b) Network/resource management upgrade
(virtualization, computing clusters, better scheduling), (c) User software
upgrade (preconfigured experiments &amp; tutorials). The hardware upgrade adds
30 wide-band Ettus Research USRP X310 software defined radio (SDR) front ends
(X310s) with 60 wide-band daughter boards and multiple antennas. A high
performance computing cluster consisting of 30 multi-core servers to form a
nontraditional shared baseband processing center. The distributed RF front ends
are connected to the central computing cluster through a dedicated 10 Gbps
Ethernet network that allows flexible association. Proposed software upgrades
allow resource virtualization for efficient radio, computing and network
resource sharing and better support for user and experiment management. One of
the four indoor testbed floors will be equipped with 12 pairs of X310s that can
be configured for MIMO operation or use as transceiver and monitor. Additional
X310 pairs will be installed, one pair on each of the remaining three floors,
and current hardware redeployed to support as many concurrent users and use case
scenarios as possible. The configuration enables experimental investigation of
spatial multiplexing, diversity, beam forming, and direction-finding techniques
and related communication protocols. The monitoring configuration facilitates
spectrum sharing research and education by providing real-time and identifiable
spectra for each transmitter to be analyzed, logged, or displayed as needed to
enable an experiment, tutorial, or contest. Basic tutorials will be developed to
enable effective access and use of the testbed by a broad population of
researchers and students at Virginia Tech.