* 1629625
* XPS:FULL: MSLO-JS: Towards Multi-SLO-Guaranteed per-Job Scheduling in Datacenters
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Hong Jiang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 815,950.00

Today's datacenters enable a wide range of applications with diverse service-
level &lt;br/&gt;objectives (SLOs), e.g., user-facing applications such as web
searches and disaster &lt;br/&gt;recoveries that require real-time or near-real-
time responses, calling for stringent job &lt;br/&gt;latency and throughput
guarantees. However, due to the lack of a proper abstraction, &lt;br/&gt;the
existing SLO-aware job resource provisioning approaches are platform dependent
&lt;br/&gt;and trial-and-error by design. The proposed solution presents a new
abstraction that &lt;br/&gt;provides an effective separation of concerns and
thus makes it possible to develop &lt;br/&gt;platform-independent, portable
algorithms that translate diverse job SLOs into exact &lt;br/&gt;performance
objectives (a.k.a. budgets) for constituent tasks, resulting in &lt;br/&gt;SLO-
guaranteed job resource provisioning. The approach proposed can be proven
&lt;br/&gt;by design and is expected to provide (a) important insights into
computer systems &lt;br/&gt;and architecture designs with high performance
guarantees and cost-effectiveness; &lt;br/&gt;and (b) significant improvements
in performance guarantees and resource utilization, &lt;br/&gt;and the reduction
of operating cost for the increasingly popular cloud computing
&lt;br/&gt;environment. It is also expected to encourage academia-and-
industry,interdisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;and cross-layer
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research develops a sound
theoretical foundation to enable &lt;br/&gt;SLO-guaranteed job resource
provisioning. It explores fundamental design principles &lt;br/&gt;and is cross-
layer by design, involving a two-layer design, from applications to runtime
&lt;br/&gt;system and system architecture. At the upper, application layer, with
any given job &lt;br/&gt;workflow represented in the form of Directed Acyclic
Graphs (DAGs), the job SLOs are &lt;br/&gt;translated into precise latency
budgets for individual task nodes in the DAG, independent &lt;br/&gt;of the
underlying system to be used to run the job. At the lower, runtime system layer,
the &lt;br/&gt;subsystems for individual task nodes are selected and the
resources are allocated to meet &lt;br/&gt;all the task performance budgets and
hence the job SLOs. This proposed research will &lt;br/&gt;enable us to develop
job resource provisioning algorithms with SLO guarantee, while
&lt;br/&gt;allowing for service consolidation and achieving high datacenter
resource utilization.