* 1629713
* II-NEW: A Beamspace Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) Testbed for Centimeter-Wave and Millimeter-Wave Wireless
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Akbar Sayeed, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 775,000.00

This project will develop a state-of-the-art network testbed for facilitating
research and development of emerging wireless technologies at centimeter-wave
(cmW) and millimeter-wave (mmW) frequencies, spanning 10GHz-300GHz. These
technologies are the focus on intense current interest in both academia and
industry as part of the emerging vision for 5G wireless standards and beyond for
meeting the exploding data rate requirements imposed by proliferating mobile
devices. It is widely recognized that current wireless networks operating below
6GHz simply do not have enough spectrum to sustain this growth and deliver the
expected multi-Gigabit data rates. Multi-Gigabit speeds are possible in cmW/mmW
due to the orders-of-magnitude larger available bandwidth compared to existing
systems and the highly directional propagation through narrow beams. This
project aims to exploit both features and will develop a versatile and powerful
platform for integrated theoretical-experimental research on timely, critical
and multi-faceted problems to advance the frontier of cmW/mmW technology. It
will facilitate new collaborations with many researchers involved in cmW/mmW
wireless, and also provide synergy with related advances in photonics, mixed
signal circuits, and antennas. The testbed development will provide a unique
teaching, learning and training opportunity for the students and faculty,
spanning wireless communications, signal processing, networking, radio-frequency
hardware and antenna design, FPGA (field programmable gate array) development,
and system design, measurement, and troubleshooting. Five industrial and
academic partners will contribute to the project. The PIs' plan to leverage the
testbed for new curriculum development emphasizing interdisciplinary research
and hands-on experience, and for outreach to middle and high schools. The
testbed will also facilitate industrial-academic collaboration to accelerate the
development of cmW/mmW technology and to enhance US leadership in 5G wireless
and beyond.

The multi-beam multiple input multiple output (MB-MIMO) wireless testbed network
being developed consists of four nodes that will serve as access points (APs)
and six nodes that will serve as mobile stations (MSs) or clients. The AP nodes
will enable wideband high-dimensional MIMO functionality supported by a novel
antenna array and a new FPGA-based digital backend. A key feature of the testbed
is that the AP nodes are equipped with a state-of-the-art physical (PHY) layer
based on a novel continuous aperture phased (CAP) MIMO architecture for hybrid
analog-digital wideband multi-beamforming. The testbed builds on the successful
development of a 10GHz CAP-MIMO prototype for proof-of-concept, and a new
recently developed 28GHz prototype with advanced functionality. The CAP-MIMO
architecture exploits the expected channel sparsity in beamspace for
performance-complexity optimization and enables a practical approach to
achieving the critical capability of electronic multi-beam steering and data
multiplexing. The testbed will also enable multi-beam wideband MIMO channel
measurements at spatial resolutions that are critical to the development of
cmW/mmW systems but unavailable at this time. It will open new research avenues
in several areas, including channel measurement and modeling, PHY design,
interaction between PHY and higher layers, and new use cases, such as sensing.