* 1629444
* XPS: FULL: Bridging Parallel and Queueing-Theoretic Scheduling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Umut Acar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 991,000.00

Scheduling computational tasks on computational resources has played a
fundamental role in computer science since the 1950s. One branch of scheduling
(queueing theoretic) has focused on analyzing multiple sequential jobs competing
for a shared resource with the goal of minimizing the response time (latency)
over all jobs. Most operating system and server schedulers use ideas developed
as part of this research. Another branch of scheduling (parallel) has focused on
analyzing a single parallel job running on a dedicated parallel machine, with
the goal of maximizing efficiency (throughput) of the job. Most schedulers for
dynamically parallel programs use ideas developed as part of this research.
Until recently these branches were adequate on their own, and the communities
studying them have had very little interaction. However, the mainstream
availability of parallel hardware, and the need to handle many parallel jobs
sharing a single resource, has recently changed this. The goal of this project
is to bridge the two branches by developing new theory and practical scheduling
algorithms, that can handle multiple dynamically parallel jobs competing for
shared resources. The project brings together PIs with expertise from each area,
and will apply and combine techniques from each area. The project has the
potential to have significant broad impact on the theory and practice of widely
used shared parallel systems. The project will include an educational outreach
component in which the PIs will include ideas from the project in courses they
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to tackle the union of
these two domains. The PIs will develop scheduling algorithms for a stream of
arriving jobs, where the jobs are complex multi-threaded fine-grained parallel
jobs with dynamic parallelism and dependencies among tasks. The research will
address three specific challenges, as follows. Challenge 1, Statistical
Characterization/Modeling: Scheduling multiple jobs requires knowing something
about when each job will complete and what it will do in the future, such as the
number of tasks it will create or the granularity of tasks. A significant part
of the project is devoted to measuring parallel jobs and statistically
characterizing them to create simple models of their behavior. Challenge 2,
Algorithmic Development and Analysis: There are currently no scheduling
algorithms for the problem that is being considered. While queueing theory touts
the optimality of always running the job with the "shortest expected remaining
time," this has little meaning when jobs are parallel and there are many
resources. New theorems and analytical techniques will be developed. Challenge
3, Implementation and Benchmarking: An important component of the project will
be the implementation and benchmarking of our algorithms on prototype systems.
The PIs will investigate multiple metrics including latency, throughput,
fairness, and robustness.