* 1629437
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: HomeSHARE - Home-based Smart Health Applications across Research Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kelly Caine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 14,455.00

This project provides funding to develop HomeSHARE, a community infrastructure
for doing research around aging in place that provides the community with access
to a network of smart homes with a standard sensor package and the ability to
add custom technology as needed for specific studies. Currently, although there
is much research interest in using home-based sensors to model mobility and
health, setting up these kinds of studies is difficult and there is little
infrastructure to support it. This tends to cause duplicate, wasted effort in
setting up sites; very small numbers of participating homes, limiting the
generality and power of the research; and incompatibilities in the setups used
by different teams that make it hard to put different pieces of research
together. To address this, the team will create the backbone of a large network
of homes that can support research that uses sensed information to predict a
number of attributes about older adults at home, including mobility patterns,
mental health, hospital readmissions, and energy use. The main activities are to
deploy their suite of sensors and other computing technology in a total of 30
volunteers' homes at two partner institutions, and develop software that
connects and collects data from the homes. Team members will work carefully with
residents of the homes to cover the costs of technologies and address privacy
and technical concerns they have. They will also create materials that cover
technical, ethical, and training issues that other researchers can use both as
client sites to conduct studies using the existing network (for a fee to cover
operating costs) and as installation sites who join the network directly by
adding their own smart homes. To manage demand for the infrastructure, the team
will create a governing board of researchers drawn initially from the awardees'
institutions. This board will review the technology needs and applications for
studies to ensure that they meet the ethical and research goals of the project.
The hope is that through this research, the infrastructure will pay for itself
many times over not just in knowledge but in improved health and life quality
outcomes for older adults; it will also provide service- and project-based
learning opportunities for a number of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The network will consist of a number of homes
using a standardized technology package to ensure consistent, reliable, and
secure data collection and data sharing across the many studies while also
addressing privacy and acceptability concerns for participants. It will include
a number of window and door sensors, a wearable activity tracker, a tablet
computer for communicating with and collecting survey information from
residents, a wireless access point and paid internet access, and an in-home
server that manages the installed devices and data. The servers will be
connected and managed with an enhanced version of the team's existing Piloteur
framework for reliable sensor data collection in homes. Piloteur will be
extended to support larger-scale deployment and changes in the standard
technology package demanded by technology advances and research needs, and will
add a layer for storing, securing, and sharing the data using existing open
standards. Installation sites will be run by technicians supervised by the
research team. The technicians will handle recruiting and communicating with
participants as well as deploying and debugging the technology installations in
the homes, and participants will be recruited to ensure diversity along
demographic factors that should improve generalizability of results. The team
will also develop materials to make it easy for other researchers to use and
join the network. For those who want to access the existing network for
individual studies, they will develop a HomeSHARE Study Packet that includes
guidance on study planning and costs, technical aspects of the homes and data,
and sample materials from prior studies that have been approved by Institutional
Review Boards (IRBs). For those who want to join the network, they will create a
HomeSHARE Site Kit that includes information about best practices around
recruitment and installation, sample IRB materials for existing sites, and
standard budget information useful for writing proposals to join the network. A
leadership committee initially composed of researchers from the awardee
institutions will oversee project management, including the coordination of
studies using the network, the evolution of the standard technology package, the
addition of new installation sites to the network, and the administration of the
data sharing and costs.