* 1629287
* Estimating the Net Benefits of Environmental, Public Health and Safety Regulations
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Adam Finkel, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 581,312.00

Collectively, federal regulations to improve human health, safety, and the
environment avert many thousands of deaths, and reduce non-fatal harm by
hundreds of thousands of cases, but also impose costs up to billions of dollars
annually. To become legally binding, almost all high-cost regulations must pass
a "cost-benefit test": the monetized value of the harms averted by the rule
exceeds costs to regulated industries and consumers. Cost-benefit analysis (CBA)
has been controversial in its monetary translation of life-saving benefits and
how to estimate risks with incomplete data, but ironically, the mechanics of how
to quantify effects of both risk reduction and cost on human welfare has
received less attention. This project presumes that two changes to current
methods of benefit and cost valuation might change which regulations pass or
fail the cost-benefit test, and alter the optimal level of stringency for a
given regulation. First, typical estimates of the value of a statistical life
deliberately exclude all consideration of altruism, using the estimated private
value of reducing a small risk of one's own death to value public programs
benefiting the entire nation. Secondly, CBA implicitly dictates that the total
benefit of a program is proportional to the number of lives saved, regardless of
whether some people face much higher mortality risks, and CBA also considers
only the regulation's total cost, even if costs affect some businesses or
consumers disproportionately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two large survey experiments
probe these simplified assumptions and offer principled, quantitative
alternatives. The researchers estimate the "value of a statistical life with
shared purpose" by querying subjects on the perceived desirability of
hypothetical regulations in which the scale of tradeoffs is billions of dollars
imposed on everyone and thousands of randomly saved lives, not a personal
tradeoff between a few dollars and a tiny fraction of one life. This survey also
tests for (and isolates) the effects of: (1) "paternalistic" altruism (concern
for others' longevity even if those others would prefer greater risk at less
regulatory cost) versus "non-paternalistic" altruism (considering others' net
benefits including their costs); and (2) posing tradeoffs as both a user-defined
acceptable cost for a fixed number of lives saved and a user-defined minimum
number of lives saved for a fixed regulatory cost. A second survey tests the
assumption that individual levels of risk and cost can be summed over the
population without being disaggregated (i.e., that individuals regard the
welfare effects of risk or cost at any level as linear), using subjects' ratings
of how dire they view varying hypothetical individual probabilities of harm and
varying personal costs. This experiment reveals whether there are de minimus
levels of either risk or cost that can sensibly be rounded to zero, and/or
intolerably high levels whose effects are not merely proportional to those at
lower levels. The project also enlists practitioners and users of CBA in the
federal government as a separate subject group for the two surveys, and
culminates with two workshops for these officials to discuss research results
and whether adding "shared purpose" and nonlinear valuation of risk and cost
might have changed important prior decisions about which regulatory option in
fact had the greatest net benefit to society.