* 1629451
* EXP: Tenacity: Self-Regulation of Attention and Its Relationship with Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 744,014.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. So-called 'non-cognitive' factors such as grit, tenacity, and
perseverance have drawn renewed attention from researchers, policy makers, and
the public. Cutting across all three concepts is the fundamental idea of 'self-
regulation,' or the ability to monitor and appropriately regulate one's
attention. Self-regulation skills are critical for success in today's era of
rapid technological and social change. Luckily, evidence is accumulating that
such skills can be taught. New technologies for collecting, tracking, and
reporting data offer great promise for developing and scaffolding students'
ability to self-regulate. One such tool is the touch tablet application entitled
Tenacity. Tenacity is a tablet based application for middle schoolers designed
to train and track the user's attentional self-regulation. Prior research found
that, after using the tool for roughly 20 minutes per day for a period of two
weeks, students showed significant improvements in self-regulation skills. In
this project, researchers will adapt the existing prototype application for more
accessible use on wearable devices, add a data dashboard for monitoring one's
skill development over time, and then assess its use and effectiveness in the
natural environment both inside and outside the classroom. The results will be a
market ready application for wearable technologies (smart watches) for self-
regulating attention, empirical results assessing its use and impact among
everyday users, and the public release on iTunes of the software for
dissemination and assessment at mass scale.

Specifically, the research team will adapt the current prototype for use on the
Apple iWatch, debug and polish its ability to train and track breath-counting
accuracy intermittently throughout the day, and implement data visualization
tools for use by users and their parents and teachers. They will then assess its
effectiveness in an 8-week experimental study using a pretest/posttest control
group design with teens (13-15 years old). Finally, they will release the tool
to the public via the Apple App Store to examine its use and effectiveness at
mass scale. The hypothesis is that systematic use of Tenacity will result in
behavior change on standard measures for attention, foster a more productive
conceptual understanding of self-regulation, increase self-regulation skills on
first order tasks (i.e., direct skill improvement measures within the
application) and second order variables, such as school grades and social
wellbeing, and increase school affiliation.