* 1629809
* AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Reliable Quantum Communication and Computation in the Presence of Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Paul Beame, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2017
* USD 402,930.00

Quantum information science has yielded deep theoretical insights into the
nature of information and communication, while raising the hope of dramatically
more capable computers and communication networks. But the achievement of these
practical goals is hindered by the inherent fragility of quantum information.
Traditional approaches for obtaining reliability through simple redundancy do
not work; instead, fault tolerance must, and can, in principle, be obtained
through subtler techniques that contrive to measure and correct errors without
learning anything about the encoded data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately
present methods for fault-tolerant quantum computation require significant
overhead, and present understanding of quantum channel capacities remain very
limited. For example, no quantum code is known on which arbitrary fault-tolerant
quantum computation can be performed without leaving the code space. And only
very recently was it discovered that classical information can be sent at rates
exceeding the long-conjectured Holevo bound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will attempt to develop new methods for reliable quantum communication and
computation in the presence of noise. First, the research will push the
capabilities and boundaries of quantum error-correction techniques, both by
extending and delineating the types of correctable errors, and by determining
the scenarios under which such error correction is or is not possible. The
second goal is to develop the deep but heretofore largely unexplored connections
between quantum codes, entanglement, and many-body physics, complexity theory,
cryptography and high-dimensional geometry. The objective is to advance our
understanding both of quantum codes as well as the related areas of mathematics,
physics and computer science. Finally the team will seek to elucidate the subtle
differences between quantum communication and its closest classical analog---
private communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research endeavors to
contribute definitively to realistic embodiments of large-scale quantum
computers, which would dramatically improve mankind's ability to process and
communicate information. And the research program itself is deeply
interdisciplinary, bringing together physicists, computer scientists and
mathematicians from industry and academia, and training students and postdocs.