* 1629059
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Emergent Functionalities in 3d/5d Multinary Chalcogenides and Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Vanderbilt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,812,749.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is focused on
understanding and enlarging the class of materials in which atoms from the
bottom rows of the periodic table play an important role. Crystalline compounds
containing these elements have an interrelated set of properties including
strong coupling between electron motion and spin, unusual magnetic behavior,
broader electronic energy bands, and a tendency to pairwise attraction of
neighboring atoms. Special attention is given to the exploration of layered
materials that include tellurium, as these show a wide variety of structural
motifs. First-principles computational methods are used to investigate candidate
materials of this class, identifying those that appear most promising as targets
for directed synthesis and in-depth experimental study. Comparisons between
theory and experiment provide feedback to refocus the theoretical and
computational effort. The team provides capabilities in bulk and thin-film
materials growth coupled to characterization using optical, scattering, and
scanning-probe techniques. The activity provides educational opportunities
through the involvement of undergraduates in research, the coordination with
outreach programs at the Liberty Science Center in New Jersey, and the
organization of topical workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in 5d materials and 3d/5d hybrids has
blossomed in recent years in response to scientific advances and applications in
the areas of hard magnets, topological insulators, multiferroics,
superconductors, and thermoelectrics. These materials are unique for several
reasons. First, strong spin-orbit coupling competes with magnetic, crystal-
field, many-body Coulomb, and other interactions in such a way as to drive new
physical behaviors, such as the effective spin 1/2 state that emerges in certain
iridates. Second, the bonding interactions associated with the larger size of
the 5d orbitals promotes inter-cation dimerization in pairwise, chain-like, and
other complex orderings. Third, the relativistic shifts in orbital energies,
combined with spin-orbit coupling and bandwidth effects, can drive band
inversions leading to topological phases and enhanced Rashba splittings. In
3d/5d hybrid materials, the interplay of these properties with the strong
magnetic moments and correlation effects associate with the3d ions provides
greater chemical flexibility and functional richness. The goal of the present
project is to improve the understanding of how spin-orbit coupling enhances
functionality in compounds containing 3d and 5d ions, and clarify how properties
depend on control parameters such as spin-orbit strength, d-shell filling,
dimensionality, and structural distortions. Specifically, the activity consists
of a concerted theoretical and experimental exploration of materials in which 3d
and 5d transition-metal sites coexist in multicomponent chalcogenide and oxide
crystals and films. The unique physical and chemical properties of these
materials provide a platform for a materials discovery paradigm in which first-
principles computational methods are used to investigate candidate materials,
identifying those that appear most promising as targets for directed synthesis
and in-depth experimental study. Target materials systems include under-explored
binary 5d tellurides, ternary 3d-5d tellurides and selenides, 3d-5d chalcogenide
superlattices, and 3d-5d hexagonal chain compounds. The research also targets
the synthesis of new materials and nanostructures for topological states
including quantum anomalous Hall, strong topological insulator, and Weyl
semimetal phases.&lt;br/&gt;The methods used in the research are diverse.
Comparison between theory and experiment provides feedback to refocus the
theoretical and computational effort, which is carried out using first-
principles methods including density-functional theory and dynamical mean-field
theory. The team provides capabilities in both bulk and thin-film (molecular
beam epitaxy and pulsed-laser deposition) growth, while the understanding and
optimization of the unique materials properties is facilitated using X-ray,
optical, scanning tunneling, transport, and neutron scattering techniques.