* 1629840
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Rheological Structure of the North Anatolian Fault Zone, Turkey
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 304,438.00

The main objective of this project is to understand how earthquakes occur along
major strike-slip faults, such as the San Andreas fault in California. More
specifically, the research team will identify which part of the tectonic plates
are the strongest and which ones are the weakest, which can feed into better
models of the mechanics of strike-slip faults. To do this, the team will study
parts of the North Anatolian Fault zone, a strike-slip fault in Turkey with a
geometry very similar to the San Andreas and the site of many destructive
earthquakes, such as the 1999 Izmit and Dücze earthquakes and the 2011 Van
earthquake. There are two unique attributes of the North Anatolian Fault zone
that make it particularly useful for understanding the earthquake cycle and the
strength of the plate. First, small pieces of the upper mantle (such rocks are
known as xenoliths) are brought up in volcanoes along the fault. These rocks
allow for direct evaluation of how the Earth?s mantle, which is thought to be
the strongest part of a tectonic plate, is deformed in a strike-slip
fault. Second, entire blocks of the middle crust, the other candidate for the
strongest part of a tectonic plate, have been brought up along the North
Anatolian Fault. Thus, in this region, the team can directly test the relative
strengths of the different parts of the tectonic plates in a strike-slip
setting. The project will advance desired societal outcomes through training of
U.S. graduate students and promote international scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will
integrate empirical and theoretical approaches to generate new understanding of
lithospheric rheology in strike-slip fault systems. The aim of the project is to
study the North Anatolian Fault zone, Turkey, by integrating field
investigations, microstructural analysis, and geodynamic modeling. The research
team will use a series of unique exposures in the Sea of Marmara region of the
North Anatolian Fault zone, to better understand the rheological behavior of the
upper mantle and middle crust in the same, active strike-slip fault. First, the
researchers will study a series of mantle xenoliths exposed in two volcanic
centers along the north margin of the fault system. The mechanical properties,
and volatile content of the lithospheric mantle at 45 to 80 km below the surface
will be characterized from the xenoliths. Second, the team will characterize
lateral variations in finite strain, stress, viscosity, and deformation
mechanisms of samples from a mid-crustal exposure that was affected by strike-
slip deformation in the North Anatolian Fault zone and was subsequently exhumed.
Various rheological models that predict different strength variations with depth
will be tested by comparing the mid-crustal to the upper mantle strength.
Geodynamic modeling will simulate how the different lithospheric layers interact
during the seismic cycle in strike-slip systems, testing specifically whether
the brittle fault and ductile layers interact to control the stress level
throughout the lithosphere. These models will be evaluated against the stress
and deformation conditions estimated from xenoliths and mid-crustal exposures,
as well as surface velocities before and after the 1999 Izmit and Dücze
earthquakes. By comparing the North Anatolian Fault zone with results from other
strike-slip fault systems, this project aims at characterizing the strength of
strike-slip systems in general. In particular, it will address if strike-slip
fault systems have systematically different characteristics than fault zones in
other tectonic environments, and whether a lithosphere feedback between brittle
and ductile layers controls the mechanical behavior of strike-slip fault
zones. The goal of the project is to produce an accurate understanding of the
seismic cycle on active strike-slip fault systems, and hence, the work is
relevant to seismic hazards in western Turkey and elsewhere.