* 1629422
* Neighborhood Demand Estimation and Ex-Ante Policy Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Jesse Gregory, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 157,590.00

Government housing policies, such as the Housing Choice Voucher program or the
Empowerment Zone program, can change the relative prices of neighborhoods,
thereby altering households' demand for neighborhoods. Despite the importance of
understanding these neighborhood demand patterns, the existing literature has
not estimated neighborhood demand systems intended to capture realistic
substitution patterns and evaluate the housing policies. This project seeks to
understand how government housing policies would affect demand for
neighborhoods, equilibrium neighborhood demographic compositions and price-
levels, and ultimately households' well-being. The investigators will develop
empirically tractable models of local demand for neighborhoods which place
minimal ex ante restrictions on the substitutability of neighborhoods. Using
detailed panel data on location choices and credit information, the
investigators will estimate the models and further perform program evaluations
of existing and yet-to-be enacted government housing programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and estimates empirically tractable
models of local demand for neighborhoods that allow for unrestricted patterns of
substitution across neighborhoods and elasticities of demand for particular
neighborhoods. The demand model achieves flexibility by positing a large number
of observable types of households, with minimal restrictions on how each type's
flow indirect utility differs across neighborhoods. Using panel data on the
location choices from 1999 to present for 5% of the U.S. population from the
NYFRB/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel, the investigators estimate the model's
structural parameters by maximum likelihood, exploiting the conditional-choice-
probability inversion techniques of Hotz and Miller (1993) and Arcidiacono and
Miller (2011) to construct likelihood functions without having to repeatedly
solve the full dynamic model. The estimated model facilitates a variety of
policy evaluation methodologies, including regression analyses that treat the
estimated neighborhood demand elasticities as explanatory variables; partial
equilibrium counterfactual policy experiments that study the impact of various
subsidies on households' location choices; and equilibrium counterfactual policy
experiments that study the impact of various housing policies on neighborhood
rent levels and neighborhood demographic compositions. Specifically, the
investigators use the estimated model to study the following policy questions:
(1) In which locations is the incidence of place-based subsidies -- Empowerment
Zones, Enterprise Zones, etc. -- likely to fall on prior zone residents?; (2)
Would a large expansion to Section 8-style housing vouchers lead to more mixed-
income neighborhoods in equilibrium?; (3) What targeting rules for housing
vouchers are most likely to induce households to choose neighborhoods that
contribute positively to their children's academic achievement?