* 1629052
* DMREF:Collaborative Research: Designing Optimal Nanoparticle Shapes and Ligand Parameters for Polymer-Grafted Nanoparticle Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Brian Benicewicz, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 295,824.00

The project investigates a new class of polymer-grafted membranes that have the
potential to improve gas separation characteristics for a wide range of
applications in the environmental, energy, and chemical manufacturing areas. The
polymer-grafted membranes consist of a matrix of inorganic nanoparticles with
grafted polymer ligands that show improved separation characteristics compared
to commonly used organic membranes. The project will use a combination of
theoretical analysis, synthesis, and experimental evaluation to optimize both
the nanoparticle shape and the polymer properties, while providing basic
understanding of the mechanism by which the grafted structures improve
separation efficiency. The project will also provide educational and outreach
components including research opportunities for undergraduate students from
Florida A&M University (a historically black college or university). While a key
class of organic membranes is made of glassy polymers, they suffer from the fact
that their permeability (i.e., product flux) and selectivity (i.e., purity of
the desired species) are inversely correlated. Preliminary work using assemblies
of inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) chemically grafted with polymer chains show
that these materials offer unexpected advantages in this context. Based on
simulations it is postulated that the self-assembly of the polymer grafted-NPs
into ordered arrays creates "interstitial spaces" which can only be filled by
stretching some of the grafted chains ("entropic frustration"). Placing solute
molecules relieves this frustration and yields the improved separation ability.
The study is predicated on the hypothesis that non-spherical nanoparticles may
offer a separation advantage due to packing into meta-crystals that are
stabilized by vacancies (of order 10%). Non-spherical NP-grafted polymers will
be studied by (1) developing novel theoretical design tools to find the NP
shapes and grafting parameters that optimize the permeability and selectivity of
relevant gas mixtures; and (2) synthesizing polymer grafted non-spherical NPs,
assembling them into membranes and characterizing their multi-scale structure
and dynamics using a suite of tools including advanced scattering techniques
(x-ray, neutron) coupled with theory. This should allow for the validation of
the design results and help close the prediction-synthesis-characterization
loop. This validated design software will be made freely available to the
research community. In addition to the educational collaboration with Florida
A&M University, the investigators will also recruit underrepresented students
(both women and minorities) with the dual goals of placing Columbia University
students into local industry and attracting industrial participants into higher
degree and/or refresher programs at Columbia.