* 1629233
* Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) - streamlining data curation to accelerate scientific inquiry
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Corinna Gries, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,688,617.00

Global-scale environmental issues such as food security, the spread of disease,
and the availability of clean water emphasize the importance of environmental
data that can address specific problems while also providing predictions of
future conditions. The increasing availability of large volumes of different
kinds of data offers new opportunities to address these issues. This project
will provide the environmental research community with efficient and reliable
means for data management, storage, and sharing. The facilities developed will
allow researchers, policy makers, managers, and other stakeholders to bring
relevant data to bear on complex environmental questions. Modern approaches that
encourage geographically distributed collaboration will be used to increase
efficiency of data curation beyond those available for single projects. The
project will provide the training and skills needed to overcome technical and
social barriers to collaboration, thereby enhancing infrastructure to address
ecological questions over broad spatial and temporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in environmental sciences is often
conducted by individual investigators over small spatial and temporal scales
under funding models that provide limited capacity for data curation or sharing.
Data that are archived in a stable, accessible repository and that are
accompanied by appropriate metadata benefit both data producers and consumers
through improved discoverability and reliability. This project builds on
expertise available in the Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) community to
provide these benefits. The project will leverage the collective experience of
the LTER community to improve data management across a broad community through
communication and collaboration. Training activities will be developed that
range from the basics of metadata creation to the adoption of standardized best
practices for specific types of data. The development of templates for
describing a data lifecycle will accelerate the availability of data for
synthesis. The project will promote shared technology to develop more commonly
usable and more efficient approaches to data curation workflows. Participants in
training workshops will be trained in developing workflow technology, re-using
existing workflows, and archiving and sharing their developments. Through these
workshops, together with community-level centers of expertise, and individual-
based skill exchanges, the project will increase the volume of data available
along with data discoverability and reuse. The Provenance Aware Synthesis
Architecture repository will ensure long-term availability of data and open data
access through federations such as DataONE. This repository will be expanded in
several ways to accommodate a broader community of data providers and users.
Enhancements include a scalable user identity management system, improved data
documentation procedures to simplify data submission for non-technical users,
and expanded data-quality assurance tools to accommodate a broader range of
community practices. These advances will accelerate scientific inquiry through
data curation and publication as well as through data discovery and integration.