* 1629230
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Nitride Discovery - Creating the Knowledge Base for Hard Coating Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 429,708.00

In applications where moving parts must be protected from excessive wear, hard
coatings are often applied to components. The class of hard ceramic materials
known as nitrides are often used for these coatings, but the performance of
nitride coatings is limited and often insufficient, leading to breakdown of
important components. New nitride materials have been predicted that are
expected to have the significantly improved properties for wear resistance and
corrosion resistance. Fabrication of these materials, however, remains a
challenge. This award supports research to systematically determine the
conditions that will enable the manufacture of these desired new nitride
materials. The results of this research will accelerate discovery of hard, wear-
resistant and corrosion-resistant coatings through a targeted synthesis
approach, yielding new coating materials for emerging applications including
fuel-efficient jet engines and gas turbines, environmentally-friendly lubricant-
free cutting tools, high-temperature concentrating solar power plants, and wind
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coatings-by-design approach in this work
facilitates the introduction of promising new nitrides, which have remained
unexplored because the traditional approach of simultaneously optimizing
composition, microstructure, and deposition process is too costly and slow. This
method enables a deterministic pathway to ascertain the processing parameter
space to achieve the desired composition and microstructure from thermodynamic
and kinetic parameters, and then synthesize the coating experimentally. This
method is based on an iterative combination of experiments and density
functional theory calculations, to determine nitrogen incorporation kinetics and
phase formation during deposition of transition metal nitride coatings. The
research effort focuses primarily on the systematic determination of reaction
and diffusion rates and local equilibria at the surface of growing transition
metal nitride layers during coating synthesis. A quantitative model will be
developed that predicts composition and phase of deposited nitrides as a
function of incident ion energetics and growth temperature and pressure, using
both measured and calculated values. The model will be verified by experimental
coating deposition. Deposition of new super-hard, tough, and vacancy-stabilized
nitride phases will be explored. Data collected in this research will be made
publicly available through an open online database.