* 1629431
* XPS: FULL: Breaking the Scalability Wall of Shared Memory through Fast On-Chip Wireless Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* David Padua, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 879,180.00

As transistor sizes continue to scale, we are about to witness stunning levels
of chip integration, with 1,000 cores on a single die. At these processor
counts, it has been an accepted tenet among many researchers that shared memory
does not scale. The reason is the high hardware overhead of supporting fine-
grain synchronization and communication between so many cores. This research
seeks to disprove this. It shows that fine-grain data sharing is scalable with
the use of fast on-chip wireless communication. The Principal Investigators
(PIs) augment each core with a transceiver that enables on-chip broadcast in 5-7
nanoseconds, and design a multicore architecture that supports it. Then, the PIs
implement synchronization and communication primitives and libraries that
support fine-grain data sharing with an unprecendented low overhead. With these
primitives, the PIs redesign popular runtimes such as OpenMP or Cilk, and
rethink algorithms and applications. This effort contributes to
multidisciplinary research and education on scalable parallel computing at the
University of Illinois. The PIs will enhance the courses that they teach in
parallel computer architecture, parallel compilation techniques, and parallel
programming. They are also working with the department to broaden the course
offerings with multidisciplinary undergraduate courses in the general area of
parallel computing --- as part of Illinois' CS+X major structure, where X can be
a large number of other disciplines. The work will also have an impact on
industry, since it addresses a real, very timely technical problem:
extraordinary on-chip integration coupled with unscalable fine-grain data
sharing. The ability to work closely with IBM Research and Microsoft Research
will be crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a cross-disciplinary effort that
cuts across three areas: architecture, programming systems, and algorithms and
applications. The architecture work focuses on supporting on-chip wireless
communication by extending cache coherence transactions, trading-off wireless
power for error rate, and supporting multiple wireless channels. The programming
systems work focuses on redesigning the MPI communication primitives, making
shared memory scalable for OpenMP and Cilk, and designing a best-effort API for
application resiliency. The algorithms and applications work focuses on studying
and developing algorithms and applicationsÂ  that can take advantage of the
architecture. The PIs study problems in the areas of graphs, numerics, dynamic
programming, recognition-mining-synthesis, and MapReduce.