* 1629382
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Accelerated discovery of chalcogenides for enhanced functionality in magnetotransport, multiorbital superconductivity, and topological applications
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Nandini Trivedi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 479,998.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Over the past decades, the discovery, understanding
and applications of new solid-state materials have played a crucial role in
modern technology. However, devices based on silicon have hit a bottleneck in
terms of the amount of information that can be packed in nano-dimensions and
still avoid the complications due to heating. This project will develop new
paradigms, new principles and new classes of materials to design the next
generation of multifunctional devices. The materials will be drawn from the
heavy transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) that combine topology and
magnetism together to yield unusual magneto-transport properties. There is the
potential to develop topological field effect transistors and thermomagnetic
spintronic devices. The specific goals of this project are to synthesize TMDCs
in bulk and thin film form, to explore their electronic properties, and compare
with theoretical calculations. A tight-knit feedback loop where theory guides
experiments and experiments inform theory will allow the team to design
materials with the desired functionality. The projects will have multiple
impacts on a broader scale through (i) synthesis of new materials that can be
dispersed to the condensed matter community; (ii) creation and dissemination of
modeling tools, algorithms, and software for computer-aided materials design;
(iii) generation of web-based access and dissemination of materials-specific
data toward enhancement of infrastructure for materials research; (iv) creation
of a new online course and comprehensive training of graduate and undergraduate
students across the breadth of topics (chemistry of materials, complementary
spectroscopies, and multi-scale theoretical modeling); (v) coordination with
local museums and schools to bring the excitement of new quantum materials to
the public and the next generation of scientists; and (vi) and a new face to
physics with three women in leadership positions in this
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The comparable energy scales
of spin-orbit coupling and Coulomb correlations and the multi-pronged tunability
by chemistry, electric field and strain afforded by van-der-Waals coupled
layered structures of TMDCs, opens up an entirely new and rich parameter regime
not available previously. The goal of this project is to explore TMDCs through a
combination of synthesis, characterization and theoretical modeling and to
determine a pathway for predicting and controlling the magneto-transport
properties of these materials. The project team consists of PIs with
complementary skills. The team is synergistic with expertise in material
synthesis in bulk and thin film form, ability to perform spectroscopy in real-
and momentum space, and advanced theoretical and computational methods. Combined
with expertise to calculate the inhomogeneous response for a single realization
of disorder, the goal is to generate universal phase diagrams in multi-parameter
space. By following both materials- and computation- inspired routes,
accelerated discovery of materials with desired optimized functionalities by an
iterative feedback loop is inevitable. Some of the expected major breakthroughs
from this project are: (1) Discovery and optimization of novel electronic phases
with unusual magneto-transport properties. (2) Discovery of topologically
protected surface states in the background of textured magnetic phases,
revealing phenomena richer than topological band insulators. (3) Emergence of
new paradigms for superconductivity in insulators or multi-band low density
TMDCs, beyond the standard BCS theory of a Fermi surface instability. (4) The
detection of spatially periodically modulated superconducting phases in strongly
spin-orbit coupled systems. (5) Synthesis of new and optimization of existing
materials with desired functionalities by tuning chemistry, strain and electric
field gating.