* 1629194
* Quasi-Experimental Study of the Effects of Homelessness Prevention
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* James Sullivan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 239,464.00

This project aims at determining the impact of providing temporary financial
assistance to those at risk of homelessness on several important outcomes:
homelessness, housing stability, and crime. The investigators will evaluate a
Homelessness Prevention Call Center (HPCC) in a major U.S. city to determine how
this assistance impacts these outcomes. This project will test whether those
receiving temporary financial assistance are less likely to become homeless,
move, or be arrested. The investigators will further examine whether the cost of
reducing homelessness and improving other outcomes through financial assistance
is outweighed by the benefits. Therefore, this research will allow policymakers
to make more informed decisions when allocating limited resources to reduce
homelessness, putting resources towards the most effective programs. Moreover,
this project will examine how this prevention service impacts different types of
recipients, so the results will importantly inform service providers who run
these call centers. Providers can also make more informed choices, targeting
emergency funding to those most likely to benefit from them, which will improve
the cost effectiveness of homelessness prevention
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first quasi-experimental
study to examine the impact of temporary financial assistance on homelessness,
housing stability, and crime. While the gold standard in impact evaluation is a
randomized controlled trial study, this is challenging in homeless policy
studies because the population being served is both extremely vulnerable and
highly mobile. These factors make keeping track of recipients of programming
difficult and costly. Consequently, there is only limited information about the
impact of homelessness prevention programs. Thus, this research fills an
important gap in the literature on the effect of homelessness prevention
programs. This project is possible because of the unique way in which the HPCC
connects eligible callers with financial assistance, and because of a rich set
of outcomes available through several different administrative data sources.
This research will be informative not only to scholars who study housing
programs, but also to policymakers and program managers who struggle to decide
how best to distribute limited resources among prevention and treatment services
to address the issue of homelessness.