* 1629201
* XPS: EXPL: Exploring the Design Space of Augmented Memory Controllers with Native Support for In-Memory Data Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Tong Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,621.00

As the cornerstone of the global information technology infrastructure, large-
scale parallel processing platforms host an ever-increasing amount of real-time
in-memory computing applications (e.g., data/graph analytics, transaction
processing, machine learning, and business intelligence). As a result, large-
scale distributed in-memory data storage has become a very important component
in large-scale parallel processing platforms. Nevertheless, conventional
realization of in-memory data storage tends to occupy a large amount of memory
capacity and consume substantial CPU cycles. This makes in-memory data storage
subject to a significant cost overhead in terms of both memory and CPU
resources. How well this cost challenge can be addressed largely determines the
overall system performance and efficiency of future large-scale parallel
processing platforms. This project will have significant impact on the research
community and the industry, while providing interdisciplinary training of
graduate and undergraduate students, and draw broad participation of students of
different levels and backgrounds in collaborative research and education.

This project proposes to improve the cost effectiveness of in-memory data
storage by enhancing the function and data processing capability of the hardware
memory controller. In particular, the in-memory filesystem and memory controller
will explicitly cooperate together across the software/hardware layers and share
the responsibility for optimizing the implementation of in-memory data storage.
Such a cross-layer design framework enables the use of memory footprint
reduction techniques to reduce memory resource cost without incurring CPU
overhead. Moreover, the memory controller will integrate customized hardware
engines that can carry out certain storage-oriented data processing tasks. Those
customized storage data processing engines in the memory controller can be
leveraged to directly reduce the memory and CPU resources overhead in the
realization of in-memory data storage. An FPGA-based platform will be
implemented to carry out experiments to further empirically validate the
feasibility and potential effectiveness of the developed design solutions.