* 1629850
* CI-EN: Enhancement of ECJ, A High-Performance Community Metaheuristics Library for Stochastic Optimization Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sean Luke, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 482,991.00

This grant funds the transformation of the popular ECJ software library into a
general-purpose software tool for performing so-called "metaheuristic"
optimization. Metaheuristics are methods for coming up with optimal (or close to
optimal) solutions to hard problems, and particularly ones for which there are
no straightforward ways to find answers. For example, imagine if we wanted to
find the best walking behavior for a robot, but didn't really know how to
program one, we could instead "evolve" a solution by trying many arbitrary
behaviors in a simulator, then selecting the best-performing ones and breeding
them to produce a new generation, then testing them in the simulator, and so on.
This approach, a form of genetic programming, is an example of a metaheuristic.
Metaheuristics are widely used in science and engineering for everything from
robot design to protein folding to simulation of migration patterns.
Metaheuristics are also popular in teaching computer science as many of them are
closely related to similar notions drawn from genetics and population biology,
swarms, human organizational behavior, and physics. While ECJ is particularly
popular for genetic programming and related methods, there is no standard
community tool for metaheuristics as a whole. This grant will enable development
of such a tool. This would give students and researchers alike access to a broad
range of metaheuristics algorithms to compare and use, make those algorithms
usable in massively parallel environments, and provide a centralized environment
for community contribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metaheuristics are stochastic
optimization techniques in wide use for those classes of problems, such as the
parameters of complex simulations, for which there is no "principled"
optimization approach. ECJ is a popular tool certain subfamilies of
metaheuristics, such as genetic programming and genetic algorithms, which have
dominated much of the early research in the area. But much recent metaheuristics
research has branched out to areas such as multiobjective optimization,
combinatorial optimization, constrained methods, model-fitting, and so on, and
has led to a host of new techniques. These techniques have a high degree of
commonality, and the metheuristics community often seeks to "mix and match"
elements from these techniques in order to customize methods for certain
problems, and also to compare them against one another. However there is at
present no popular common library to make this possible. This proposal aims to
extend and enhance ECJ into a community metaheuristics toolkit for both
researchers and educators. Enhancements will include: a testing harness and
various testing facilities; new metaheuristics in single-state optimization,
hybrid architectures, NEAT, combinatorial optimization, and model-fitting
optimization; GUI and Eclipse environments; statistics utilities; and new
benchmark problems for testing metaheuristics methods. The work will be done in
conjunction with the metheuristics research community and also with teachers
from high schools in the Washington D.C. area to assess the utility of the tool
in STEM education.