* 1629347
* XPS: FULL: Collaborative Research: Enabling Scalable Cloud And Edge-device Integration Using Cross-layer Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Feng Qian, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2018
* USD 247,013.00

The importance of energy efficiency today is felt across all domains of
computing. In particular, personal computing platforms are becoming increasingly
wireless and miniaturized, but limited by trade-offs between battery lifetimes
and computational requirements. Developing energy-efficient solutions is
critical to the survival of the semiconductor industry. This project seeks to
develop new abstractions to effectively utilize network and cloud resources to
enable a scalable and energy-efficient mobile computing paradigm. The proposed
hierarchical cloud computing architecture with cross-layer parallelism provides
innovation for teaching networking, system, and architecture courses. It
provides a platform to engage undergraduate students and community service
agencies. Finally, this project is expected to have a high impact on global
societies and economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed distributed system
architecture leverages cross-layer parallelism to enable scalable, adaptive, and
intelligent integration between edge mobile devices and clouds by intelligently
partitioning and replicating computation between mobile devices and the cloud.
&lt;br/&gt;This project redefines two classes of programming abstractions that
enable seamless usage of: (1) network resources at transport layers and (2) any
form of cloud resources whether local or remote. The proposed architecture
strategically leverages network-level parallelism that transparently utilizes
multiple network paths, in-network cloudlets that offer highly customized
accelerators for offloaded computation, and remote cloud servers with more
plentiful resources. These three components work in a coordinated way with
awareness of the dynamic communication overhead, thereby ensuring scalability
and energy efficiency of supporting both compute and network intensive
distributed applications on mobile platforms.