* 1629949
* II-New: CyPhyHouse: A Laboratory for Evolving Distributed and Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Sibin Mohan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 626,000.00

This project develops CyPhyHouse: an innovation playground for enabling rapid
development and deployment of distributed and mobile robotic systems.
Distributed robotic systems are at the frontier of research in manufacturing,
transportation, logistics, and exploration. Yet, managing and experimenting with
distributed robotic platforms can be a laborious and error-prone undertaking.
Deploying a new algorithm on an existing hardware platform can take weeks;
porting an application to a new platform can take months. This high overhead of
deploying robotic applications takes a toll on the robustness of the scientific
claims made in this area. CyPhyHouse provides application programming interfaces
(APIs) and an easy to use software environment which reduces the above efforts
by orders of magnitude. This new infrastructure provides easy to use, open
source, software and hardware platform for rapidly programming, simulating,
deploying, and visualizing a rich family of applications on heterogeneous fleet
of vehicles. It thus will enable large-scale experimental research needed for
developing computing systems that support and rely on coordinated and controlled
mobility, for example, in the study of mobility of WiFi access points, debuggers
for mobile systems, and augmented-reality with real and virtual Unmanned
Autonomous Vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hardware infrastructure consists
of a collection of about mobile vehicle platforms (a mix of ground vehicles and
aerial vehicles). The software infrastructure consists of APIs for coordination
and control of the heterogeneous fleet based on distributed shared-memory (DSM)
and reach-avoid functions. These APIs are integrated in an extension of a
familiar programming language (e.g., C++ or Java) and have implementations on
all the hardware platforms. Supporting software tools are developed for
compilation, simulation, logging, and monitoring that help with development and
deployment of application programs. The infrastructure enables a researcher to
quickly deploy experiments involving dozens of vehicles and visualize them. The
same high-level application programs will be portable across different hardware
platforms. The platform enables large-scale, repeatable experimental research
needed for developing computing systems that support and rely on coordinated and
controlled mobility. All the software and hardware specifications will be open-
sourced and made available to the broader community. In several graduate
courses, CyPhyHouse will provide students with a realistic platform for
projects. It aims to help train graduate students and provide research
opportunities for undergraduates in areas like cyber-physical systems, mobile
and distributed computing, and multi-agent systems.