* 1629214
* Generation, functionalization, and distribution of de novo designed protein nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Todd Yeates, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,350,000.00

Proteins are large molecules that have complex three-dimensional (3D) structures
that give them sophisticated cellular functions. To provide access to complex
protein structures not found in nature, Professors Baker and King of the
University of Washington and Professor Yeates of University of California Los
Angeles collaborate to compute and precisely control the assembly of proteins
into 3D architectures. The research team shares these capabilities with the
engineering and scientific communities and constructs a Designed Protein
Nanomaterial (DPN) database to enable others to rapidly build on these advances.
The long-term goal is to allow predictable design of protein-based materials for
use in a wide range of applications such as targeted drug delivery, functional
materials for energy conversion, and other chemical technologies. The
interdisciplinary project provides excellent research training opportunities to
postdoctoral researchers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
integrates theory, computation and experiment to close the design cycle on
creation of new protein-based nanomaterials that are not currently accessible
using conventional protein engineering approaches. It develops strategies to
prepare more robust and complex protein nanomaterials from modular building
blocks, whose 3D assembly and disassembly can occur in response to changes in
environmental conditions. The research team recruits citizen scientists to solve
complex protein design problems using Foldit, and to provide innovative input to
enhance functionalization of such materials.