* 1629983
* Workshop on Language Processing and Language Evolution: Special Session at the 2017 CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 42,499.00

It is a central goal of the field of linguistics to characterize the process by
which the human brain links the forms of language with some representation of
meaning--a process unique to humans. Understanding this process has practical
value in a world where language barriers and foreign language learning are
increasingly important, where new media and new forms of language use (for
example, as on the Internet) play an increasingly large role, and where
algorithms that seek to bestow computers with understanding of human languages
are proliferating and have increasing impact on day-to-day life. Within the
field of psycholinguistics, the most common approach is to take languages as
given and to study the processes by which humans comprehend and produce
utterances in those languages. Here, using ideas from functional linguistics,
quantitative typology, and evolution, workshop participants will explore the
reverse approach. Taking some knowledge of human information processing as
given, participants will examine systematic differences among languages,
variation among grammatical constructions within languages, and the diachronic
emergence and development of language structures. Using this evolutionary view
of language, presenters will discuss novel hypotheses about the relationships
between processing and linguistic structure, and shed new light on how human
language operates both within speakers and over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is for a special conference session, Language Processing and Language
Evolution, to be held in conjunction with the 30th Annual CUNY Conference on
Human Sentence Processing. The CUNY Human Sentence Processing conference is the
premier event in North America for scientists interested in how humans
comprehend and produce language. The conference regularly receives well over 300
abstracts for roughly 35 oral presentation slots and 150 poster slots.
Approximately 400 scientists (faculty, postdocs, graduate and undergraduate
students) attend the conference as audience members and presenters. Conference
attendees come from all over the United States and Canada, and from Europe,
Australia, East Asia and Latin America. The conference has been remarkably
successful as an interdisciplinary forum, drawing researchers from the fields of
linguistics, psychology, computer science, education, neuroscience, and
philosophy. The special session is designed to extend our current knowledge of
language processing by providing a richer characterization of the linguistic
systems that humans learn and use, from the perspective of models of language
evolution: how these linguistic systems got to be the way they are. Workshop
participants will explore how human languages have and have not been shaped by
information processing constraints. The ultimate goal is to create a more
realistic and representative picture of diversity among languages and of how the
human mind represents and processes those languages.