* 1629346
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Materials Design of Correlated Metals as Novel Transparent Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Karin Rabe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 279,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Transparent conductors are a critical component in
many technologies affecting society, including solar cells, touch screens, flat
panel displays, light emitting diodes and lasers. Finding materials that combine
high electrical conductivity with excellent optical transparency in the visible
spectrum has proved challenging: metals typically are good conductors but
reflect rather than transmit visible light, while insulators like glass are
highly transparent but do not carry an electrical current. The goal of this
project is to pursue an unconventional paradigm, developed in previous work by
members of the project team, to discover and develop new transparent conducting
materials based on earth-abundant elements that exhibit substantially better
performance and can be made with lower cost than the long-standing industry-
standard indium-tin-oxide (ITO). Theoretical analysis combining mining of
databases of materials property measurements and computations with predictive
simulations of the structure and properties of candidate materials will be
closely integrated with efforts in the laboratory to synthesize, characterize
and optimize real materials. In the context of the Materials Genome Initiative
coordinating efforts across the nation to accelerate the discovery, development
and deployment of advanced materials, tools and techniques for integration of
theory and experiment in materials design that are developed in the course of
the project will be made available to the community to advance progress in
broader materials design challenges. Breakthroughs in the development of
transparent conductors will advance green technologies for energy generation,
lighting, and passive building designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: The conventional paradigm to combine the contradicted properties of
transparency and high electrical conductivity is to heavily dope a wide band gap
? thus transparent ? semiconductor to increase its electrical conductivity.
Rather than making a transparent semiconductor more conductive, the idea of the
new paradigm is to make a metal optically transparent. This can be done by
increasing the electron effective mass by correlation effects, which reduces the
metal reflectivity in the visible range, in targeted systems for which interband
transitions are above the visible range. The design space for the discovery of
new transparent conductors spans a wide range of families, including correlated
oxides, layered chalcogenides, pnictides, and intermetallic compounds. A
hierarchical three-level search approach will be pursued. First, material
candidates will be pre-screened in the available materials design space using
simple-to-apply qualifier criteria, followed by high-throughput first-principles
computations of crystal structure, electronic bands, and quantities related to
optical and electrical transport properties at the level of density functional
theory (DFT). At the third level, correlation effects will be studied within
density functional mean field theory (DMFT) to refine the lower level search
criteria and identify the most promising systems for further investigation. In
the laboratory, synthesis and characterization of the electrical transport and
optical properties of these candidate materials and comparison with theoretical
predictions will aid in the refinement of design principles and the expansion of
the set of transparent conducting materials available for technological
applications.