* 1629321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Investigating the Impact of the Civilian Conservation Corps Program on Health and Human Capital
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 15,803.00

This project aims at investigating the impacts of one of the New Deal employment
programs during the Great Depression, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC),
which employed young adults from impoverished families as conservation workers
in national and state parks. Due to the remote location of the CCC jobs,
participants had to move away from their homes in cities and into camps run by
military officers. Narrative evidence suggests that living in these camps led to
long-run health and career changes for participants. Though a large literature
in labor economics has examined various work programs and subsequent impacts on
employment, few studies have examined a program that was implemented on such a
large scale. This research is the first to analyze long-run impacts of a large-
scale unemployment relief program. This project will provide greater insight
into the impact of work training programs and mobility during the Great
Depression. Moreover, the project will inform policies regarding national work
programs, particularly for periods of economic
downturns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will examine the effect of CCC
participation on human capital attainment, migration, and health by analyzing a
novel dataset. This dataset will be composed of personnel records from the
Civilian Conservation Corps and individual records from both the 1930 and 1940
US censuses. The 20% sample of the 1930 census will provide a control group to
provide counterfactual outcomes for CCC enrollees. Both CCC enrollees and this
control group from 1930 will be matched to the 1940 census so that post-CCC
outcomes can be observed. Using this dataset, the investigator will estimate
treatment effects of CCC participation to examine the following questions: Did
the CCC influence migration across the country? Did participation in the CCC
improve participant's subsequent careers? Were participants able to achieve more
than they would have without the CCC?