* 1629124
* Collaborative Research: Trade and Informality in the Presence of Labor Market Frictions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 177,811.00

How does trade liberalization affect the labor market of natives? Recent
research exploring the Brazilian trade liberalization of the 1990s shows that
regions that were hit harder by the liberalization episode faced a strong
increase in unemployment and a less accentuated increase in informality in the
medium run. In the longer run, however, regions that were hit harder by trade
liberalization experienced a strong increase in informality, but no significant
increase in unemployment. This experience in Brazil is inconsistent with
traditional trade models which typically predict a decrease in informality after
a trade liberalization. This project will therefore investigate trade and
informality by developing a novel model of trade featuring heterogeneous firms,
informality, and labor market frictions. Ultimately, this project will improve
public understanding of trade and the informal sector, and further inform
policy-making about developing and emerging market economies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aiming to better understand the mechanisms through which
trade induced this reallocation and its consequences for welfare, this project
will develop a model of trade and labor market informality in the presence of
labor market frictions. In the model, heterogeneous firms endogenously choose in
what sector they wish to operate (formal or informal) and formal firms decide
what fraction of workers they wish to hire formally and informally. Labor market
frictions vary across formal and informal labor markets. The model will be
estimated by employing multiple sources of micro data. The investigators will
use the estimated model to address the following important questions: (1) To
what extent does the informal sector smooth labor market outcomes of workers
displaced from the formal sector due to trade liberalization; (2) How do
policies directed toward the informal sector (monitoring and regulation
enforcement, payroll taxes, revenue taxes, etc) interact with trade
liberalization; (3) How are the welfare consequences of trade affected by the
presence of the informal sector and by policies directed towards this sector;
(4) How can deregulation of the formal labor market affect the dynamics of trade
liberalization.