* 1629948
* International Workshop on Sustainable Smart Cities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Fouad Fouad, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 76,244.00

This workshop will bring together, in Egypt, 15 senior and 3 student
participants from the US to meet with approximately 60 participants from Egypt
and other countries in the Middle East and Europe to discuss and plan future
research on Sustainable Smart Cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on
sustainable urban infrastructure and living is urgently needed as the pace of
urbanization continues to increase. Some estimates suggest that by 2050 70% of
the world?s population will live in cities. Already nearly one billion people
live in urban slums that lack basic services like water and electricity. At the
same time, cities consume a tremendous share of resources like water and energy
for which demand globally is only increasing. Urbanization is increasing most
rapidly in developing countries, making the topic of sustainable cities
particularly valuable for collaboration between US and developing country
scientists. Egypt is a particularly valuable location for this meeting, with
Cairo facing some of the greatest urban infrastructure challenges of any city in
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the workshop are
to:&lt;br/&gt;A. Provide a forum for engineers, scientists and planners to
discuss current research on sustainable smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;B. Establish an
international collaborative research agenda and promote joint research
between&lt;br/&gt;C. US and Egyptian scientists in urban
sustainability&lt;br/&gt;D. Outline opportunities for junior researchers in the
form of training courses, fellowships, and educational
exchanges&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics proposed for the three-day meeting
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Sustainable Smart City Planning and
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;2. The Built Environment&lt;br/&gt;3. Economic Aspects
of Urban Development (Sustainable Smart Tourism)&lt;br/&gt;4. Impact of Smart
Cities on Health and Quality of Life,&lt;br/&gt;5. The Role of Higher Education
in Sustainable Smart Cities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching topic and
selected themes are timely. Research efforts are underway in the US and around
the world to find ways for cities to operate and grow that are efficient,
attractive and economical while also supporting the needs of residents. This
workshop will bring together experts from the US, Egypt, the rest of the Middle
East/North Africa (MENA) and Europe to share results, coordinate new
collaborative research endeavors and develop training materials, all of which
will be valuable in the US and around the world. Because this meeting will bring
together researchers committed to understanding and improving urban areas in
developing countries, the potential for valuable knowledge exchange and longer
term collaboration is tremendous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project
is provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering through the
US-Egypt Joint Fund.