* 1629613
* Social, Behavioral, and Academic Linkages throughout the Undergraduate Experience
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Leeat Yariv, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,882.00

The outcomes of higher education are a consequence of individuals' personality
traits and many&lt;br/&gt;dimensions of the university experience. The Caltech
Cohort Study (CCS) will track the entire&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate student body of
the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) over several years.
It&lt;br/&gt;uses repeated, incentivized surveys to elicit behavioral proxies:
risk aversion, strategic sophistication,&lt;br/&gt;competitiveness, social
behavior, etc. The results will be married with objective outcomes:
academic,&lt;br/&gt;social, and financial. The project will examine the
evolution of attributes over college years, the&lt;br/&gt;formation of social
interactions, and ultimately how certain attributes interact to produce
educational&lt;br/&gt;outcomes. The CCS also serves as an ideal environment for
answering fundamental questions about&lt;br/&gt;the external validity of
incentivized surveys and laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCS
has four unique features. First, Caltech's small size makes it possible to track
nearly&lt;br/&gt;the entire student body over time (90% of students completed
the first three surveys). Second, the&lt;br/&gt;survey design allows measurement
of a large set of behavioral traits for each individual. Third,&lt;br/&gt;the
repeated nature of the study makes it possible to track the stability of these
traits across time&lt;br/&gt;with minimal selection bias. Fourth, the array of
behavioral traits elicited can be tied to real-world&lt;br/&gt;behaviors and
outcomes. The combination of these elements should be invaluable for a large
battery&lt;br/&gt;of basic social science questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed study has the potential to improve the educational process in US higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding what impacts social and scholastic outcomes
will help design certain aspects of college&lt;br/&gt;education aimed at
increasing well-being and academic performance, as well as furthering gender
and&lt;br/&gt;racial equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on
three areas. First, the dataset's longitudinal nature will allow for a
careful&lt;br/&gt;inspection of the stability (or lack thereof) of a wide array
of behavioral attributes. Second, the rich&lt;br/&gt;data on different layers of
interactions over time (social, academic, and geographic) combined
with&lt;br/&gt;the comprehensive set of elicited attributes will allow us to
study network formation processes. Last,&lt;br/&gt;the data can be cross-checked
against Caltech's experimental laboratory data to examine the
impacts&lt;br/&gt;of selection into experiments as well as the differences in
responses occurring in the lab and outside.&lt;br/&gt;The survey will also allow
for a comparison of responses across other platforms and
populations.&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the detailed longitudinal data that will be
collected have the potential to uncover&lt;br/&gt;predictors of academic
outcomes (chosen major, grades, and graduation), and the channels
affecting&lt;br/&gt;the evolution of different traits.