* 1629914
* II-New: Infrastructure for Supporting Biomedical Application Algorithms, Runtime Development and Resource Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Xiaobo Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The research supported by the funded computing infrastructure focuses on
biomedical applications that must (i) process images or graph data of enormous
size, (ii) handle data with noise and deformation, and (iii) require tremendous
computational capability. One example problem being investigated is studying
breast cancer brain metastasis using large 3D microscopy fluorescence images.
Such biomedical applications can benefit greatly from both appropriate
heterogeneous computing infrastructure and concerted effort spanning from
algorithm development to effective mapping of algorithms to the computing
infrastructure. Furthermore, the infrastructure will provide a platform for
implementing a CS training plan of sufficient rigor for faculty, postdoctoral
researchers and students to share with peer institutions, and will be integrated
into multiple existing outreach programs to underrepresented minority, high
school teachers and students such as the Notre Dame Summer Scholars Research
Computing Track and the NSF REU Site program in Computational
Science.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;A top-down, vertically integrated theme is
adopted in the proposed research effort. Successful completion of the work will
advance computational approaches for tackling fundamental problems in treating
cancer and other diseases, and for discovering new classes of algorithms that
mimic the sensory processing and reasoning abilities of biological systems. The
effort will also offer powerful visualization and graph analysis techniques for
processing and making inferences from large and complex image/graph data, which
are essential for many biomedical and other applications. Finally, it will lead
to the development of application-driven resource management mechanisms that are
indispensable for effectively exploiting any GPU-based heterogeneous computing
infrastructure.