* 1629055
* Moral Hazard, Learning and Temporal Dependence: Dynamic Incentive Problems in Firms and Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Venkataraman Bhaskar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2019
* USD 271,474.00

Incentive problems are pervasive in modern societies - they arise within firms,
in the interaction between suppliers and consumers, and in online markets. This
project examines how incentive problems arise in dynamic environments, and the
mechanisms that may be used in order to achieve socially efficient outcomes. The
first part of the project will examine dynamic incentive problems that arise
when a firm introduces new technology. The efficacy of the technology may be
uncertain, and both firm and workers will learn about its effects over time. The
PIs will examine how these incentive problems may impede innovation, and the
mechanisms that firms may use in order to mitigate inefficiency. A second part
examines the interaction between supermarkets and their consumers. Supermarkets
have an incentive to know the consumer's past shopping behavior, and the project
will examine how the privacy of the consumer's transactions improves her
bargaining position. The third part of the project will examine the functioning
of illegal online drugs markets such as Silk Road and its successors. Despite
the fact that these markets are illegal, are operated by criminals and buyers
and sellers are anonymous, they appear to function exceedingly well. The project
will examine how these markets overcome the severe moral hazard problems, and
the mechanisms that law enforcement agencies may use in order to hinder illegal
online trade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of incentive problems usually
involves two dichotomous classes of model: moral hazard (or hidden action)
models and hidden information models. This project examines how moral hazard in
dynamic environments gives rise to hidden information. This phenomenon may arise
when firm and workers are learning about an uncertain technology or when the
future costs/benefits to an agent depend upon her current actions, and these
actions are unobserved by the principal or by third parties. The proposed papers
deal with a diversity of economic situations, from incentive provision within
firms to the pricing strategies of supermarkets. They are unified by a common
methodological theme and insight. The action of an agent today affects her
preferences and payoffs tomorrow. Third parties, such as the principal or a
future supplier to the consumer, do not observe the agent's action. This gives
rise to a form of endogenous asymmetric information. Asymmetric information may
only be latent, i.e. it may not arise on the equilibrium path, as is the case
where the agent's equilibrium strategy is a pure strategy. Nonetheless, its
possibility affects the incentive problem. When the agent randomizes, so that
the equilibrium is in mixed strategies, asymmetric information arises on the
path of play, giving rise to a mechanism design or screening problem. The
novelty here is that the distribution of types is endogenous. This project will
examine how hidden action with dynamic consequences aggravates agency problems
in long-term relationships; how the nature of technology affects the choice of
organizational form; how inter-temporal price competition between firms such as
supermarkets affects the efficiency of allocations. The analysis will focus on
situations where parties cannot make long term commitments and will rely on
insights and techniques from the theory of dynamic games, combined with those
from contract theory and mechanism design. &lt;br/&gt;This project also has a
second component, that is motivated by the rise of online illegal drugs markets,
such as Silk Road. Moral hazard problems would seem to be severe, given that
agents are anonymous and have no legal recourse. How are moral hazard problems
solved in competitive markets? How do these solutions affect price mark-ups and
the extent of price dispersion? Can moral hazard be leveraged in order to hinder
the illegal drugs trade? The research in this section builds on the theory of
repeated games, played in the context of competitive markets. It also has an
empirical component, that builds on data that is being collected by the PI and
his collaborators since August 2013, accessing and scraping data from dark-net
websites.