* 1629060
* Bilateral Bargaining through the Lens of Big Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven Tadelis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 403,036.00

Bilateral bargaining is pervasive, and has been part of human interaction for
millennia. People bargain over retail goods, professional services, salaries,
real estate, territorial boundaries, mergers and acquisitions, household chores,
and more. For an economic activity that is so pervasive, it has proven to be one
that is not easily analyzed, let alone fully understood. Because bargaining
parties are uncertain about the bargaining position of their counterpart in
bargaining, economic theory suggests that there will be inefficiencies such as
unnecessary delays in reaching an agreement or even the complete breakdown of
negotiations. This project will explore how these informational frictions affect
bargaining and whether they can be mitigated with the use of communication
between the parties, which serves as a framework for modeling negotiation. The
investigators will explore the communication process in bargaining using modern
tools from economic theory, econometrics and machine learning in order to bridge
some of the gap between the abundance of theory and the rather slim availability
of empirical studies on how people actually bargain. In the process, the
investigators will employ and train graduate and undergraduate students who will
learn how to exploit and analyze "big data" and how to tie the data insights to
theoretical notions of bargaining from game theory and economics. The results
will shed light on how to facilitate bargaining and create value, which is
likely to play an important role with the growing prevalence of online
bargaining platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on access to
novel data of millions of bargaining transactions on the eBay.com "Best Offer"
platform, where sellers offer items at a listed price and invite buyers to
engage in alternating, sequential-offer bargaining. The nature of the data --
high-dimensional and sometimes sparse and unstructured -- not only benefits
from, but in fact requires the collaboration of methods from economics,
statistics and machine learning, which explains the diversity of approaches and
the composition of the group of investigators for this project. The
investigators use a variety of methods that will exploit the unique and
expansive data obtained from eBay.com. A first set of analyses describe the way
in which bargaining unfolds between buyer-seller pairs on eBay.com. A second set
of analyses explore the communication between agents engaged in bargaining using
data from eBay that contains stored messages sent alongside offers for Best
Offer listings. The probability of certain outcomes (e.g., a counteroffer from
the seller) will be modeled using machine learning techniques, and within the
resulting predictive models the investigators will isolate the role of message
content. This content effect will provide a descriptive analysis of the
importance of communication in bargaining. The last set of analyses explores the
role of "cheap talk" in bargaining. Based on theoretical models of cheap talk
signaling, the investigators propose a set of tests that unveil equilibrium
behavior and apply a set of regression discontinuity techniques to verify the
ways in which behavior conforms with equilibrium theory predictions.