* 1629071
* DMREF - Biologically Interfaced Single Layer Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Mehmet Sarikaya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,319,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In biology, a signal is passed from one biomolecule
to another, such as in antigen-antibody interactions, or between a protein and
DNA, and this function is transmitted via molecular interactions between their
molecular structures. The result, in each case, is manifested as part of life's
function. Similarly, in this project, peptides (small proteins) with short amino
acid sequences will be designed and engineered to induce signal transduction
into single atomic layer solids. As a consequence, the functions of the devices
made from these thin solids will be monitored and controlled by carefully
designed peptide sequences. Since the devices will be interfaced with peptides,
they could be integrated with biosensors and bioenergetics devices of the
future. The project will be executed at the cross-sections of diverse scientific
fields such as molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, physics, mathematics
and engineering. The research, therefore, is expected to result in the
development of novel experimental and computational tools that will enable the
design of hybrid bio/solid devices, creating a common scientific language that
could be used collectively in these diverse and convergent fields. The project
will establish research training opportunities for the next generation of
creative scientists who will be unique members of interdisciplinary engineers
and technologists contributing to the continuing tradition of creativity, the
hallmark of innovation in the USA. The transformative nature of the project will
also lead to advanced intellectual properties and patents, enhancing the
competitive edge of the USA at the global platform.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The key reason for this project is the shortcoming of
knowledge of how biology interacts with man-made solids at the molecular scale.
Despite numerous studies in this major topic, the understanding has so far been
far from complete. This knowledge is essential to integrate devices with living
systems, for example, for future health monitoring. Based on the collective
expertise and facilities of the investigators, the project addresses these
limitations by three major innovations: coded recognition of simple crystals,
such as single atomic layer materials, by peptides; designed functional moieties
via state-of-the-art predictive computational modeling and genetics; and,
finally, advanced test-bed demonstrations of hybrid devices. Controlling the
intrinsic properties of materials using simple biomolecules, i.e., engineered
peptides, will be carried out by integrated experimental and computational
approaches working iteratively and in tandem, in three Task Areas: Formation of
self-organized structures of peptides on single atomic layer solids (Task-1),
with interface structures and physical properties (predicted by advanced
computational modeling) induced by biomolecular coding (Task-2), and
interrogated by test-bed measurements (Task-3), for example in a field effect
transistor. The overall work, therefore, will establish the foundations of
biologically-coded physical properties of engineered solids. Finally, the
bio/solid interfaces are also analogous to a famous technological problem,
namely coherent interfaces in compound semiconductors developed during the 80s
that enabled today's electronics (lap-top computers, cell phones, etc.,). It is
conceivable that through this project a more complete understanding of the
intricacies of the bio/nano interface structures, molecular recognition
characteristics of different peptide sequences, and physical changes in the 2D
materials across the interfaces, one can make major strides in the in vivo
integration of the worlds of biology and solid-state devices of the future with
unprecedented functionalities.