* 1629791
* CI-P: Planning for a Community Infrastructure to Enable Pocket-Scale Data Management Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Oliver Kennedy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The world's 2 billion smartphones and 4 million apps have become a large part of
most people's communication and computing experiences. Most apps need to store
structured data like contacts, address book entries, or even your top scores in
Candy Crush. Most smartphones include a piece of software called an embedded
database that helps apps save and access this information. For example, both
Android phones and iPhones include a popular embedded database called SQLite.
SQLite is used a lot -- the project team measured nearly 180 thousand SQLite
requests per day on an average Android phone in real-world use. The team also
found that lots of these requests use SQLite inefficiently, resulting in shorter
battery life, slower performance, and potentially wasted plan data. To do
better, research is need to understand what is the problems are. As part of this
project, the team is gathering the real-world data and building the
infrastructure that researchers will need to make better embedded databases,
leading to longer battery life, more responsive phones, and longer-lasting plan
data.

This is the planning stage of an overarching project that aims to make it easier
for researchers to explore the challenges of "Pocket-Scale" data. While server-
class database systems are frequently tested and tuned for continuous high-
throughput query processing, embedded databases experience lower-volume but
bursty workloads produced by interactive use. These workloads are far more
dynamic, making them much harder to reproduce, which in turn make it hard to
evaluate new techniques and systems in realistic settings. The ultimate goal for
this community infrastructure (CI) project is to establish a self-sustaining
community of researchers and industrial partners who create and share workload
traces, benchmarks, instrumentation, and visualization tools, making it easier
to evaluate innovations in embedded database technology. In this CI planning
stage, the project team is building up the community by reaching out to
potential partners from multiple areas including databases, mobile systems,
programming languages, and internet-of-things. As a hub for this community, the
team is developing a toolchain for benchmarking embedded database, as well as a
community website hosted at the University at Buffalo (http://pocketdata.info).
The project also involves outreach efforts including tutorials, workshops, and
seminar series. With the interest and support from the community, the embedded
database benchmark CI is expected to spark a new wave of research interest on
pocket-scale data management.