* 1629270
* DMREF:  Antiperovskite Interfaces for Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials with a particular crystalline arrangement
of atoms, known as perovskite, have played important roles in applications
ranging from electronic and magnetic devices to micro-machined actuators and
sensors. Some of the most interesting phenomena arise at interfaces between
these and other materials, where the atomic and structural aspects combine to
form new materials in their own right. The main goal of this research is the
discovery of a new class of interface materials based on antiperovskites. These
antiperovskites exchange the atomic positions of the more common perovskites,
creating unique, wide-ranging properties different from the parent materials.
Interfaces between these two 'anti'-structures create unexplored fundamental
opportunities for materials design. This research will discover the fundamental
principles controlling these new materials systems, develop atomic-scale design
principles, and create and explore these interfaces for potential applications
in electronic, magnetic, and quantum-controlled devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Complex perovskite materials have
been fertile ground for new discoveries, due particularly to their wide-ranging
structural, electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. Interfaces between
perovskites create juxtapositions between different symmetries and ordered
states, and it has become clear that these interfaces are new materials in their
own right, with inherently multiple length-scale distortions near the interface
that lead to rotations, deformations, and electronic and structural orderings
dramatically different from those in bulk. The main goal of this research is the
discovery of a new class of interface materials based on antiperovskites.
Antiperovskites have the perovskite structure, but cation and anion positions
are interchanged, resulting in unique, wide-ranging properties different from
perovskites. Interfaces between these two 'anti'-structures create unexplored
fundamental opportunities for materials design. The fundamental principles
controlling new physical phenomena at these interfaces will be determined, and
the principles used to design couplings between multiple orders at interfaces to
generate new functionalities. This research is aimed at developing atomic scale
design principles for antiperovskite heterointerfaces, constructing databases of
the stable interface structures, and developing antiperovskite heterostructures
with scientifically important and technologically transformative structural,
electronic, and magnetic properties. The project implements an integrated effort
of theory, materials synthesis, structural, electronic, and magnetic
characterization. The research will use an iterative approach, where feedback
from experimental measurements of interfacial structure and electric and
magnetic order is used to refine theoretical parameters and approximations. This
iterative approach will develop a fundamental understanding of the interface
atomic structure and bonding between disparate materials, and how it creates new
interfacial spin order and electronic configurations. These atomic-scale
interface materials will lead to new classes of controllable electronic and
magnetic phenomena, and new growth approaches that will make possible
heteroepitaxy of other materials systems with large disparity in structure and
chemical bonding. The predictive theory and modeling, with feedback to theory
from materials growth, and from structural, electronic, and transport
characterization, will produce hetero-interfaces that have unique properties not
presently available.