* 1629990
* CI-P: Planning for AudioNet: A New Community Infrastructure for Audio Annotations for Acoustic Event Identification
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Gerald Friedland, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This effort lays the groundwork for AudioNet, a public-domain corpus of audio
labels for the nearly 800,000 videos in the open-access YFCC100M dataset. Audio
information provides an important complement to visual information in the
automatic analysis of video data, allowing systems to detect situations that may
not be clearly identifiable from the visual stream alone. However, there are as
yet no truly large-scale labeled audio datasets of the kind needed as input to
build flexible, accurate analysis systems. Creating such a large-scale corpus
will serve as an impetus for better multimedia algorithms to be developed by
more researchers and computer science students, translating into an impact on
the everyday life of the public at large. Social media videos are increasingly
used for scientific research, as they provide an opportunity to observe and
model many phenomena in the social sciences, economics, meteorology, and
medicine. New capabilities for content analysis will therefore impact many
scientific fields. In addition, audio analysis could be used in real-time
security surveillance and in robotics applications like autonomous vehicles and
household robots to aid and monitor the elderly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AudioNet
is part of a multi-institution collaboration, the Multimedia Commons initiative,
which is developing a variety of resources around the YFCC100M dataset of
Creative Commons-licensed photos and videos. AudioNet is annotating the audio
tracks from the YFCC100M videos, focusing on audio concepts. Audio concepts can
be thought of as acoustic "objects": concrete, localizable units of sound like
"crowd cheering" or "fire alarm". The approach will be modeled on ImageNet, an
image dataset labeled and organized using the WordNet hierarchy of synsets
(groups of synonyms); ImageNet has enabled major enabled advances in image
processing. However, while ImageNet focuses largely on entities (noun synsets),
audio data is inherently temporal. The label set for AudioNet will therefore
focus on events and actions, though similarly organized using semantic resources
like WordNet.