* 1629369
* DMREF: Paired Ionic-Electronic Conductors in Spatially Confined Self-Assembling Rod-Coil Block Copolymers and Bolaamphiphiles
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The target materials and devices offer the potential
to address and improve needs ranging from the harvesting and storage of energy
to sensing and detection with their resulting societal benefits. A key aspect of
these studies is the combination in a single system of both major types of
conductivity (ionic and electronic conduction) to create new, effective
materials. Students from Cornell University, the University of Chicago and the
University of Washington working together in this research will be provided with
a stimulating and constructive environment in which they are exposed to key
elements of a comprehensive materials design cycle comprising theory and
computation, synthesis, assembly and characterization. The focus of the project
also provides a unique context and an opportunity to convey the importance of
science and engineering to students in succinctly simple, yet powerful messages.
The materials design and pattern recognition software and the user manuals
developed under this activity, will be made freely available through a dedicated
project web site, and through co-PI Escobedo's web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This research entails the
following: (i) modeling of the self-assembly behavior of conjugated rod-charged
coil block copolymers and bolaamphiphiles, (ii) design and synthesis of rod-coil
polymers with controlled architecture and behavior, (iii) their assembly and
characterization for charge transport, and (iv) assessing the performance of
prototype devices. To enable synergistic modeling-experimental interactions, the
research will involve the iteration of two cycles. The first cycle entails the
use of model-based morphological predictions to guide the selection of new
polymers for synthesis and processing. The second cycle entails characterization
of conductivity and construction of device prototypes, providing data that will
guide the development of new models. The computational activities are then a
combination of mesoscopic and atomistic modeling. The research is envisioned to
not only shed light into fundamental physical questions, but also lead to new
applications through a combination of modeling and experiments that will allow
exquisitely precise manipulation of characteristic dimensions, chemistry, and
charge density.