* 1629923
* CI-P: Planning for Scalable Language Resource Creation through Novel Incentives and Crowdsourcing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Mark Liberman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 99,754.00

Advances in human language technologies enable systems that, for example, obey
natural language commands and respond in kind, translate among many language
pairs and summarize multilingual news. However, the technology's potential
remains largely untapped because the linguistic resources that fuel development
still fall far short of need. This community infrastructure planning (CI-P)
initiative begins the process of building infrastructure to continuously develop
high quality language resources, by employing techniques proven to work in
multiple scientific disciplines. Social media, crowd-sourcing, games with a
purpose and citizen science show us that human resources are effectively
limitless for some activities. By offering human contributors appropriate
opportunities and incentives, this project enhances language resource
development well beyond what direct funding alone can produce. By removing
constraints on participation, designing activities to appeal to multiple
communities the project creates educational opportunities for the public
including students and under-represented groups. The increase in scale and
diversity of data also benefits those working in language related research,
education and technology development. The availability of an ever-growing body
of resources for an expanding range of languages will permit developers to
supply technologies to a greater proportion of the world.

This project is the first step in the creation of infrastructure capable of high
volume, continuous collection of language data and judgments through: ubiquity,
perseverance, comprehensive annotation, automated training and certification,
appropriate incentives, task engineering and variants of crowdsourcing. Building
upon Linguistic Data Consortium's WebAnn framework, virtual front end web
servers provide multiple interfaces to incentivize and engineer linguistic data
contributions from targeted groups: linguists, citizen scientists, game players
and students. Collection and annotation activities are analyzed into component
tasks according to the skills they require and are assigned as appropriate to
different workforces using different workflows. The combination of customized
interfaces and novel incentive strategies enables ongoing, scalable data
collection and annotation resulting in diverse language resources available to
the wider Computer and Information Science and Engineering research and
education communities.