* 1629160
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Accelerated Soft Magnetic Alloy Design and Synthesis Guided by Theory and Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Matthew Willard, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Soft magnetic materials have use in power conversion, conditioning,
distribution, and generation technologies, including transportation (electric
vehicles), renewable energy (solar inverters), and aerospace (power converters
and inductors) sectors. The term "soft magnet" refers to a magnetic material
that easily changes magnetic pole directions using small magnetic fields. With
over 20 percent of all generated electricity in the US being consumed by
industrial electric motor drives, a mere 1 percent improvement in energy
efficiency would result in significant financial and environmental benefits. The
magnetic components are a major source of energy loss in the above-mentioned
applications, motivating the need for soft magnets with better energy
efficiency. The design cycle for new soft magnetic materials has so far been
informed mainly by direct human engineering intuition and historic knowledge and
bias, with materials development occurring by trial-and-error approaches. This
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award
supports research to establish, demonstrate, and validate a computation-guided
framework for accelerated discovery of new, better performing soft magnetic
materials. This approach will use computational materials science tools to guide
alloy design, with the synthesis and experimental validation of properties
performed for down-selected new alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, new
alloys with microstructures comprised of an amorphous matrix and nanocrystalline
grains have revolutionized advanced soft magnetic materials by enabling smaller
hysteresis than has been achieved in traditional magnetic materials. This award
supports research on the design of new alloys of this type using hierarchical,
multi-scale, magneto-structural modeling with input from density functional
theory calculations of structural and magnetic properties for single-crystals.
Micromagnetic theory will provide the constitutive law for the continuum-level
model for optimization of realistic microstructures consisting of an amorphous
matrix surrounding nanocrystals. The continuum-level modeling represents a
fundamental advancement that will provide much-needed insight into the interplay
between the microstructure effects and the magnetic properties of the
crystalline phase in determining small hysteresis, as well as an operational
understanding of the applicability limits of the currently-prevalent random
anisotropy model for coercivity. Structural considerations will be evaluated by
continuum thermodynamics modeling and resulting magnetic performance
characteristics will be evaluated by micromagnetics modeling. Down-selected
alloy compositions - as optimized by these computational approaches - will be
synthesized using rapid solidification with subsequent annealing and
characterized using state-of-the-art structural and magnetic characterization
tools.