* 1629395
* XPS: EXPL: Hippogriff: Efficient Heterogeneous Servers for Data Centers and Cloud Services
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Steven Swanson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The growing importance of artificial intelligence, network services, and cloud
storage drives the demand of building powerful computer systems that can perform
many operation at once. Building computers with different kinds of computing
processors (i.e., heterogeneous processing) is an effective way to achieve this
goal. However, this approach also creates new problems that can negate some of
the benefits it provides. In particular, using different processors for
different tasks requires moving data between those processors. This movement
takes time and can cancel out saving heterogeneous processing provides. This
project is addressing this problem in heterogeneous computing systems by making
the movement of data between different processors more efficient. This improved
efficiency leads directly to benefits for applications of scientific and
commercial importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the cost of data movement
heterogeneous computing systems stems from the entrenched central processing
unit (CPU)-centric programming model. This project is revisiting the design of
the application interface, system software and hardware components to remove
CPUs and main memory from the critical path of moving data. The project provides
an efficient programming model that allows the system software stack to
automatically and efficiently setup the data movements between heterogeneous
processors. We are applying the system to large-scale database systems, massive
parallel programming systems like Spark and MapReduce as well as scientific
computing that power important daily applications and research projects.