* 1629129
* XPS: FULL: A Fresh Look at Near Data Computing: Coordinated Data and Computation Government
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 875,000.00

Many important computer applications in our daily lives depend on processing
large amounts of data. While moving data from storage devices to processing
components can be very time consuming, with increasing core counts and emerging
applications, moving data within a computer system can also incur significant
latencies, thereby hurting application performance and energy efficiency.
Unfortunately, existing solutions to minimize this data movement overhead have
limited potential. Thus, it has become essential to explore a holistic approach
for minimizing data movements, and shifting from the compute-centric model being
used today to a data-centric or near-data computing (NDC) model for effectively
handling the data processing needs of different classes of applications. The PIs
aim to integrate their research on NDC with the educational activities and
student training at Penn State for nurturing the future workforce in science and
engineering. The outreach activities include engaging undergraduates in the NDC
research, and working with the CSATS (Center for Science and the Schools) and
VIEW (Visit In Engineering Weekend) programs at Penn State to get involved with
the ongoing STEM-oriented K-12 activities.

This project aims to revisit the near-data computing concept from a fresh
perspective by undertaking a cross-layer approach for exploring the potential
benefits of moving computation closer to data. Thus, instead of considering only
the Boolean extremes of near-data computing in the hardware of processor core
vs. the DRAM (as in the case of past attempts), this project explores a rich
spectrum of possibilities between these two. Specifically, focusing on emerging
multicore systems and multithreaded applications from three important
application domains (high performance computing, embedded/mobile computing, and
datacenter computing), this research tries to address the "where", "when",
"what", and "how" questions of near-data computing in the context of deep memory
hierarchies. This comprehensive approach to moving computation closer to the
data aims to break the memory wall, which is the biggest barrier to the
scalability of emerging chip multiprocessors.