* 1629757
* II-EN: Enhancing an Infrastructure with an Agile Dexterous Mobile Manipulator for Research on Dynamic Balance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ralph Hollis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 665,586.00

The project develops a test bed for exploring highly agile robot mobility in
human environments such as an office or home, while also incorporating a highly
dexterous ability for purposefully interacting with features in the environment
such as opening doors, moving tables or furniture, and manipulating everyday
objects. Mobile robots are poised to take increasingly important roles in our
daily lives ranging from transporting materials in warehouses and hospitals,
inventory management in retail stores, and applications in direct service to
people including support and guidance in public spaces. Wheeled mobile robots
currently lack the agility and dexterity needed for these kinds of tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances the CMU ballbot research platform, a
first-of-its-kind capability previously developed under NSF funding. Ballbots
are dynamically stable mobile robots, which balance and locomote on single
spherical wheels. Unique advantages of the ballbot class of mobile robots
include tall heights enabling human-robot interaction at eye level, a small
footprint afforded by the single ball wheel, and omni-directional motion with
intrinsic compliance. This combination of desirable features does not exist in
traditional statically stable mobile robots. The project develops and adds a
pair of 7-degree-of-freedom arms and hands to the CMU ballbot platform. The
objective is to create an unprecedented capability for agile and dexterous
mobile manipulation. Here, the term "agile" refers to the ballbot?s current
ability to swiftly and smoothly move through the environment, while avoiding
static and dynamic obstacles. The term "dexterous" refers to the ability to
skillfully manipulate objects and interact with the environment. Reaching this
compound goal is enabled in part by the creation of a pair of new lightweight
but strong human-scale arms/hands for the ballbot and the requisite software to
enable a wide range of future research.