* 1629908
* II-NEW: Experimental Characterization and CAD Development Testbed for Nanoscale Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Masud Chowdhury, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 772,060.00

The aim of this NSF CRI-II-NEW project is to develop a testbed for computer
aided design (CAD) simulations, experimental metrology, and software and
hardware calibrations to support cross-layer evaluation of novel nanoscale 3D
heterogeneous integration of CMOS and post-CMOS technologies. Proposed tools and
equipment acquisitions and sustainment will allow bottom-up evaluations from
materials, fundamental physics, and experimental metrology to device and
circuits to large-scale systems. The proposed infrastructure is unique and will
enable thorough evaluation of new 3D heterogeneous integration concepts with
accuracy only parallel to full-scale experimental prototyping. It will directly
impact the nano-electromagnetics, nano-device, circuits, 3D IC and manufacturing
research directions, and will also have significant impact on the big data
analytics, renewable energy, smart-city, RF and electromagnetics research
initiatives in Computer Science and Electrical Engineering (CSEE) department at
University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC). The testbed will not only facilitate
transformative research, but will also allow broad ranging educational and
outreach activities such as new undergraduate and graduate curriculum
development with lab modules, training and mentoring of research students,
research dissemination thorough forums and seminars, development of online
repositories and online labs, and nanotechnology awareness for K-12 students
through summer workshops. The boarder impact of this project is that the
proposed infrastructure will provide unique opportunities for research,
education and community outreach in the fields of nanomaterials, nanodevice,
nanocircuit, biosensing, heterogonous integration, and
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focus of this collaborative
project will be to develop nanoscale heterogeneous 3D integration and testing
framework for bio-sensing and computing applications leveraging novel materials,
devices, circuits and integration schemes. 3D integration provides opportunities
to realize systems with heterogeneous layers, such as bio-analytical device and
mixed-signal information processing layers that can be vertically stacked and
electrically connected through dense vias. However, such implementation with
CMOS is challenging due to CMOS?s scaling limits, noise coupling between
dissimilar analog and digital circuit components and limitations of die-die or
layer-layer stacking. We propose a new 3-D heterogeneous integration approach
that overcomes challenges by utilizing new materials such as Carbon Nanotube,
MoS2, and nanoscale geometry to realize highly sensitive bio-sensors for bio-
molecule detections, scalable 2-D material based ultra-low power devices that
exhibit FET like switching and Negative Differential Resistance (NDR) for
seamless integration of signal processing and logic components, and monolithic
3-D integration techniques with dense vias. Initial projections reveal
significant benefits for such heterogeneous integration over conventional 2-D
CMOS based multi-chip based approaches. If realized, this can be game-changing
for mixed-signal ASICs, and as well for bio-medical applications such as point-
of-care and lab-on-a-chips.