* 1629226
* School Choice Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Christopher Neilson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2019
* USD 528,468.00

This award funds research on centralized school choice mechanisms. The goal is
to better understand how students and parents make choices about which schools
to attend, and how their choice processes interact with the rules that districts
use to assign students to schools to affect family welfare and academic
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many school districts in the US offer families
the option to participate in school choice programs. Districts that offer choice
must pick between a number of possible mechanisms that use families' choice
applications together with random lotteries and coarse priorities to assign
students to schools. Recent work has shown that which mechanism best depends on
which schools families prefer, on the relationship between families' preferences
and their priorities at different schools, and on how well families understand
the school choice process. This award will fund a household survey of (the
parents of) actual and potential school choice participants. Survey participants
will answer questions about district schools and about their understanding of
the school choice process. The PIs will combine results of the survey with data
on student outcomes and models of family behavior to understand how students
from different demographic groups make choices under one common assignment
mechanism, and how these choices would change if they had more information about
the choice process or if the rules of school choice mechanism were modified to
reduce the scope of strategic behavior. Their findings will provide insight into
how the decisions districts make about the way school choice works affect
outcomes of policy interest, including student test scores. They will also help
guide changes to school choice policies in future years.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project makes three technical contributions. The first is to
integrate survey data on students' elicited preferences over schools and
subjective expectations about the school choice process into an estimable
empirical model of school choice in the context of a non-strategy proof school
choice mechanism. The survey data allow the PIs to separate students' beliefs
about admissions probabilities from their preferences over schools under
relatively weak assumptions about student behavior. Second, comparing
counterfactual predictions of behavior based on model estimates to those
observed under randomized informational interventions or policy changes will
provide a strong test of the accuracy of model predictions. To the extent our
model passes this test, additional simulations will provide valuable evidence on
the effects of future interventions in other contexts. Third, using
administrative data on academic achievement in addition to school assignment,
this project will link the choices districts make in school choice mechanism
design to outcomes of direct policy interest such as test scores and high school
graduation.