* 1629833
* II-NEW: WiNEST: A Prototype for a City-scale "Living Laboratory" for Wide-area Wireless Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2021
* USD 600,000.00

This project is building a city-scale experimental testbed, called
WiNEST,comprised of cellular basestations, WiFi access points, and various
static and mobile usage scenarios with wireless connectivity. The testbed spans
a part of downtown Madison, Wisconsin, and beyond and allows for interesting new
applications over a large coverage area. The infrastructure provides a sandbox
in which researchers can prototype new ideas of wireless systems with
unprecedented speed and responsiveness. It also supports experiments in emerging
mobile applications, such as virtual-reality video streaming, intelligent
transportation and Internet-of-Things. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiNEST is an
academia-industry-government partnership between the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, a local data center and ISP in Madison, and the city where each partner
is providing different resources to enable this
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiNEST has many new avenues of research and
educational impact, including:&lt;br/&gt;(i) engages with a large community ---
potentially all of UW-Madison students, staff, and faculty, city of Madison
agencies, including public safety organizations, and Madison Metro Transit
system buses;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) creates unique synergies between local academic
institutions and technology partners;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) disseminates all key
platform components of WiNEST through its public portals;&lt;br/&gt;(iv)
supports a laboratory-oriented curriculum at the university for engaging
undergraduate and graduate students through hands-on
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
create a preliminary prototype for a unique city-scale "living laboratory" for
wide-area wireless experimentation, called WiNEST. WiNEST will be the first-of-
its-kind outdoor testbed and infrastructure that allows researchers, local and
remote, to run wide-area wireless experiments at moderate to large-scale. It
combines commercial-grade 3G/4G cellular base stations backed with OpenFlow
switches, uniquely programmable and sliceable WiFi hotspots that are backhauled
via the cellular base stations, along with mobile and static usage scenarios. It
leverages prior efforts of the PI in assembling significant experimental
wireless infrastructure for conducting research, integrates them with real usage
scenarios across the the greater Madison area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiNEST is an
academia-industry-government partnership between the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, a local data center and ISP in Madison, and the city where each partner
is providing different resources to enable this infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimenters using WiNEST have a unique opportunity to
deploy their new services and experiments at scale. They have deeper
programmability inside the network (in client devices, at the edges, and in
certain parts of the core) and they will also have the advantage of operating
with real users. WiNEST enables diverse types of experiments ranging from
mobility strategies, handoffs, multi-path systems, edge/fog computing and the
Internet of Things applications.