* 1630244
* Travel Support for U.S. Participants Attending the 8th International Symposium on Stratified Flows (San Diego, August 29 - September 1, 2016)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 12,500.00

PI: Meiburg, Eckart &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1630244 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;Title: Travel Support for U.S.
Participants Attending the 8th International Symposium on Stratified Flows (San
Diego, August 29 - September 1, 2016)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to
support the participation of about 20 US scientists to the 8th International
Symposium on Stratified Flows that will take place in San Diego, California,
between August 29th and September 1st, 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium is motivated by the need to understand stratified flows of different
flavors and scales. Such flows are found all around us, in the atmosphere, in
oceans, in rivers and in the chemical process industry. Recent developments in
mathematical analysis, laboratory techniques and numerical approaches generate
the need to have this symposium five years since the last one in Rome (2011).
The symposium aims, in addition to the dissemination of the most recent research
findings, include bringing together researchers across the world to discuss
future needs in this field and to educate the next generation of young
scientists. Travel and participation costs for about 20 US participants are
expected to be funded with the NSF support to this conference, with priority
given to younger scientists who would otherwise be unable to attend.