* 1630454
* Pathways to Coronal Magnetic Energy Storage and Release
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* K Leka, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 511,619.00

This project science focuses on a fundamental gap in our knowledge of solar
energetic events and their potential impact on the heliospheric and
interplanetary environment - how to evaluate their potential size in terms of
energy release. This project is unique in that it uses as statistics based
approach to analyze characteristics of solar active regions. Being able to
measure the stored and available energy, and to predict the size of an upcoming
event will improve forecasting capability for solar flares and related phenomena
such as coronal mass ejections and energetic particle production and
propagation. These are the phenomena with direct impacts on human-dependent
infrastructure and national security, hence improvements in forecasting
eventually benefits large sectors of society. This project supports a
postdoctoral researcher and a member of an underrepresented group who will serve
as a mentor and Co-PI. Summer inters from the REU program will also be
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
the different pathways to the release of stored coronal magnetic energy. When a
large amount of free energy is stored, some active regions release it in a few
large events, while others release the same amount of energy in many smaller
events. Why this occurs is unknown. Two complementary approaches will be used to
investigate this: 1) using photospheric proxies for the energy for a large
sample of events, and 2) modeling of the coronal magnetic field for a small
sample of events. In each case, the energy will be computed for subareas within
each active region to estimate the fraction of the total free energy that can be
released in a flare. This will be compared to the GOES soft X-ray flux of the
events. Verification statistics computed from discriminant analysis will be used
to determine whether photospheric proxies for sub-areas of an active region are
better then global proxies at distinguishing regions which produce large events
versus those which produce only small events. If the analysis indicates that the
free energy computed for sub-areas are more closely associated with the energy
released, this will indicate that the local configuration of the field is more
important than the global configuration. The corona will be modeled using the
Minimum Current Corona model and nonlinear force-free field extrapolations. For
both models, a detailed comparison will be made of the possible energy release
pathways to the flares that occurred, and the location of the flare emission to
the currents associated with the stored energy. This will provide insight into
the underlying processes governing the production of energetic events.