* 1630154
* Orchestral Innovations in Science Education (OISE): An Experiment in Informal STEAM Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Linda Baker, Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,991.00

The Baltimore Symphony Orchestra (BSO), in collaboration with the Psychology
Department of the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) and Octava (a
technology company), are conducting a pilot exploratory research project to
assess the effectiveness of delivering informal science learning (ISL) to adult
audiences through live music in a concert hall environment. The first half of
the study is being timed to coincide with the 2016 annual meeting in Baltimore
of the League of American Orchestras. Audiences will be introduced to the core
idea that symmetry is a central concept both in science and in music, and they
will experience these ideas via the orchestral music of pieces such as Aaron
Copland's Appalachian Spring and Beethoven's Symphony. No. 5. The project goals
are: to test whether and the extent to which informal STEM learning can occur
among adults (ages 18+) during live orchestral performances and how the science
content may enhance the audience experience; and to develop assessment tools for
measuring audience learning and retention of scientific concepts delivered in
connection with live musical performances both through interactive technology
and through traditional program notes. It is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.

The pilot study will investigate the interaction of key variables related to the
audience composition, the learning formats (use of app technology, program
notes, or not), and the science concepts. The tablet application technology,
under continued development by Octava, presents unobtrusive program notes that
act as a concert companion in real time as a concert proceeds. The mixed methods
research methodology will produce quantitative and qualitative data using pre-
and post-test instruments and focus group interviews. A follow-up questionnaire
will be sent to participants six weeks after the performances to ascertain
whether what was learned was retained over a period of time. Dissemination of
project findings will be to professionals in science, science education and
music fields.