* 1630142
* Investigation of Physical and Chemical Clogging Phenomena in Underdrain Stormwater Systems Utilizing Geotextiles
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Burak Tanyu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2019
* USD 79,659.00

The production of demolition material and construction waste has been increasing
at a gradual pace in the United States and around the world, although the land
for disposal is becoming limited and more expensive. Consequently, the use of
recycled unbound material has become widespread. In recent years, there has been
substantial increase in the use of aggregate produced from recycling crushed
concrete (referred as recycled concrete aggregate - RCA) in civil engineering
applications to reduce production costs, construction time, and engage in
sustainable practices. With increased usage, the physical, mechanical, and
environmental properties of RCA have been widely investigated to support its
suitability for using it as backfill or structural fill in variety of
geotechnical applications. Despite previous research, the potential of
precipitating calcareous material (in particular, deposition of calcite) from
RCA leachate is not well understood. Not understanding this behavior may lead to
unintended consequences based on incorrect use, inappropriate design, or
unnecessary limitations especially in underdrain stormwater systems. For
example, when stormwater systems are designed with natural soils/aggregates,
they are primarily evaluated against the physical clogging of the geotextile
filter. However with RCA, evaluating the physical clogging alone is not
sufficient as this phenomenon is based on migration of fine particles and does
not describe the potential of precipitating calcite from RCA. The main objective
of this research is to investigate and understand the chemical phenomena leading
to calcite precipitation and crystal growth within geotextile media from RCA
under conditions similar to underdrain stormwater systems.

This is a one-year exploratory experimental research program to examine the
suitability of existing calcite precipitation rate models, and theoretical
calcite crystal growth kinetics models in natural waters. The objective is to
quantify and predict the calcite precipitation occurrence in RCA. An attempt
will be made to answer questions regarding (1) precipitation of calcite crystals
over geotextile; (2) approximation of the kinetics of calcite precipitation from
RCA using the mechanistic PWP model; (3) quantifying the difference between
physical and chemical clogging phenomena; and (4) defining the degree in
reduction in serviceability of geotextile based on coupling the effects of both
chemical and physical clogging phenomena. The findings from this exploratory
research will also identify the complexities that may require further, longer,
and more in-depth investigation for a follow-up research program. The outcome of
this research will yield transformative knowledge in terms of (1) understanding
the chemical phenomenon and (2) differentiating between physical and chemical
clogging of underdrain stormwater systems with geotextiles constructed alongside
RCA.