* 1630195
* Ultra-sensitive and specific graphene Immunosensors for in-situ mercury measurement in marine ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Robert Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 136,968.00

Discoveries from this project could lead to new applications of biosensors in
marine and environmental science and potentially to new insights into the
environmental cycling of trace chemicals. Mercury is one of the most toxic
contaminants in the environment and is of global concern. Developing methods for
measuring the distribution mercury in the field is needed to better understand
the source and fate of mercury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop ultrasensitive and specific graphene-based immunosensors for in-situ
detection of trace Hg2+ concentrations in aquatic ecosystems. Developing
ultrasensitive, specific, and robust methods for quantifying the distribution
and speciation of ultra-low level mercury, especially for in-situ measurements
in the field, is a fundamental requirement to better understand the source,
fate, transformation and bioaccumulation of Mercury, as well as for assessing
environmental pollution and possible remediation. The proposed technique is
potentially transformative, and will promote further design and optimization of
novel sensors, instrumentation, and analytical schemes for trace targets
important in practical biological, chemical and environmental monitoring. This
project will be incorporated as undergraduate and graduate educational and
research tools, and provide opportunities for students at all levels, diverse
ethnic backgrounds and nationalities, underrepresented minorities and persons
with disabilities.