* 1630459
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Nearshore settlement and hydrodynamics in Southern California during El Nino, and the transition to normal ocean conditions: boom and bust?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2018
* USD 98,981.00

Understanding how larvae are transported in the coastal ocean is key for
characterizing the population fluctuations of marine organisms. Studies
demonstrate that larvae of species that inhabit shallow waters can behaviorally
respond to changing oceanographic conditions by moving vertically into currents
that can promote their transport to coastal, nearshore habitats where they
settle to bottom habitats and complete their life cycle. However, the
oceanographic mechanisms that promote such transport, and how they might be
impacted by infrequent events such as El Niño, are poorly resolved. Given that
El Niño events might increase in frequency and magnitude under climate change,
it is imperative to assess how El Niño affects larval transport and larval
settlement. To this end, this study will use an unprecedented set of nearshore
biological and physical measurements spanning pre-El-Niño, during El Niño, and
the predicted return to El Niño neutral conditions, to test mechanistically how
larval transport and settlement respond in a nearshore coastal environment. This
project will also provide educational and research opportunities for students at
the University of San Diego, a liberal arts university. At least one laboratory
exercise demonstrating the impacts of El Niño on larval transport and settlement
will be developed for undergraduate students, and students will be recruited to
participate in all aspects of the project to provide them with hands-on research
experience. This research will form the basis for the thesis work of at least
one M.S. graduate student. Finally, given that the research falls within a
Marine Protected Area, results will be broadly disseminated and shared with
coastal managers and the CA Department of Fish and
Wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Larval transport and settlement are fundamental
processes for understanding the population dynamics of benthic invertebrates.
Previous studies and unpublished observations indicate that El Niño events
profoundly impact community and population processes, and in Southern
California, El Niño effects range from alteration of larval transport and
settlement of local populations, to the geographic expansion of subtropical
species. This research will test the hypothesis that the current (2015-2016) El
Niño event will result in a reduction of barnacle larval transport and
settlement in Southern California nearshore habitats. Two mechanisms might be
involved; first, a deepening of the thermocline forced by El Niño would result
in reduction of larval transport by internal tidal bores, a mechanism that
requires shallowing of the thermocline. Second, the distribution of larvae of
littoral barnacles would be deeper, more offshore, and less constrained to
nearshore habitats during El Niño than in El Niño neutral conditions, resulting
in a reduction of nearshore larval abundance and settlement. The effects of El
Niño on nearshore circulation, hydrography, larval transport and settlement in
Bird Rock, Southern California, will be measured by a) deploying an array of
instrumentation to measure temperature, pressure (waves) and currents; b)
measuring daily barnacle larval settlement, and; c) assessing cross-shore and
depth distribution of invertebrate larvae. These observations will be contrasted
with two years of comparable observations taken at Bird Rock in 2014 (El Niño
neutral conditions) and 2015 (during El Niño). Additionally, the investigators
will measure weekly settlement at Bird Rock, and at Dike Rock, a site 7 km to
the north, where previous observations at the end of the 1997/1998 El Niño
indicated that barnacle settlement was very high. This will enable the
evaluation of the generality of the settlement response as El Niño conditions
eclipse, and examination of how settlement varies along a coastline.