* 1630114
* FRHTP: Center for Quantum Information and Control
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Carlton Caves, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,261,083.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is the interdisciplinary field that
investigates how to control the behavior of systems obeying the laws of quantum
mechanics to make them perform information-processing tasks. The task of
engineering and controlling quantum systems to perform interesting information-
processing tasks is one of the grand challenges for 21st Century science and
technology. If successful, it will have far ranging implications for many
technologies, including computation, communications, and environmental sensing.
The Center for Quantum Information and Control (CQuIC) is a research center
headquartered at the University of New Mexico, with an experimental node at the
University of Arizona. Research at CQuIC focuses on the development of tools for
the control of quantum systems and the application of those tools to
information-processing tasks. Under this five-year award, CQuIC becomes a
Focused Research Hub in Theoretical Physics (FRHTP). The activities of the FRHTP
are centered on a stable of three postdoctoral research fellows who will, first,
work with CQuIC's senior scientists and research students on projects generated
by the FRHTP's Project Directors and, second, bring new expertise to CQuIC and
introduce new research projects into the portfolio of quantum-control projects.
The chief outreach activity under the FRHTP is CQuIC's sponsorship and
organization of the Annual Workshop of the Southwest Quantum Information and
Technology Network. Held every February, the Workshop is attended by 150-225
scientists, with an emphasis on participation by undergraduate, graduate-
student, and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QIS is a large,
diverse field that draws from a variety of disciplines in the sciences and
engineering. To do effective research in this field requires knowledge and
expertise from many different backgrounds and attention to learning new
theoretical concepts and experimental techniques as they are developed within or
brought into the field. CQuIC leaders categorize research projects in this
diverse field in two ways. The first focuses on the type of quantum system to be
controlled. This encompasses the control and measurement of complex quantum
systems, where the complexity arises because systems have many interacting parts
(many-body systems), have Hilbert spaces of moderate to large dimension
(qudits), or have complex dynamics by virtue of contact with environments or
ancillas (open quantum systems). The second categorizes the work according to
objective, such as the development of tools for the control and measurement of
complex quantum systems or on their application to specific computational,
communication, or metrological control tasks. Within this general framework,
CQuIC pursues several research directions: foundational investigations in
quantum information, control, and measurement; control of qudit atomic and
optical systems; quantum control and squeezing of collective atomic spins; and
analog quantum computation and simulation. Through close collaboration with
experimental partners both within CQuIC, and within the larger SQuInT network,
CQuIC advances both fundamental and practical aspects of quantum information
science.