* 1630360
* Riparian shrub expansion: Linkages to permafrost, hydrology and soil microbes
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Ina Timling, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2017
* USD 61,913.00

The climatic drivers and landscape-scale patterns of recent Arctic shrub
expansion are well understood, while the biogeochemical and physical mechanisms
controlling shrub recruitment and growth remain unclear. The biogeophysical
characteristics associated with tall shrub expansion near streams could
potentially explain the documented increases in carbon and nutrient export from
large Arctic rivers through the underlying processes of widespread permafrost
degradation and increased subsurface flow. Additionally, occurrences of tall
shrubs could be used as a readily measured proxy for subsurface properties both
across space and time using remote sensing. If our observations hold true in
other stream environments, the information has the potential to provide novel
hydrological, permafrost, and biological process insights to complement the
extensive literature on increasing Arctic shrub cover. Preliminary measurements
of differential runoff in Arctic tundra link tall shrubs along riparian
corridors to losing stream sections (streams with decreasing discharge
downstream), whereas gaining or maintaining stream sections (increasing
discharge downstream) lack tall shrubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support measurements to test whether the formation of a talik (permafrost-free
ground) and a downward hydrologic gradient creates a biogeochemical subsurface
environment that favors shrub recruitment and growth, which, in turn, results in
patterns of tall shrub distribution coinciding along losing stream reaches. This
team will measure additional streams with differing gradients, bed morphologies,
and substrates to test the statistical significance of their preliminary
observation that tall shrubs indicate losing streams, and to expand measurements
to include shrub height, cover, biomass, Leaf Area Index (LAI), permafrost, and
soil microbial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support three
early career researchers to gather background data to enable them to explore a
potentially transformative idea to set the foundation to examine the processes
linking shrubs, permafrost, hydrology and microbiology. The results of this work
would be disseminated directly to land management and private organizations.