* 1630203
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Treatment for Stress Urinary Incontinence
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Gloria Kolb, Elidah, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,022,930.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the expedited development of a novel non-
surgical medical device and therapeutic treatment for the approximately 1 in 3
women over the age of 30 who suffer from urinary incontinence, two thirds of
whom, in part due to notable deficiencies of available solutions, elect to live
without treatment while their symptoms progressively worsen. Urinary
incontinence, although a very private concern, has far-reaching physical,
psychological, social, and economic implications. For example, urinary
incontinence has been found to reduce health-related quality of life measures on
par with depression, incontinence is the number one reason for admittance into
nursing homes, and the annual cost to the US healthcare system is estimated at
$25 billion. Through design and validation activities this project will
demonstrate the functionality of a wearable device that provides discreet,
comfortable, easy-to-use therapy for female stress urinary incontinence. The
technological understanding gained through this work lays the groundwork for
subsequent commercialization of an FDA cleared product that will enhance the
lives of tens of millions of American women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project provides a new framework for wearable therapeutics by enabling the
patient to treat incontinence via discreet surface electrical stimulation
without interruption to daily activity. Current non-surgical care often involves
electrical stimulation via intravaginal probe, a treatment most woman are not
willing to adopt or maintain. This project builds on successful Phase I
feasibility work in which a contiguous array of cutaneous electrodes placed
proximate the perineal tissue to deliver sufficient electrical muscle
stimulation to promote pelvic floor toning were shown to maintain this efficacy
under conditions associated with continuous wear. The Phase II project goal is
to develop an incontinence specific electrical muscle stimulator to function
with the electrode array. The system architecture will enable manipulation of
the therapeutic waveform to support future multi-armed clinical studies designed
to test the efficacy of various treatment regimens. The system will also track
treatment frequency, duration and intensity to provide information to clinical
researchers. Activity will include design, prototype fabrication, performance
testing, human factors assessments, iteration and electrical safety validation.
Refinements to the electrode array are also anticipated. The project will
deliver a device suitable for future evaluation a human clinical studies, FDA
clearance and product commercialization.