* 1630090
* Collaborative Research: Tsunami and Tropical Cyclone Sediment Dynamics and Products
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jonathan Woodruff, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2020
* USD 178,504.00

Tsunamis and tropical cyclones pose a serious hazard to coastal communities.
Quantifying this hazard is challenging in part because instrumental and
historical datasets are too short to capture the extreme range of flood
conditions possible at any particular location. Deposits from tsunamis and
tropical cyclones, preserved within coastal sediments, provide a means to extend
these records. However, there is significant uncertainty related to the movement
of sediment during tsunamis and tropical cyclones, which hinders the
interpretation of these event deposits.

To gain insight in sediment transport during tsunamis and tropical cyclones,
computational modeling, informed by the properties of modern and paleo
sedimentary deposits, will be performed. One assumption is that similarities
exist in flow and transport processes between tsunamis and tropical cyclones;
therefore, much can be learned from studying the two phenomena in tandem.
Another assumption is that natural patterns exist in tsunami and tropical
cyclone deposits such that correlations between deposit properties and their
causative event can be obtained with advanced statistical methods coupled to
computational modeling. The study will advance understanding of sediment
transport during tsunamis and tropical cyclones and will improve the capability
to predict the impact of future tsunami and tropical cyclones with more
certainty, resulting in more resilient coastal planning, potentially saving
lives and protecting livelihoods.