* 1630782
* FRHTP: Network for Neutrinos, Nuclear Astrophysics, and Symmetries (N3AS)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,04/30/2023
* George Fuller, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2023
* USD 2,397,995.00

New discoveries in basic physics often require scientists to probe Nature at the
extremes of energy, distance (very large or very small), intensity, and density,
where it is most likely to uncover discrepancies in understanding. Extreme
conditions can be produced in the laboratory - the high-energy particle
accelerators are an example - but often only after great investments in both
scientific personnel and infrastructure. For this reason, over the past two
decades physicists interested in fundamental physics have increasingly turned to
astrophysics, using the exotic conditions already existing in Nature to test the
understanding of the underlying laws of physics. This strategy has proven
successful: the high fluxes of neutrinos available from our Sun and cosmic rays
led to the discovery of neutrino mass and flavor mixing; studies of the
velocities of stars bound in galaxies and galaxy clusters revealed that 85% of
the matter in the universe is dark, hidden from us, yet crucial in forming the
structures we see in the night sky; observations of the thermonuclear explosions
of distant stars led us to conclude that our universe is expanding at an
increasing rate, dominated by some mysterious, unidentified vacuum energy; and
most recently, a new field of gravitational wave astronomy opened up with
Advanced LIGO's detection of the merger of two massive black holes, allowing
scientists to test physics in the presence of extreme gravitational fields. This
project will bring together nuclear physicists and astrophysicists interested in
the quantitative modeling of astrophysical systems, to advance the understanding
of the properties of neutrinos, the behavior of nuclear matter at the extremes
of temperature and density, and the nature of dark matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific goal of this project is to produce
improved models of extreme astrophysical environments, like the cores of
supernovae and the interiors of neutron stars, by combining knowledge of the
underlying nuclear and neutrino microphysics, with the most advanced tools for
numerical simulations in astrophysics. This will enable to reliably connect
available astrophysical observables, such as the electromagnetic and
nucleosynthetic signals from supernovae, to underlying fundamental microphysics.
A second goal is to create the kind of interdisciplinary research environment
that will allow the training of a new generation of scientists to work
effectively at the interface of astrophysics and fundamental physics. The
nuclear physics community will benefit greatly from junior researchers trained
in this interdisciplinary science, who can then bridge the gap between
astrophysical and astronomical measurements on one hand, and their
interpretation in terms of our "standard model" of fundamental interactions, and
its possible extensions, on the other.