* 1630281
* Five Year Request for East Coast Winch Pool Facility (CY16-20) Year 1
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2022
* USD 4,656,462.00

A request is made by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to fund the
operation of the East Coast Winch Pool. The investment in overboarding equipment
is an expensive undertaking due to the high cost of purchase, maintenance and
shipping of these systems. In an effort to not only ensure that these systems
are available to researchers for their work but to also ensure that that they
are properly maintained and available to the entire science community with
expert support, NSF created the East Coast Winch Pool. This ?pool? was created
to offer scientists a convenient single point of contact for all of their
overboarding equipment needs as well as the expertise to provide them with
creative engineering solutions for their unique requirements while at the same
time reducing cost by pooling equipment for use by the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2009 NSF assigned the operation of the East
Coast Winch Pool to the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The range of
responsibilities included:&lt;br/&gt;? Single point of contact for overboarding
systems&lt;br/&gt;? Act as a center of expertise in winch use, maintenance and
engineering support&lt;br/&gt;? Provide portable winch systems in support of
oceanographic research&lt;br/&gt;? Provide expertise in tension member spooling
for both portable and shipboard&lt;br/&gt;? systems and the personnel to operate
spooling equipment&lt;br/&gt;? Maintain winches, spooling and overboarding
equipment in top condition&lt;br/&gt;? Schedule the use of equipment&lt;br/&gt;?
Provide shipping and handling logistics to get equipment to where it is
needed&lt;br/&gt;? Provide expertise for system setup and testing in the
field&lt;br/&gt;? Maintain, operate and provide UNOLS Long Core
System&lt;br/&gt;? Maintain, operate and provide Jason ROV launch and recovery
system&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six years since the formation of the pool,
scientists, technicians and ship operators&lt;br/&gt;have come to recognize the
pool as a center of expertise and a source of over-boarding&lt;br/&gt;systems
with the reliability they expect in the harsh conditions that performing field
work&lt;br/&gt;often presents. This proposal seeks the funds to cover five main
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;1) Provide technical expertise for engineering analysis,
winch maintenance, and winch training.&lt;br/&gt;2) Maintain the parts, supplies
and tools required to keep equipment operating.&lt;br/&gt;3) Adapt systems to
specific scientific requirements through engineering, updating and
modification.&lt;br/&gt;4) Identify the needs of the scientific community and
procure the necessary new equipment.&lt;br/&gt;5) Provide for the scheduling,
mobilization, demobilization, shipping, and logistics of Pool assets.