* 1630399
* Micro-Scale Mechanisms of N2O Production in Soil
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nathaniel Ostrom, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,999.00

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a potent greenhouse gas and more than half of its
anthropogenic production is from agricultural soils. Accurate assessments and
modeling of N2O emissions are thus important but have remained elusive. A major
reason is the high temporal and spatial variability in N2O production rates.
"Hot spots" are temporally and spatially variable micro-sites within a soil
profile that at a given point in time might be responsible for the majority of
soil N2O production. Occurrence of a hot spot in soil requires an optimal set of
physical, chemical and biological conditions. However, these conditions are
largely unknown. Extremely high temporal variability in hot spot occurrence,
often referred to as "hot moments", makes their identification even more
difficult. This proposal will measure N2O production in real time at small
spatial scale (1-1000 Âµm) and will answer the following questions 1) what
physical conditions are needed for a N2O hot spot to emerge, 2) what
microorganisms need to be present at the right place and time to enable the hot
spot's functioning, and 3) can knowledge of N2O production in micro-scale hot
spots be useful in predictions of soil N2O emissions at larger scales.

The project's approach addresses the critical knowledge gap regarding the
influence of micro-scale environments on hot spot/hot moment N2O production.
Soil N2O production will be studied using a new strategy - accounting for
heterogeneity in soil micro-environments at the locations where N2O production
takes place. For that the project will rely on a novel combination of advanced
tools, including synchrotron based X-ray computed micro-tomography (X-ray micro-
CT) information with isotope source tracing, micro-scale O2 mapping, and
microbial community analyses. This combination will enable identification of N2O
hot spots and descriptions of their physical characteristics and microbial
community compositions. The project will test the hypothesis that the micro-
scale patterns in distribution and characteristics of soil pores act as the main
driving force defining whether a particular organic-substrate-rich area will
become a hot spot of N2O production. The influence of pores takes place via
impacts on physical micro-environmental conditions as well as on composition of
active microbial communities. The project will provide 1) ability to estimate
the relevant transport processes; 2) new insights into micro-scale
spatial/temporal coupling of nitrification and denitrification processes; 3)
unique possibility to separate the contributions of the two key elements known
to drive N2O emissions, that is, (i) soil pores as physical avenues with a
potential to affect transport phenomena and (ii) water/air filled status of the
pores through which that potential is realized; and 4) development of physical
measures for field-scale predictions of N2O emissions based on X-ray micro-CT
information.

Post-doc, graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the project.
The 3D computed tomography images will be used to develop a set of interactive
computer tools, which will be made available to general public at the project's
website. The tools will also be presented to K-12 teachers as a curriculum
enhancement instrument and included in extension presentations to farmers and
crop consultants on nitrogen cycling.