* 1630051
* The Use Of "Ancient" DNA For Interpreting Predation And Mammalian Population Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Steve Wolverton, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 55,069.00

Dr. Steve Wolverton, of the University of North Texas, along with colleagues in
Biological Sciences and Geography, will undertake research to study the impact
of long term hunting of large game in western Argentina. Previous scholarship on
hunting of guanaco (a form of lama) indicates that hunter-gatherers were able to
sustainably hunt the species for the last 4,000 years. This pattern is unique in
that most archaeological studies of long term hunting of large wild game
indicate that people overhunt prey populations, causing serious declines. What
were the factors that enabled people to sustainably hunt large game in this
aridland context over the long term? Analysis of ancient DNA (aDNA) from guanaco
will enable archaeologists to learn about hunter-gatherer, large-game
interactions in this context, which is relevant to hunting practices
(contemporary and archaeological) in many other areas of the world. The guanaco
and human populations in this region were migratory, taking advantage of the
productive Andean river valleys during the summer; thus, an important aspect of
this research is to determine if the geographic component of migration
contributed to an ability to hunt sustainably. The research team will use new
approaches in aDNA analysis, previously unexplored in archaeology. Thus, this
research represents a substantial advancement through the use of new methods,
which can be employed to study human hunting of large game in many areas of the
world. The approaches refined in this study will be relevant to the study of
aDNA from any species (including humans) in any part of the world when
archaeologists are concerned with how populations grew or declined over time. .
The result will be a comprehensive study of the impacts of long-term hunting in
a sensitive aridland environment. This study is of particular interest because
hunter-gatherers there seem to have figured out how to hunt sustainably.
Understanding of this process has potential implications for managing migratory
species today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wolverton and his research team will
examine the impacts of hunting on guanaco population genetics over time; in
addition, whether or not guanaco populations remained geographically connected
across the region during the last 4000 years will be studied through analysis of
aDNA. The research will be conducted in the aDNA laboratory at the University of
North Texas on samples from southern Mendoza Province, Argentina. Hunter-
gatherers in the study region occupied the desert and steppe environments of the
arid Andean escarpment, today occupied by migratory herders. The research, thus,
links past hunter-gatherers to contemporary ranchers who use the same seasonal
migratory patterns between the lowlands and Andean river valleys. The outcome
will be an interdisciplinary dataset that can be combined with existing data on
physical geography, stone tool resource use, stable-isotope analysis of animal
bone, archaeobotanical analysis, and study of site locations over time The
research will take place primarily at the University of North Texas, it
represents substantial advancement in aDNA analysis in archaeology, and it will
involve students in all phases of the project.