* 1630177
* Wave-Wave Interactions and Upper Atmosphere Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jeffrey Forbes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 595,096.00

Large-scale vertically-propagating waves such as planetary waves (PW) and tidal
waves (TW) represent the primary means by which energy from lower atmosphere
meteorological activity is transmitted into the upper atmosphere region. The
coupling interaction between these waves is believed to be a source of strong
variability that is transmitted into the upper atmosphere and ionosphere as
secondary wave structures that could potentially affect navigation,
communications and radar tracking systems. Understanding the origins of such
variability in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) region is one of the
major challenges faced in space physics. This award would focus on studying
these large-scale wave interactions and the secondary waves they produce by
using a year-long dataset generated by the use of a NCAR general circulation
model (TIME-GCM), coupled to the use of the Global Scale Wave Model (GSWM) that
would provide simulations of the lower atmosphere inputs into the upper
atmosphere model. The broader impacts of the research effort will be realized in
several different ways: (a) engagement with a diverse population of students
through partnership with the Broadening Opportunity through Leadership and
Diversity (BOLD) Center; (b) engaging an undergraduate student in the research
through the Discovery Learning Apprentice (DLA) Program; (c) leveraging the
above connections to teach graduate students how to mentor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For individual cases where non-linear interactions are
seen, a non-linear version of the GSWM model will be employed to perform
numerical experiments, investigating factors such as how the phases of the two
primary waves impact the generation of the secondary waves. The primary
objectives of the work are as follows: 1) to delineate and understand the basic
mechanisms underlying the interactions between PWs and tides propagating up from
the lower atmosphere, 2) to quantify the variability imposed on the global
atmosphere-ionosphere system by these interactions, and 3) to assess the
implications for ground-based and space-based observing systems.