* 1630019
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,050.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) 2016. CVPR is the premier annual international conference in
computer vision with about 2000 senior, junior, and student participants. The
goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to highlight the work of senior PhD students
who are within six months of receiving their degrees (including recent
graduates), and to give these students an opportunity to discuss their research
and career options with faculty and researchers who have relevant expertise and
experience. The Doctoral Consortium supports the career development of some of
the brightest junior researchers in computer vision, contributes to the research
community in general by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate
student development, potentially increases the number of active researchers and
educators in STEM, and ensures that the computer vision community, through its
recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support covers some of the costs for 20 selected US-
based graduate students to attend the CVPR 2016 conference and the Doctoral
Consortium associated with it. Participants and recipients of travel support are
selected by the 2016 CVPR organizing committee, with the logistics managed by
the PI. The Doctoral Consortium provides opportunities for graduate students to
receive advice on their research work and career plans from experts from
different institutions, and with potentially different perspectives, is often
not available internally at one's own institution. This year's Doctoral
Consortium features two new components which aim to address comments from last
year's participants. These components are a panel discussion and more
interaction with mentors. The Doctoral Consortium helps graduating students in
computer vision find the best career options for their talents and achieve their
potential, thus benefiting the computer vision field and society as a whole.