* 1630448
* Conference: New Advances in Probing Cell-Extracellular Matrix Interactions;  Berlin, Germany; October 21 - 22, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Ovijit Chaudhuri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 03/31/2017
* USD 10,271.00

Many of the secrets to life lie outside the cell. The extracellular matrix
(ECM), consisting of primarily proteins supports the cells within a tissue.
While the ECM has long been viewed as a static "home" for cells, we are starting
to understand how the stiffness of the extracellular matrix changes cell
activities in ways that are similar to how dissolved signaling molecules control
cell behavior. In other words, the ECM helps determine what the cell does during
development of a baby, and during adulthood, wound healing, and cancer invasion.
Support from this grant for the conference "New Advances in Probing Cell-
Extracellular Matrix Interactions; Berlin, Germany; October 21 - 22, 2016" will
enable young investigators to meet senior scientists and to understand
technologies at the cutting edge of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
progress in cell mechanotransduction research has been facilitated by advances
of experimental tools. Microtechnologies have enabled the design and fabrication
of controlled physical microenvironments for the study and measurement of cell-
ECM interactions. Advances in engineered biomaterials have allowed researchers
to develop synthetic ECMs that mimic tissue microenvironments and investigate
the impact of altered physicochemical properties on various cellular processes.
Finally, advanced imaging and spectroscopy techniques have facilitated the
visualization of the complex interaction between cells and ECM in vitro and in
living tissues. This meeting will highlight the application of recent
innovations in these technologies to probing cell-ECM interactions with an aim
to inspire new combinatorial experiments from the interaction of these sub-
disciplines.