* 1630854
* EAGER:  Evaluating the Mechanisms of Perfluorinated Chemical Degradation by a Novel Plasma-Based Water Treatment Process
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Thomas Holsen, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 70,000.00

1630854&lt;br/&gt;Mededovic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perfluoroalkyl compounds, that
is those compounds that have fluorine attached to a carbon, have recently
received considerable attention due to their ubiquitous presence in the
environment. The presence of perfluoroalkyl compounds is problematic due to the
lack of effective treatment technologies. The objective of this proposed
research to develop an effective treatment, results from technology recently
developed in the PIs' laboratories, the foaming electrical discharge plasma
reactor that rapidly and efficiently degrades many chemicals including
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, disinfection byproducts, and
perfluoroalkyl compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to advance the fundamental understanding of the chemical reaction
mechanisms by which reactive species produced by the foaming plasma reactor
transform perfluoroalkyl compounds in water, evaluate the performance of the
reactor for additional perfluoroalkyl substances, and identify potential
degradation byproducts. The major hypothesis to be tested in this project is
that free and aqueous electrons are the species responsible for the primary
degradation reactions of perfluoroalkyl compounds. Radical propagation and
termination reactions involving the formed radicals and electrons may be driven
by any other species including hydroxyl radicals, hydrogen radicals,
hydroperoxyl radicals and oxygen radical anions. To test these hypotheses, the
experimental plan involves spectroscopic, radical scavenging, and state-of-the-
art analytical techniques to determine the species responsible for the
degradation of these compounds and their byproducts. The development of a
versatile, robust and cost-effective technology that can rapidly and efficiently
degrade perfluoroalkyl compounds and other contaminants of emerging concern in
industrial effluent and groundwater before they can impact rivers and drinking
water supply networks would likely be widely adopted and have a significant
positive impact on water quality. The project is designed to answer critical
questions: 1. Is the plasma-based water treatment equally effective for
perfluorinated alkane substances other than perfluorinated octyl acids and
perfluorinated octyl sulfonates? 2. What is the fate of these compounds during
treatment and what are the key chemical species responsible for their
transformation and what are the final products? 3. Can free electrons degrade
short- and long-chained perfluorinated alkane substances or other oxidative
radical contributing species? 4. Are transformation pathways similar for
different perfluorinated alkane substances? Do physicochemical properties of the
compounds (e.g., chain length) play a role in their extent of degradation? 5.
Does the presence of co-contaminants lower the treatment efficiency? The project
will involve both graduate and undergraduate students. Undergraduate students,
who will serve as assistants to graduate students, will be recruited through
institutional pipeline programs at the Institution.