* 1630377
* Collaborative Research: A Corpus of New York City English: Audio-Aligned and Parsed
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Cecelia Cutler, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2021
* USD 180,533.00

This project aims to further the study of New York City English (NYCE) - the
varieties of English particular to New York City and the surrounding region -
through the development and use of an innovative audio-aligned and parsed corpus
of New Yorkers' speech. The project will combine recent advances in speech
corpus development tools with the special talents and backgrounds of
undergraduates at the City University of New York (CUNY), to create the first
such corpus of New York City English (the CUNY-CoNYCE). The CUNY-CoNYCE will be
based on interviews with New Yorkers across the five boroughs and Long Island,
conducted by CUNY undergraduates from Queens College, Lehman College (The
Bronx), and the College of Staten Island. Because our student populations draw
predominantly from neighborhoods across the five boroughs of New York City and
Long Island, they are uniquely able to collectively gather and produce large
quantities of speech data from all over the region. The ultimate product will be
an on-line, freely accessible, ~1,000,000-word audio-aligned and grammatically
annotated corpus of NYCE speech, which will be accompanied by a full set of
digital, text-searchable recordings of the speech signal from which the corpus
is transcribed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to answering questions about
language variation and change in NYCE, the corpus will further research in all
areas of linguistics, especially in phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax,
sociolinguistics, and discourse analysis. The use of oral history and
sociological measurements of ethnic affiliation components in data collection
will also make the CUNY-CoNYCE a useful tool for sociologists and
anthropologists examining lived experience in urban settings, inter-ethnic
relations, and near-term history of New York life. The project will also provide
transformative research experiences for dozens of CUNY undergraduates, giving
them unique research opportunities. Additionally, users of the corpus will
develop an understanding of and appreciation for the grammar of non-standard
dialects, and functions of non-standard speech as necessary linguistic resources
for social integration.