* 1630194
* Collaborative Research: Individual and Team Behavior in Strategic Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* David Cooper, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 137,396.00

Economists use game theory (the theory of strategic interactions) to study a
wide variety of policy issues such as how to prevent collusion between large
firms, how to design auctions for various purposes (e.g. air wave rights), and
how to limit dysfunctional phenomena such as bank runs and market panics. In
many of these settings, decisions are made by teams rather than individuals -
the board of a large corporation, a congressional committee, etc. - but
relatively little is known about how decisions made by teams differ from
individuals in strategic interactions. Researchers on this project will conduct
carefully designed experiments to identify how groups agree to cooperate with
other groups, the mechanism by which groups perform better (or worse) than
individuals at generating more efficient outcomes, and to compare how groups, as
opposed to individuals, learn to make choices in related situations from past
experience. Better understanding how teams make decisions, and how these
decisions differ from ones made by individuals, will contribute to foundational
understanding of game theory. In terms of broader impacts, this research will
enable economists to better predict behavior of entities when the decisions of
those entities are made by teams rather than individuals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Psychologists studying repeated prisoner's dilemma games typically
find that teams are less cooperative than individuals, referred to as the
"discontinuity effect". Kagel and McGee (2016) fail to find a discontinuity
effect across finitely repeated super-games with no communication between teams.
Experiments involving multiple plays of repeated PD games with a probabilistic
stopping rule will be run with and without communication between opponents to
understand why groups seem less cooperative that individuals in some setting but
not in others. A second set of experiment will explore the relative efficacy of
communication for teams vs. individuals in reaching the efficient outcome in a
coordination game where the efficient equilibrium is quite challenging. A final
set of experiments will examine whether teams and individuals differ in the
extent to which they perceive different types of games as similar.