* 1630178
* NCS-FO: Understanding Neural Processing in Long-Term, Naturalistic Human Brain Recordings Using Data-Intensive Approaches
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Rajesh Rao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 899,318.00

Much knowledge about how human brains process information and generate actions
has been informed by carefully controlled experiments in laboratory settings.
However, understanding the brain in action requires exploration of its functions
outside structured tasks. The current project explores neural processing over
many days using large-scale recordings of brain activity augmented with video,
audio and depth camera recordings, all simultaneously and continuously
monitoring a subject. Importantly, unlike the majority of existing studies, here
the subjects receive no instructions but are simply behaving as they wish in
their hospital room-including eating, sleeping, and conversing with family. The
project will advance data-intensive science and human neuroscience, leveraging
external monitoring of the subjects to interpret naturalistic neural activity.
The results of this project will be catalytic in understanding of the human
brain, opening the door to study of brain function outside the structured
confines of laboratory experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neural decoding
algorithms developed will be directly applicable to current Brain-Computer
Interfacing (BCI) technologies, enabling the deployment of systems that can
predict the user's needs and improve quality of life outside the laboratory.
Further, ongoing collaborations with neurosurgeons focus on evaluating this
novel data-intensive approach to ethological brain mapping and how it may
complement existing clinical functional brain mapping. The project will support
and enable the education of students at the intersection of data science and
neuroscience, including training scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral career stages. Results from the research will be distributed as
open access publications and code repositories, supporting a commitment to
reproducible science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on data-driven
innovations to enable more accurate decoding and inference of actions from long-
term, naturalistic neural recordings. The first aim proposes to develop
algorithms for automated decoding of natural motor and speech behaviors.
Unsupervised clustering will be used to discover coherent patterns in brain
activity, and clusters will be annotated with behaviors automatically parsed
from external monitoring streams. Motivated by the size of the dataset and
substantial variety between individuals, this scalable computational approach
circumvents tedious manual annotation and fine-tuning of parameters. The second
aim proposes to infer networks of dynamic causality of cortical networks engaged
in task-free, naturalistic behaviors. This aim focuses on testing the hypothesis
that neural correlates of naturalistic behaviors differ from those of repeated,
instructed behaviors. Functional networks and the dynamic causality of cortical
areas will be explored using methods from nonlinear dynamical systems theory.
These networks will be compared to results from clinical brain mapping. This
project will improve state-of-the-art neural decoding in naturalistic contexts
and uncover neural correlates of task-free behaviors in humans.