* 1630141
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Heritage in Community Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ryan Lash, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,835.00

Doctoral candidate Ryan Lash, of Northwestern University, along with colleagues
in the US and Ireland, will undertake research to study how the adaptation of
ritual heritage contributes to the sustainability of marginal communities. The
commemoration of shared heritage through the maintenance of traditional rituals
and material culture is often an important means for communities ? both past and
present - to maintain integration and identity. Nevertheless, most approaches to
sustainability in the past focus on environmental and demographic factors while
placing little emphasis on considerations of community commemoration and
cooperation. By focusing on the material realities of community life over long
time frames, archaeology is especially poised to build comprehensive accounts of
sustainability that consider how the challenges of social integration and
environmental adaptation are entangled. How do communities adapt their
traditions and maintain solidarity as they undergo major transformations in
subsistence practices and political economy? How can people deploy old practices
to make new forms of social organization possible? By investigating what
contributed to community sustainability in the past, social scientists can
better address parallel challenges in the present. In particular, this research
can inform strategies of heritage maintenance among indigenous or other
marginalized communities undergoing economic transformations that threaten their
ways of life and continued existence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Lash
and his research team will investigate how members of a small island community
adapted the monuments and practices of a ritual tradition as the community
underwent major transformations in agriculture, political economy, and
demographics in the 18th to 20th centuries. Previous scholarship suggests that
ritual practices can foster shared heritage and identity by maintaining
monuments from the past as places of collective access and commemoration. From
c. 1750-1960, islanders on Inishark in western Ireland visited a series of
monuments as part of annual ritual processions dedicated to St Leo. Scattered
around islanders? houses and field plots, these monuments were remnants of a
monastery abandoned centuries earlier. To assess the impact of this ritual
tradition on community sustainability, research will trace how the use,
abandonment, renovation, and destruction of ritual monuments corresponds across
time with transitions in village agriculture, landholding, and demographics.
Combining oral history, archival documents, and excavation of four monuments
will reconstruct the changing practices and spatial dynamics of the ritual
tradition. Results will test common assumptions about the capacity of heritage
maintenance to support political economic formations by structuring community
members? movements and commemorations. A research team of American, Irish, and
local collaborators will generate a dataset that will enhance archaeological
analyses of sustainability and inform local initiatives that incorporate
archaeological heritage as a key cultural and economic resource.