* 1630365
* 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Cunningham, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) is considered to be the
premier conference in Machine Learning, both from an educational and scientific
standpoint. ICML encompasses topics on all facets of Machine Learning, and
solicits papers on problem areas, research topics, learning paradigms, and
approaches to evaluation. It is a key forum for exchange of ideas in the Machine
Learning community, and features scientific poster sessions, educational
tutorials, forward-looking workshops, and invited talks. This project offers
awards to students to help defray their travel costs, promoting a broader
societal reach for the conference. Promoting education and participation in
cutting edge data science is central to the mission of the NSF, and this project
and its awards speak directly to that mission.

ICML 2016 will be held in New York City. We have estimated itemized costs based
on previous ICML conferences. Students funded via this project will be selected
by a peer review process based on their financial needs, alignment of research
areas, and participation in the conference. These awards will offer the
opportunity to network with experts in the area and gain valuable insights into
the cutting edge of Machine Learning research. This will positively impact the
depth and breadth of their research as well as quality of their dissertations.
Long-term career benefits should also result, as ICML has a number of industrial
sponsors who set up booths and discuss Machine Learning-oriented job
opportunities within their own companies. The ICML 2016 scholarship program
follows the successful scholarship programs from the last several years. The
requested funds will be used exclusively to help defray the travel and
registration costs of students attending the conference. These student
scholarships are very important for encouraging student participation in this
premier conference and for shaping the future of the field as a whole.