* 1630217
* Building Bridges: 3rd EU/US Summer School and automorphic forms workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Jay Jorgenson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2018
* USD 34,040.00

This conference and workshop award is jointly funded by the International
office, OISE, at NSF and the Algebra and Number Theory program in DMS. The goal
of the Building Bridges Summer School and Workshop at University of Sarajevo,
July 11-22, 2016, is to provide a means by which mathematicians, primarily early
career researchers, can seek to expand their investigations into areas of
research beyond that of their previous studies. The main area of emphasis is
current topics in Number Theory. The first meeting in this program was held in
Aachen, Germany in 2012, and the second was held in Bristol, England in 2014. In
both instances, the bridges being built were across sub-disciplines of
mathematics. For 2016, the organizers selected Sarajevo in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as the venue, thus expanding the program into Eastern Europe.
Sarajevo is a fascinating city of unparalleled historical significance, which
the organizers believe will further enhance the appeal and impact of the
"building bridges" philosophy. Conference website: http://bb3.efsa.unsa.ba/

The summer school will consist of three distinct yet related programs:Galois
Representations and Diophantine Problems; Explicit L-functions, automorphic
forms and Galois representations; and Single and multiple variable Dirichlet
series and special values. Lectures will be given by accomplished mathematicians
who will present both introductory material as well as workable problems to
motivate the students. The workshop will consist of lectures on a range of
mathematical results which fall under the broad description of number theory and
automorphic forms. As with previous "Building Bridges" events, the organizers
will encourage the interaction and collaboration of participants with the
prospect of seeing future research teams form and undertake mathematical
collaborations.