* 1630000
* Synthetic Biology Open Language (SBOL) Workshop to be held in Boston, MA in March 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
enable researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably; apply a
variety of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. This is a
project to support a workshop on this topic in March, 2016 to be held in Boston,
Massachusetts. The meeting is organized by the Standards network (SBOL), . The
request if for participant costs to enable students and junior scientist to
attend the meeting. They will learn valuable lessons in the importance of
research and tool standardization and the impact of a community-wide effort.
This effort is essential for areas of systems and synthetic biology and
translational research to become seamless. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meetings
will specifically explore data exchange standards for biology to enable
researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably, apply a variety
of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. The discussion
will center, among others, on the systems biology markup language (SBML) for
mathematical modeling, the biological pathways exchange language (BioPaX) for
describing pathways, the systems biology graphical notation (SBGN) for visual
representations, and the synthetic biology open language(SBOL) for describing
biological designs. While synthetic biology data exchange has many unique
requirements, there are also many overlapping goals such as the need to
construct mathematical models, describe pathways, and provide visual
representations. Therefore, enabling the sharing of tools and other
infrastructure will be generally beneficial. Likewise, other communities will
benefit from renewed discussions around data exchange and synthetic biology's
unique process of forward engineering living systems.