* 1630265
* Collaborative Research: Smooth National Measurement of Public Opinion Across Boundaries and Levels: A View From the Bayesian Spatial Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jamie Carson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 123,616.00

This research project will measure public opinion in voting constituencies
around the United States. The project will provide estimates of opinion in
districts with little or no survey data, such as state legislative districts.
The project's intellectual merit comes from establishing a new means for
measuring public opinion that not only uses survey respondents' answers to
polling questions but also incorporates important information about where
respondents are located and what that implies about geographic patterns in
public opinion. Coupled with population information from the U.S. Census, the
project will produce stronger estimates of public sentiment when survey data are
sparsely distributed. The investigators will release free software that includes
user-friendly functions allowing any citizen to determine public opinion in his
or her own district or in districts that have not yet cast any votes, such as
proposed congressional districts in a redistricting cycle. The software will
allow more sophisticated users to obtain measures for any variable (even if
unrelated to public opinion) in relationship to geographic boundaries, which
will have extensions to research in public health, epidemiology, economics,
sociology, business, and law. The broader impact to society will be that the
data and software from this project will provide more information for the news
media, the public, and elected officials regarding the outlook of the nation by
constituency and locale, thereby providing a better understanding of the
American representation process. The project will recruit a diverse group of
research assistants that will be trained in this kind of statistical analysis.

Studies relating to public opinion often settle for less-than-ideal data.
Frequently, researchers will measure public opinion in the 50 states or the 435
congressional districts by pooling together several surveys taken over time
(losing a sense of change over time), using old measures of public opinion
(which may not be consistent with current public views), or using presidential
vote share to approximate public sentiment (which is prone to error because
factors besides ideology affect vote choices). With smaller districts than
these, such as state legislative districts, the problem is magnified
considerably, because it is rare to have many survey respondents in such a small
area. In this project, the investigators ask: How can survey responses and the
geographic location of the respondents be used to reliably forecast constituency
public opinion? To answer this question, the investigators will use the method
of Bayesian universal kriging. This technique fits a training model over survey
data to determine how demographic factors shape public opinion and how the
portion of survey responses that cannot be explained by demographics can be
explained by a geographically smoothed process. With a model like this, public
opinion in constituencies can be predicted with known population demographics
and the values of the geographically smoothed error process over that district.