* 1630096
* EAGER: Metrics to Evaluate Customer Preference Models for use in Engineering Design Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kate Whitefoot, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 235,348.00

Engineers have begun to use customer preference models developed in marketing,
economics, and psychology to design products that better meet customer desires.
While such models are adequate for marketing purposes, they often introduce
significant errors when used as-is in an engineering design context. Despite the
prevalent use of customer preference models by many engineering researchers, the
field does not have adequate methods for evaluating the accuracy or
appropriateness of demand models for use in this context. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides support for fundamental
research to develop metrics and a test procedure to evaluate various errors
associated with customer preference models that can mislead engineering
designers. Results will allow engineering designers to construct demand models
using estimation methods that minimize errors in design selection and
optimization. The metrics developed through this work will also allow
practitioners to evaluate demand models and select the most appropriate model
for their design problem. In addition, several education and dissemination
activities will be conducted to improve student learning of model evaluation
techniques and facilitate use of the evaluation methods by federal agencies that
employ demand models to inform their funding and regulation of technology
development in the transportation sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives are to produce (1) engineering-design specific metrics that will
evaluate the estimation biases associated with demand models, (2) a
demonstration of the significance of demand-model estimation biases on optimal
design variable selection, and (3) identification of one or more demand
estimation methods that reduce biases affecting design selection and
optimization. The research will draw upon discrete choice analysis and
econometric estimation to identify metrics and estimation methods that are
appropriate for engineering design. Estimation biases of two types of parameters
that affect demand gradients with respect to engineering design variables --
customer preference coefficients and aggregate demand estimates -- will be
examined. Multiple metrics will be tested to compare demand-model predictions
with synthetic customer purchase data in which biases between the estimates and
true parameters are known. Several different demand estimation methods proposed
in econometrics will be evaluated using the identified metric(s). Finally, an
optimization case study will be used to illustrate the influence of demand model
biases on optimal design variables by comparing results using the identified
estimation method that reduces parameter biases with one that does not.