* 1630037
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Program Analysis for Smartphone Application Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Iulian Neamtiu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 46,389.00

This project investigates a new approach for describing and reasoning about
security properties of smartphone applications. Smartphones are becoming
pervasive, and smartphone applications are increasingly used for a variety of
social, health, scientific, and military purposes. However, the capabilities
these phones provide, such as access to GPS, camera, Internet, calendar,
contacts, and other sensitive information can lead to major security risks.
Today's smartphone development methodologies do little to help developers
construct applications that safely access sensitive
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
program analysis techniques that can help developers express, reason about, and
enforce security policies in smartphones. The proposed technical approach will
allow developers to define rich security policies in an intuitive and flexible
manner: as program code that interacts with a mobile application and checks
desired properties. To ensure that application code conforms to such policies,
the project is pursuing several techniques that leverage recent advances in
static and dynamic program analysis. The project is also investigating
approaches to automatically synthesize a code-based policy for a given
application. The project is instantiating these ideas in the context of Google's
Android operating system, and is evaluating the ideas in terms of effectiveness
and performance on a broad range of Android-based smartphone applications.