* 1630490
* Collaborative Research Belmont Forum: Ecological Calendars and Climate Adaptation in the Pamirs
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Karim-Aly Kassam, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2022
* USD 459,962.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a six-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a group of the world?s major and
emerging funders of global environmental change research. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international environmental research most urgently needed to
remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. Each partner organization provides funding for
researchers from their country to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in a
Collaborative Research Action, the six partner organizations have provided
support for research projects that utilize a strong inter- and trans-
disciplinary approach to examine climate, environmental, and related societal
change in mountain regions. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers
to cooperate in a consortium of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that brings together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological Calendars and
Climate Adaptation in the Pamirs (ECCAP) unites researchers from the United
States, Italy, China, Germany, and the Kyrgyz Republic. The goal of the project
is to recalibrate historical and existing ecological calendars from the Pamir
Mountains by integrating indigenous knowledge with scientific analyses of
climate and phenological data. By doing this, the project will contribute to the
capacity of Pamiri communities to anticipate and respond to increasingly
inconsistent weather patterns. ECCAP will conduct participatory action research
with indigenous communities in the Pamir Mountains, and develop and test new
ecological calendars by integrating indigenous ecological knowledge with
science. New knowledge will be disseminated through the development of a
curriculum for inter-generational transfer and adaptation of calendars, as well
as an international conference on the use of ecological calendars for building
anticipatory capacity for climate change at local scales.