* 1630404
* EAGER: Determining pyrolysis kinetics through time-resolved measurements of condensed phase reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 65,000.00

1630404-Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the chemical processes
responsible for the decomposition of biomass when it is rapidly heated in the
absence of oxygen, a process known as fast pyrolysis, to produce gases, liquids,
and solids. The liquids from fast pyrolysis from biomass show promise for the
production of advanced biofuels and biobased chemicals that resemble
conventional gasoline and diesel fuels produced from petroleum. Understanding
the chemical reactions that occur during fast pyrolysis and measuring their
rates are important for designing future biorefineries that would convert
biomass into fuels and chemicals. This project will explore new experimental
techniques for probing reactions that occur in solid biomass after it has been
rapidly heated to high temperatures in a matter of seconds. By tracking the
change in concentration of various decomposition products with time, rates of
important pyrolysis reactions can be determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is to measure the chemical kinetics of biomass fast pyrolysis
through time-resolved measurements of condensed phase reactions. Pyrolysis is
the basis for most thermochemical processes including combustion, gasification,
fast pyrolysis, and even solvent liquefaction. Among these technologies, fast
pyrolysis has gained considerable attention in the last few years for its
prospects to produce advanced biofuels and biobased chemicals from
lignocellulosic biomass. The reaction mechanisms of pyrolysis have been studied
since the 1950s, but only modest progress has been made in determining
elementary reaction rates associated with the depolymerization of the
biopolymers that make up lignocellulosic biomass. Without rate coefficients and
activation energies for these reactions, it is difficult to accurately model and
design pyrolysis reactors from first principles. Most previous studies of
pyrolysis kinetics have measured weight loss of samples undergoing relatively
slow heating, which yields little information about elementary reactions
occurring in solid biomass. This research will demonstrate the utility of two
versions of Controlled Pyrolysis Duration (CPD) - Quench reactors developed at
Iowa State University for studying condensed phase elementary chemical
reactions. The first, capable of investigating reactions that occur on the order
of a few seconds, will be used to study unzipping of small oligosaccharides to
form the anhydro-monosaccharide levoglucosan. The second, capable of
investigating much faster reactions, will be used to study cracking of cellulose
to oligosaccharides early in the depolymerization process. These apparatus will
also be employed to study depolymerization of hemicellulose and lignin.