* 1630276
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Significance of Biotic Interactions: A Comparative Study Utilizing Echinoid Associated Traces
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Roger Portell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 230,022.00

Predators often leave distinct marks on prey skeletons, including tooth marks,
fractures, scars, and drill holes. Fossils that contain those distinct marks can
be used to explore the role of predation over the span of millions of years. To
date, research on the fossil record of predation has centered mainly on
mollusks: snails, clams, and their relatives. The proposed project will expand
the history of predation beyond mollusks, and assess the impact of predation on
sea urchins, sand dollars, and other echinoids. Echinoids are a commercially
important group of animals and a major food source for many marine predators.
This project aims to develop a global reference system for identifying traces
left by predators on echinoid prey, which is expected to stimulate echinoid
research on both modern and ancient ecosystems. Once assembled, the database
will then be used to study the impact of predators on the evolution of echinoids
over the last 100 million years, during which, they have diversified and become
a critical part of the marine biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neontological
museum collections in conjunction with the literature will be used to codify
trace characteristics of various types of interactions (predation, parasitism,
commensalism, etc.) that affect modern echinoids. The resultant database will
include data on the identity/ecology of trace makers, identity/ecology/phylogeny
of affected echinoids, and morphology, frequency, and distribution of traces.
The database will then be used to explore the fossil record, and evaluate
hypotheses regarding the relative evolutionary importance of select types of
biotic interactions affecting the ecology and evolutionary history of
echinoids.&lt;br/&gt;Results will be publicly available through museum
activities, activity kits for middle school students, and teaching tools in the
Florida Museum of Natural History Educator Resource program.