* 1630010
* Sociocultural Consequences of Legal Innovation: An Anthropological Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Mara Buchbinder, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Legislative support for physician aid-in-dying (PAD) in the United States has
risen steadily in recent years. Five states currently authorize physicians to
prescribe a lethal dose of medication to a mentally competent, terminally ill,
adult patient for the purpose of ending the patient's life, provided that
certain preconditions are met. With ongoing legislative activities in many other
states, these laws are expected to spread nationally. While such laws remain
contentious, regardless of one's moral position on PAD, this shifting
legislative climate raises questions of broad public significance about how the
legalization of PAD affects death, dying, and end-of-life care in the US. Much
of the social scientific research on PAD in the U.S. has focused on the social
and political factors that give rise to legalization. Less is known about how
jurisdictions accommodate PAD as a new end-of-life practice and incorporate it
into existing medical and bureaucratic institutions responsible for managing
death. Dr. Mara Buchbinder, a medical anthropologist at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, will investigate the implementation and cultural impact
of a recently enacted PAD law. The project will yield descriptive information
that can be used to improve clinical practices and end-of-life communication in
the U.S. The findings will also enhance democratic process in states considering
PAD laws by contributing a more comprehensive understanding of the societal
effects of PAD laws. Teaching and mentoring activities will extend the broader
impacts of this project, most directly, through the training of a social science
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on Vermont's
"Patient Choice and Control at End of Life" Act (Act 39), enacted in May 2013.
The 2-year ethnographic study will address the following overarching research
questions: How do ordinary people understand, access, experience, and contest
the right to PAD once it has been granted? How do healthcare providers and
policy stakeholders accommodate or resist PAD as a new end-of-life practice? How
does PAD affect the cultural landscape of care for the dying in the US? Due to
the recent enactment of Act 39, and Vermont's small size and the geographic
proximity of key institutions, Vermont offers an unparalleled setting for
documenting emergent responses to the law across multiple sites (e.g.
legal/medical, lay people/experts, urban/rural). Data collection will include:
1) semi-structured interviews with patients, survivors of people who have used
Act 39, healthcare providers and administrators, activists, and legislators, and
2) participant observation in settings in which PAD is likely to be discussed
(e.g. continuing education events for healthcare providers, community advocacy
events). Qualitative data analysis will yield valuable information about the
broad sociocultural consequences of legalizing PAD,including unintended
consequences,that will be relevant to US policymakers, clinicians, patients, and
families. It will also contribute to emerging social science theory on the
relation between law, ethics, and social change.