* 1631814
* ALTERNATIVE NITROGENASES: HOW MUCH DO THEY CONTRIBUTE TO N2 FIXATION AND WHY?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xinning Zhang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2020
* USD 357,768.00

In terrestrial and marine ecosystems, plant growth is often limited by the
availability of the essential element nitrogen. Biological nitrogen fixation,
the reaction that transforms nitrogen gas into plant-available ammonium, is a
key reaction that controls the fertility of ecosystems on the planet.
Nitrogenase, the enzyme (biological catalyst) responsible for this reaction,
exists in three different forms, called isoforms. Each isoform has
characteristic properties, including different efficiencies, trace metal
requirements and optimum temperatures. Yet, their relative contributions to
nitrogen fixation in the environment are currently unknown. This project aims at
using a newly developed method to improve our understanding of the distribution
and activity of the three nitrogenase isoforms. This project will provide a
better understanding of the services (such as changes in ecosystem fertility)
provided by nitrogen fixation to human societies and how they may evolve into
the future. It will also provide important educational training to undergraduate
and graduate students, and material for science activities with K-5 students
focused on the origin of soil nutrients and their role for plant
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three isoforms of nitrogenase are the Mo-
nitrogenase, and the V- and the Fe-only nitrogenases (sometimes referred to as
the "alternative" nitrogenases). The activity of the alternative nitrogenases
can be distinguished from that of the Mo-nitrogenase using a new method (ISARA,
for Isotopic Acetylene Reduction Assay), which is a variation on the classic
Acetylene Reduction Assay (ARA). The samples are incubated with acetylene, and
ethylene production is measured over time to estimate nitrogenase activity. The
13C isotope fractionation of acetylene reduction is diagnostic of whether the
Mo- or the alternative nitrogenases carry out the reaction. The proposed project
has two components: 1- Determination of the contribution of the three
nitrogenase isoforms in coastal marine and boreal ecosystems; 2- Laboratory
investigations of alternative nitrogen fixation, with particular focus on
delineating the interplay of metal, temperature, and cellular physiological
controls on isoform activity. This work will provide the quantitative data on
the contribution of alternative nitrogenases to ecosystem nitrogen fixation. It
will also shed new light on the controls of alternative nitrogen fixation. If
the importance of alternative nitrogen fixation is confirmed, it may require a
reexamination of isotope- and ARA-based understanding of the nitrogen cycle on
local and global scales.