* 1631598
* Mid-Segment Polydispersity as a New Tool for Manipulating ABA Triblock Copolymer Morphologies and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/04/2015,05/31/2017
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 172,092.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of innovative
polymeric materials possessing unusual combinations of chemical functionalities
and useful physical properties is crucial in their myriad applications as high-
strength structural materials, water and gas purification membranes, components
in organic photovoltaic cells, and materials for high power lithium-ion
batteries. Within a highly interdisciplinary research environment, this project
will challenge undergraduate and graduate students to conduct hypothesis-driven,
crosscutting research at the interface between chemistry, chemical engineering,
and materials science. By using modern methods in synthetic polymer chemistry to
generate new materials and by characterizing their structures and attendant
physical properties, this project will aim to uncover new tools for designing
innovative, functional polymers with unusual morphologies and novel properties
for a variety of potential applications. An undergraduate polymer chemistry lab
and two polymer-oriented lecture demonstrations will be developed for use in
general chemistry instruction and in public outreach
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of commodity and specialty block
copolymers rely on their useful combinations of properties, which stem from
covalently linking two or more dissimilar homopolymer segments into a single
macromolecule. By virtue of their thermodynamically driven self-assembly into
complex yet well-defined nanoscale morphologies, block copolymers are useful as
thermoplastics and thermoplastic elastomers, advanced molecular separations
membranes, and new templates for fabricating next-generation microelectronics.
Modern polymerization techniques enable access to a plethora of copolymers
containing unusual combinations of chemical functionalities with useful physical
properties, at the expense of introducing significant segmental dispersity into
one or more blocks of the copolymers. However, the role of broad segmental
dispersity on block copolymer phase behavior is not well understood. This
project will directly investigate the effects of mid-segment polydispersity on
the phase behavior of ABA-type triblock copolymers. Model polydisperse triblock
copolymers with varying segmental interaction parameters will be synthesized by
tandem polymerization techniques for studies of their composition-dependent
phase behavior, using small-angle X-ray scattering, electron microscopy, polymer
rheology, and various transport measurements. Characterization of samples near
the order-disorder transition (ODT) will help to identify the variables that
parameterize the phase behavior of these multicomponent block copolymer
mixtures. Ultimately this study aims to transform segmental polydispersity into
a new tool for manipulating the morphologies of block copolymers with
technologically useful bulk properties.&lt;br/&gt;