* 1631550
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: A Mechanistic Model of Cognitive Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Joseph Kable, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2020
* USD 544,207.00

Cognitive control is the ability to guide our thoughts and actions in accord
with our internal intentions. It enables us to make good decisions, balance
options, choose appropriate behaviors and inhibit inappropriate behaviors. Yet
our understanding of how cognitive control works in the brain is critically
lacking. The research outlined in this proposal will address this outstanding
problem by developing and validating a mechanistic model to explain the
fundamental principles enabling cognitive control. This problem is of urgent
national interest and clinical relevance: greater understanding of how brain
structure gives rise to cognitive control may be critical for the development of
earlier and more effective treatments of the many neuropsychiatric disorders
where cognitive control deficits are present. In addition, this project will
create new research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in
neuroscience, network theory, data sciences, and mathematics. The investigators
will integrate the research into undergraduate and graduate teaching activities,
providing a powerful bridge between theoretical and experimental applications
for students at the University of Pennsylvania and the University of California
at Riverside, one of America's most ethnically diverse research-intensive
institutions. The investigators will also incorporate this material in extensive
community and educational outreach efforts, in addition to translating this
knowledge to mental health clinics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
project, the investigators seek to develop, validate, and test a mechanistic
theory of cognitive control. They postulate that the regulation of cognitive
function is driven by a network-level control process akin to those utilized in
technological, cyberphysical, and social systems. Their approach is grounded in
network control theory, a relatively new subdiscipline of control and dynamical
systems. In contrast to the descriptive statistics of graph theory, network
control theory offers a principled mathematical modeling framework to inject
energy into a networked system leading to a predictable alteration in the
system's dynamics. Traditionally applied to mechanical and technological
systems, this field builds on notions of structural controllability to ask
specific questions about the difficulty of the control task and how to design
realistic control strategies in finite time, with limited energy resources. The
work will (i) develop a network-based theory of cognitive control informed by
neuroimaging data, (ii) validate a network-based theory of cognitive control
using data-informed computational models, (iii) define how network structure
impacts individual differences in cognitive control performance in adults
undergoing cognitive training, and (iv) release a publicly available toolbox for
network controllability analysis. These theories and tools are the result of a
truly integrated and cross-disciplinary approach to cognitive control, which
blends the engineering and data sciences with empirical methodologies in
neuroscience.