* 1631072
* Making Academic Change Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Julia Williams, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 10/31/2016
* USD 48,227.00

The lack of systemic change in STEM education points to an important problem
with the approach that the STEM education community has pursued thus far. Change
has been targeted at the course and curriculum levels, focusing on teaching and
learning methods and proving their efficacy. While beneficial, these activities
have not fostered the strategies - such as motivation, communication,
collaboration, and persuasion - that are necessary if individuals wish to enact
change on larger, more institutional levels. These change strategies are well
known but have not been brought into STEM education in a rigorous, accessible
way. The workshop Making Academic Change Happen (MACH) fills the need for
research-based skills development and assistance in creating a plan for change.
Through targeted working sessions on specific topics participants learn
research-proven strategies for making large scale change happen on their home
campus. Our focus for the 2016 MACH Workshop is emerging engineering educators.
The primary experience of graduate training is introduction to and acquiring
competence in disciplinary research. We have determined, however, that new
engineering educators are tasked with developing new courses, curricula, and
programs. These initiatives require additional skills or areas of expertise:
advising, mentoring, curriculum development, imaginative vision, program
assessment, etc. None of these skills are likely addressed in a typical
engineering Ph.D. curriculum. For these reasons, we argue that new engineering
educators who envision themselves as change agents should work to adopt the
disposition and skills of a change agent. Attending the MACH Workshop will help
these educators start on their path as engineering education innovators.

The purpose of this workshop is 1) to assist emerging engineering educators in
learning and practicing skills needed to lead change, and 2) prepare working
documents around a variety of topics that are necessary to advance a change
project. By fostering the development of these skills and mindsets in the very
people who must lead change efforts, this workshop promotes meaningful change in
STEM higher education. The change projects advanced by the workshop participants
are expected to become model programs that can be used as example strategies and
processes for others hoping to implement similar ideas. These projects reach
beyond a single classroom, focusing more on the underlying processes,
approaches, or philosophy of STEM education enacted on their campus. By working
within the institution's context, the change agents trained during the MACH
workshop will positively impact the student experience of STEM. As part of this
research, we will interview the emerging engineering educators about their
change projects and provide them with mentors and support for their change
activities. We will continue to offer mentorship after the workshop is over, and
we will keep track of their progress on their change projects as they implement
the MACH change strategies they learned during the workshop.