* 1631994
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of Working Memory on Response Order Effects and Question Order Effects in Telephone and Web Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Robert Belli, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This research project will investigate whether working memory has an impact on
the responses participants provide on survey questionnaires. Working memory is a
cognitive system that provides both the limited storage for relevant information
and the temporary processing needed to perform ongoing mental tasks. When
individuals participate in a survey, for each question presented, the
participant must remember the question and response options while formulating a
response. This research will extend the current understanding of the impact of
working memory on participants' response selections in questions about
attitudes. The research will contribute new knowledge about the cognitive
aspects of survey methodology. The results may have implications for the design
of questionnaires and could be of particular importance to large, nationally
representative surveys like the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), where it is
essential to measure cognitive functioning. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, support is provided to enable a promising student to
establish a strong, independent research career.

This project will collect new data through administering a survey to a random
sample of Nebraska residents. Three research questions will be addressed with
this data: 1) Does working memory impact question order and response order
effects? The project will assess whether these effects are consistent across
high and low working memory capacity groups for younger and older participants.
2) Is the impact of working memory on question-order effects and response-order
effects consistent across two modes of survey administration, telephone and web?
To examine this question, the same set of questions will be administered in a
telephone survey and web survey. 3) How do participants compare across two
different sets of memory measures? A subset of memory measures from the Health
and Retirement Study (HRS) will be included in the survey to compare with other
questions designed to specifically measure working memory capacity. The data
will be analyzed using statistical methods such as chi-square tests and logistic
regression.