* 1631903
* CONFERENCE:  Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation in Plants to be held July 14-15, 2016 at the Austin Convention Center in Austin, TX
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Karen Browning, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide support for a Conference on Post-transcriptional Gene
Regulation in Plants to be held July 14-15, 2016 at the Austin Convention Center
in Austin, Texas. The format of the meeting, which includes oral presentations
and poster sessions, will provide a highly interactive environment to facilitate
the sharing of latest research developments in this exciting field of plant
biology. The program will also include career-building opportunities for young
and early-career scientists, thus contributing to development of a new
generation of plant scientists. The timing of this meeting--immediately after,
and at the same site as, the American Society of Plant Biologists' Plant Biology
2016 Conference--is intended to make attendance convenient and
affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression is crucial to many fundamental plant processes, and recent
discoveries have highlighted many new regulatory mechanisms impacting pre-mRNA
processing, RNA modification, and RNA stability. This conference will provide
opportunities for scientists to exchange ideas concerning these new models of
gene regulation and their impacts on plant growth and development, including
responses to various abiotic and biotic stresses. Discussions will also include
novel experimental and computational methods that permit collection and
integrative analyses of high throughput data. The conference will have broad
impact on scientific career development by promoting participation of women and
members of underrepresented groups and by providing early-career researchers
with structured opportunities to network and form collaborations with experts in
the field.