* 1631436
* NCS-FO: Using computational cognitive neuroscience to predict and optimize memory
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lila Davachi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2020
* USD 954,910.00

The last decade has seen an explosion of research concerning the neural
processes underlying memory formation and learning. As the basic research in
this field becomes more mature, exciting possibilities for application of this
knowledge have begun to emerge. This proposal aims to capitalize on these
findings by developing assistive learning technologies that may revolutionize
the way we teach and train people. Researchers at New York University will
develop automated "adaptive teaching" technologies that guide learners through
material in an individualized way. The goal is to increase retention or mastery
of materials by tailoring instruction to individual learners. The novel
contribution of this project is to combine insights from cognitive neuroscience
and machine learning in the design and operation of such technologies.
Successful development of this synergistic research would be a transformative
application of neuroscience to our daily lives and may lead to new commercial
technologies. The research will also provide a post-doctoral training
opportunity for the next generation of scientists working at the intersection of
neuroscience and computer science. The award is from the Integrated Strategies
for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems program, with funding from the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports fundamental research that
advances the research literature on STEM learning, and from the Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences division in the SBE directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific scientific goal is to explore novel applications of neuroscience
methods (particularly fMRI) to improve how people learn. Neuroscience research
has identified robust neural correlates of successful memory formation (e.g.,
activity in brain areas such as the medial temporal lobe and the hippocampus).
The goal of this project is to use these variables to help predict the
information needs of learners in an adaptive way. The project design involves
scanning an individual's brain during the learning phase of a task. The research
team then will identify which materials would benefit from additional study by
combining computational models of the time course of learning and forgetting
with theories mapping neural activation to successful memory formation. A
computer algorithm then selects new materials for learners to re-study in a
subsequent session. The goal is to show that generating a training sequence from
a computer-based "neurofeedback" algorithm can enhance long-term memory
retention more than when learners choose for themselves which items to re-study.
This is a high-risk but potentially large reward project that merges basic
science findings from neuroscience and cognitive science in ways that may
transform the way we educate people.