* 1631608
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2016 International Conference of Mobile Brain-Body Imaging (MoBI) and the Neuroscience of Art, Innovation and Creativity
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2016
* USD 21,330.00

This is funding to provide partial support for the 2016 International Conference
of Mobile Brain-Body Imaging (MoBI) and the Neuroscience of Art, Innovation and
Creativity. The conference's goal is to identify the challenges and
opportunities for engaging the creative arts to promote novel and innovative
approaches for solving complex problems in science, engineering, education and
medicine. The meeting, to be held at Live Aqua, Cancun on July 24-27, 2016, is
being jointly organized by the University of Houston in Texas and the Technical
University of Berlin, Germany. The agenda is designed to examine the state of
the art, to promote audience-driven discussions whose content is defined by the
participants themselves, and to facilitate collaborations and interactive
demonstrations and performances. A roadmap summarizing the meeting's findings
will be prepared and submitted for peer-review as part of a Special Issue in
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, a first-tier electronic open access journal.
Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, taking part in the Doctoral
Consortium program at the conference, will capture summaries of the group
interactions and final group briefings that describe the challenges addressed
and outline the approach(es) identified for solving them, including what
research needs to be done to understand the fundamental science behind each
challenge, a plan for promoting trans-disciplinary collaboration and innovation,
the reasoning behind the plan, and the expected benefits to society. In terms of
STEAM (STEM + Art) outreach, conference attendees will represent a wide range of
experience and expertise, from graduate students to well-established scientists,
clinicians, artists, engineers, media, and industry. The Doctoral Consortium for
selected graduate students and postdocs will provide an opportunity for the
students to network while exploring and developing their research interests
within the context of an interdisciplinary conference, under the guidance of a
distinguished group of international researchers, artists and innovators. The
organizers will actively recruit student participants from under-represented
groups, including women and minorities, and across institutions, with a maximum
of two students per institution (and if two then one must be a female).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve MoBI's ambitious goals, the organizers will
convene thought leaders and innovators from academia, medicine, the arts, and
technology to explore the myths, challenges and opportunities of research at the
intersection of these disciplines in the context of a 3-day conference in a
unique setting selected to foster discussion, interaction and collaboration,
leading to a strategic plan that exploits the creative arts to advance science
and engineering across critical areas, including: (a) uncovering the basic
neural mechanisms underlying aesthetic and creative experiences (reverse
engineering of the human brain); (b) the artistic, scientific and engineering
challenges that affect collaboration and innovation; and (c) how to design new
tools for understanding and promoting innovation and creativity. The conference
will be organized around a number of tracks: Mobile Brain-Body Imaging (MoBI)
Technologies; Cognitive, Medical and Pedagogical Applications; and Cognitive and
Affective Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs).