* 1631953
* SEP:  Sustainable Housing through Holistic Waste Stream Management and Algal Cultivation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Ben Stuart, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 05/31/2018
* USD 956,595.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. Ben Stuart and co-workers at Ohio
University and Georgia Institute of Technology. This project will lead to a
shift in the knowledge base required to address a significant national need for
alternative energy for the next generation of sustainable buildings. It will
provide the fundamental information required for designing, constructing,
optimizing, and scaling up of an algae-based power system that will
significantly contribute to the energy requirements of houses or residential
communities. The project proposes the following aims: a) Evaluate the bench-
scale feasibility of the technology through compositional analysis of various
residential waste streams, determining biochemical methane potentials,
calculating specific growth rates and biomass yields of local algae strains, and
processing the cultivated biomass into biofuels. Process modeling software will
employ comprehensive mass and energy balances to develop the descriptive and
predictive understanding of system parameters necessary to design, construct and
operate a pilot-scale system in both open- and closed-loop modes; b) Determine
the interrelationships of architectural design and planning parameters for the
algae-powered house at the rural, suburban, and urban scales using the design
studio and GIS to test hypotheses and develop novel scenarios; and c) Evaluate
elements of integration, constructability, reliability, safety and environmental
impact on the use of the algae-based technology in residential structures using
a comprehensive economic risk and feasibility assessment to investigate the
costs of installation, training, operation, material transfer, maintenance, and
evaluation of selected technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic analysis
described in aim 3 above includes comprehensive surveys that will elicit public
perceptions and tolerance for the costs associated with sustainable housing
incorporating integrated material and energy flows. Investigating the holistic
development of these communities will have positive impacts in the fields of
architecture, building construction, engineering, sustainable/renewable energy,
environmental stewardship, multi-scale economics, and education, and will lay
the foundation for a significant shift in the approach to cross-disciplinary
research in these fields. This effort will engage students from several of these
disciplines, and will produce educational materials that will be incorporated
into academic instruction as well as informative videos for younger students and
adults. Jobs could be created for manufacturing the proposed algae-based systems
in rural community developments of Appalachian counties with historically high
unemployment rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While biofuels hold the potential to
contribute significantly to global energy demands, the majority of algal biofuel
research to date has been directed towards meeting transportation needs. The
proposed research will assess the potential of algal cultivation and processing
in the management of liquid and solid waste streams, using the algae produced to
supplement waste biomass in the production of energy for use in residential
applications. Including water and waste management with the potential for food
production and generation of biofuels will augment existing off-grid power
technologies (e.g. solar PV, solar thermal, wind) that provide many homeowners
with desired energy security, and will extend the sustainability and resource
independence of residential communities.