* 1631719
* Molecular Co-Evolution: Lessons from Pathogen-Immune System Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Vijay Balasubramanian, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2017
* USD 6,000.00

The workshop titled, "Molecular coevolution: lessons from pathogen-immune system
interactions", will be held on 11th-12th April 2016, at the Princeton Center for
Theoretical Sciences (PCTS). It will bring together theoreticians and
experimentalists who study adaptive immunity in vertebrates or in bacteria.
Adaptive mechanisms for immunity have evolved to mount a flexible and diverse
response and to counteract the rapid evolution of pathogens to enhance
organismal survival. The participants of this program work at the cutting edge
of research into such immune dynamics. The goal is to foster new collaborations
that build and test predictive approaches to coevolution of pathogens and the
immune system. Predictive modeling is an essential component for understanding
the fundamental science of the immune system. Such basic science advances will
eventually enable advances in medicine. Close to half of the participants in
this workshop are females, helping to increase diversity and participation of
women in STEM fields.

The immune systems in vertebrates and in bacteria have evolved remarkable
mechanisms for adapting to a diverse and constantly changing pathogenic
environments. In vertebrates, new receptors are constantly generated by genomic
recombination, and those that successfully detect threats are selectively
amplified to protect the host. Some of the stimulated receptors are retained to
form a memory of past infections, and thus to mount a rapid response against
future infections of a similar type. This process of affinity maturation in an
adaptive immune system constitutes a Darwinian evolution of the immune cells
that occurs during the lifetime of an organism. By contrast, in some bacteria
and archaea, immunity is directly acquired from interactions with the
environment, and is heritable to future generations. These bacteria use the
CRISPR-Cas mechanism to acquire specific genomic sequences from attacking phages
(viruses that attack bacteria), and use these sequences to target future
invaders. In both cases, the rapid turnover of pathogens to escape the adaptive
immune response creates an evolutionary arms race at the molecular level.
Understanding the complex dynamics of these adaptive immune systems in response
to coevolving pathogens is only possible through a joint theoretical and
experimental effort. This workshop will focus on a number of questions at this
interface, including: (i) what does it mean for an immune repertoire to be
"well-adapted", (ii) how can the actual dynamics of the adaptive system reach
such a well-adapted state?, (iii) how should, and how does, the adaptive system
react to an evolving pathogenic environment, and (iv) what are the molecular
signatures of coevolution between viruses and the immune system, and how can we
detect those from the biological data? This workshop will bring together many of
the leading experts on these topics.