* 1631983
* I-Corps: Interactive Co-operative Tracking of Heterogeneous Networked Multi-Agent Systems for Advanced Composites Manufacturing and Repair
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Mark Tuttle, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Carbon fiber reinforced plastics (CRFPs), commonly known as composites, are
increasingly becoming integral to a variety of markets such as aerospace,
alternative energies, marine, and automotive industries due to their high
strength and low weight in comparison to other engineering materials such as
steel. As a case in point, the amount of composite materials that are used in
commercial aircraft is projected to be nearly 50% by 2020. Additionally,
composites are used to increase efficiency of wind turbines by producing larger
blade rotors. In spite of having favorable properties such as high strength to
weight ratio and moisture resistance that makes them ideal for engineering
structures, composites are expensive and energy intensive to produce due to the
need for large pressurized ovens (autoclaves) in their manufacturing process.
Moreover, composite structures are more challenging to repair, as the repair
material is often needed to be glued to the damaged structure using a high
performance adhesive rather than bolting repair patches per normal practices for
metallic structures. The proposed project utilizes an innovative approach that
will significantly reduce the cost, and improve the energy efficiency of
manufacturing and repairing large/thick composite structures. The scrap rate in
the composite industry is significantly higher than other manufacturers due to
the challenging nature of repairing composites. The proposed technology will
help reduce the scrap rate, thereby making composite repair more efficient at a
lower cost by limiting the major pain points in the current composite bonding
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Washington has filed an
international patent for the methodology, which protects the primary
functionality that makes this innovation possible. This I-Corps team will have
exclusive access to this patent within the field of use once it is moved toward
commercialization. A working prototype of a temperature controller box along
with tested heaters is ready, and proof of concept has been completed. The
results from the proof-of-concept have been published in peer-reviewed journal
papers. The ultimate goal of this project is to gain a better understanding on
the feasibility of commercializing the proposed technology based on the team?s
in-depth customer discovery work. The expected activities and deliverables for
this project at the end of the I-Corps program will be to: 1) Finalize the
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) that will provide this team the necessary mobility
to introduce the product to potential customers; 2) Showcase the methodology for
curved surfaces to potential customers; 3) Finish the Alpha test and ensure Beta
readiness; and 4) Develop a robust business model and a go-to-market strategy.