* 1631472
* NCS-FO: Biomimetic membrane networks as adaptable neuromorphic computation circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Stephen Sarles, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 669,763.00

NCS-FO: Biomimetic membrane networks as adaptable neuromorphic
circuits&lt;br/&gt;Garrett S. Rose (PI) and C. Patrick Collier (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;University of Tennessee, Knoxville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Using biologically-inspired approach that better mimics
the architecture and signaling currency of biological neural networks and to
offer untapped potential for new forms of multifunctional neuromorphic
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuromorphic computing as a field comprises
computational hardware engineered to mimic the behavior of the mammalian brain.
Such systems are well suited to perform applications that are often simple for a
biological brain but prove to be difficult for classical artificial computers
for example, recognizing human faces at most any angle. While many neuromorphic
architectures have been studied over the years, implementations based purely on
traditional silicon-based circuitry fail to mimic the basic properties of
biological neural networks, and, possibly as a result, they require far more
power to achieve similar computational capability. To address this limitation
and to uncover new insights into the role of properties such as tunable ion
transport and synapse-neuron organization on complex computation in the brain,
this project considers a new class of adaptable brain-inspired circuits
comprised of biomimetic membranes with reconfigurable transport properties that
mimic the variable weighting found in real synapses and solid-state artificial
neurons that communicate via these synapses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project delineates significantly from prior
electronic neuromorphic hardware and digital software systems. Specifically, in
this work the PI investigates: 1) how molecular transport through biomimetic
membranes can be gated using physical stimuli to reproducibly vary synaptic
weights in artificial synaptic mimics; 2) learn how to integrate membrane-based
synaptic mimics with solid-state (i.e. transistor based) neural circuitry to
develop hybrid devices that exhibit controllable and reproducible plasticity;
and 3) utilize network modeling techniques to predict how variable synapse
weighting within multi-neuron architectures affect collective sensing and
learning functionality. This high-risk, high-reward project features a
comprehensive integration plan across research and educational activities such
that the results from previous work inform many, including neuroscientists
studying complexity in the brain, engineers developing neuromorphic computation
devices and brain-hardware interfaces, and social scientists in understanding
how continuously-variable signaling pathways aid in learning, individuality, and
group behavior. The broader impacts of the proposed work are transformative in
nature and of interest to multiple fields of science, engineering, and medicine.
By tapping into environmentally friendly, easily configurable soft materials and
emulating nature's design, the PI seeks to advance computational strategies past
Exascale, thus setting the stage for the next generation of low-power autonomic
computation, distributed sensing, and information storage. Our approach also
contributes to advancing brain-inspired computing systems, energy-efficient
circuitry, and synthetic devices capable of communicating with live tissues,
including multifunctional medical implants, drug-delivery devices, systems for
disease monitoring and treatment, and technologies that can assist the brain in
learning and cognition. The modeling and simulation aspects will also generate
new open-source software that will allow students and researchers to explore the
characteristics of network arrangement and synapse plasticity on network
functionality. The educational impact leverages the fact that this project
interfaces topics in engineering, biology, physics, and chemistry; PhD students
involved in this work will receive exclusive scientific training to prepare them
for making contributions in multiple fields. These activities also support
broader impacts by generating interest in STEM, increasing participation of
underrepresented groups, and expanding engineering curricula.