* 1631460
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Learning Efficient Visual Representations From Realistic Environments Across Time Scales
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Marc Howard, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,015.00

Computer vision algorithms examine images and make sense of what these images
depict. Current computer vision algorithms are able to interpret images at the
level of a typical middle school student for many image interpretation tasks.
Recent advances in computer vision have led to rapid technological advances
which are still unfolding but affect not only the technology industry, but
education, national security and health care. However, these new algorithms are
as yet poorly understood and do not describe how natural learners such as a
typical middle school student learn to understand the visual world. This
proposal draws together a team of cognitive psychologists, neuroscientists, and
computer scientists to develop a new class of algorithms for computer vision
inspired by the way people learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight of this
proposal is that human learners, unlike many leading computer vision techniques,
make extensive use of the temporal structure of visual experience to extract
structure. In the real world the image on the human retina is almost never
static. Changes in eye position and movements of the head and body create a rich
and complex temporal structure over a range of scales from hundreds of
milliseconds up to days and weeks. This proposal a) develops databases of
realistic and dynamically changing images in the real world and in immersive
virtual reality environments, b) develops computational models for learning
visual representations from temporally structured experiences and, c) examines
the brain structures supporting representations integrating time and space
across scales using fMRI. The algorithms pursued in this project are inspired by
recent theoretical work in the neuroscience of scale-invariant memory. However,
because the databases will be made publicly available, other researchers will be
able to develop other algorithms that exploit temporal and spatial correlations.
Taken together, these efforts are intended to catalyze a new generation of
techniques for human-like machine learning algorithms with applications in
computer vision.