* 1631571
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Flexible Rule-Based Categorization in Neural Circuits and Neural Network Models
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Freedman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 565,183.00

Categorization is the brain's ability to recognize the meaning of objects and
events in our environment, and is an essential cognitive process underlying
decision making. Categorical decisions are often flexible, and depend on the
demands on the task at hand. The current project aims to understand the brain
mechanisms which underlie flexible categorical decision making, as well as
computational algorithms for making such decisions my artificially intelligent
systems. Experiments will record from ensembles of cortical neurons during
flexible categorization tasks. Computational modeling work will train recurrent
neural networks to perform the same flexible categorization tasks used in the
experiments, with parameters of the model inspired by the experimental data.
This will result in a greater understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying
categorization and decision making, as well as improvements in computational
algorithms for flexible categorization by artificially intelligent systems. The
broader impacts of the project include substantial training opportunities for
undergraduates, Ph.D. students, and postdoctoral researchers in both
experimental and computational approaches to flexible decision making. The
project will also generate new experimental data and computational tools that
will be shared with the broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines multi-channel neurophysiological recordings and neural circuit
modeling to investigate the neural circuit mechanisms of flexibility and
generalization in visual categorization. The project leverages a collaboration
by the researchers that has proven fruitful in our previous joint research on
category learning. The focus of the present project is on flexible task
switching between discrimination and categorization, and between categorization
rules, in the behavioral, experimental, and computational work. The task
paradigms will also directly test the 'exemplar model' of categorization from
cognitive psychology, linking behavioral models to neural circuit processes. The
project will develop a novel modeling framework, based on training recurrent
neural networks to learn to perform multiple tasks. This approach offers a
potentially powerful data analysis tool and conceptualization of neural circuit
computation in terms of neural population trajectories in a high-dimensional
state space, and this perspective is urgently needed to analyze simultaneous
recording from many single neurons during performance of complex cognitive
tasks, a major thread of modern Data-Intensive Neuroscience and Cognitive
Science.