* 1631910
* NCS-FO: Sub-millisecond Optically-triggered Compound Release to Study Real-time Brain Activity and Behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jonathan Ploski, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 800,000.00

1631910&lt;br/&gt;Qin, Zhenpeng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the brain
controls behavior requires advanced tools to manipulate brain activity. Inspired
by recent progress in optogenetics (i.e., a technique to control selected types
of brain cells with genetic modification and light stimulation), this project
seeks to develop a new set of tools that will allow localized and ultrafast
control of brain activity to influence behavior in freely-moving animals. This
will be achieved by using light stimulation to rapidly release compounds that
are encapsulated in tiny nanometer-sized particles. The ultrafast feature of
this novel compound technology is ideally suited to manipulate brain activity
that typically occurs on the scale of milliseconds. Importantly, this new
technology is suited to packaging and releasing a wide range of chemical and
biological compounds, as well as combinations of such compounds. The project's
success will have a number of broader impacts. Scientifically, this project will
generate a new technology to better understand how the brain works, and thus new
knowledge about the brain and behavior. The ultrafast compound release method
can potentially develop into a platform technology for other research areas,
including the nervous system outside the brain. The collaborative environment of
this project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for two
graduate students with cutting-edge technologies in the fields of engineering
and neuroscience. Finally, this project will promote STEM education both in the
lab and through community outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Advances in
methodologies and tools for neuroscience research often lead to fundamental
insights into the function of the central and periphery nervous system.
Currently available methods for drug infusions using relatively large metal
cannulas are not ideal for studies in freely behaving animals, because drug
delivery is slow and the cannulas often destroy the brain area under study
and/or overlying brain areas. New methods are needed to perform drug infusion or
local release in a minimally invasively manner in freely moving animals.
Inspired by recent developments in optogenetics, the PIs will develop a
versatile optically-triggered system for sub-millisecond compound burst release
for the real-time study of brain activity and behavior. Plasmonic liposomes,
i.e. liposomes coated with a gold shell layer, can encapsulate a wide range of
molecular compounds and be deposited locally in the brain. Due to the small
width and poor clearance of the extracellular space in the brain, the plasmonic
liposomes can be designed to stay in the injected area for prolonged periods of
time. The encapsulated compound can then be quickly burst-released by a near-
infrared pulsed laser via an implanted optical fiber. The encapsulated compounds
can be designed to release by repeated triggers, allowing multiple on-demand
drug release events over an extended period for behavioral studies. In this
project, an integrated approach will be developed to deliver and release the
encapsulated compounds, and to study the resulting brain activity and behavior
change in real-time utilizing Pavlovian fear conditioning. Successful
development of this sub-millisecond optically-triggered burst release technique
will represent a major technological advancement that addresses the limitations
of current techniques for behavioral research. Specifically, improved bio-
compatibility and reduced invasiveness are anticipated by the by one-time
nanoparticle infusion and on-demand light-triggered drug release. The fast
release feature of the new technique will provide sufficient speed to study
neuronal communication in neuroscience research. Furthermore, this technique
will find wide applications in neuropharmacology research where targeted
delivery and localized rapid release are currently unavailable.