* 1631963
* New Methods for Bayesian Quantile Regression Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Athanasios Kottas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 255,000.00

This research project will develop flexible models and corresponding methods for
inference and variable selection for a number of quantile regression problems.
Regression modeling to explore the effect of a number of predictor variables on
a response variable remains a key activity in statistical research. By targeting
different percentiles of the response variable, quantile regression provides a
practically important alternative to traditional mean regression for settings
where the predictors may affect the tails of the response distribution in a
different fashion than its center. This project will advance statistical
methodology within the composite quantile modeling framework. Quantile
regression is a burgeoning area of statistical research with great promise for
substantive applications. The project will investigate the application of the
methods to several problems within the economic and social sciences. The methods
will be used, for example, to study the relative importance of different types
of predictors on different levels of mathematical achievement for high school
students. To facilitate use of the methods by practitioners and researchers from
other fields, publicly available software will be developed for implementing
several of the models. The project will create educational opportunities for
graduate students and seek to increase the participation of women and
underrepresented groups in the research.

This research project will develop a general model-based framework for composite
quantile regression to allow estimation and selection of predictor effects to be
informed by multiple percentiles of the response distribution. The composite
quantile regression modeling framework involves structured mixtures of
distributions that will facilitate different inferential objectives in the
integration of effects from several predictor variables through multiple
response quantiles. Composite quantile regression is a recent development that
has not yet been studied under a probabilistic modeling framework for the
response distribution. The research project has a substantial analytic component
with regard to the theoretical study of properties for the various quantile
regression models as well as a challenging computational component with regard
to achieving computationally tractable model fitting. The practical utility of
the new methods will be investigated through several simulation studies in the
context of variable selection to compare with well-established regularized
regression methods. For all the models, the project will involve the study of
relevant theoretical properties and design of computational techniques for
inference, model checking, and prediction. The project also will explore
hierarchical model extensions for practically relevant settings with multilevel
data structures.