* 1631674
* PFI:BIC: Multimodal-Sensor-Enabled Environments with Advanced Cognitive Computing Enabling Smart Group Meeting Facilitation Services.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jonas Braasch, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

Millions of meetings take place every day in the US, incurring a tremendous cost
in terms of managers' and employees' precious time and salary. Unfortunately,
group meetings suffer from serious problems that undermine productivity and
collegiality, including overt or unconscious bias, "groupthink", fear of
speaking, and unfocused discussion. Few automatic tools exist for keeping
meetings on track, accurately recording who said what, and making group
discussions more productive. The goal of this research is to design intelligent
rooms that provide facilitation services by identifying meeting participants,
understand their conversations, summarize discussions, and help the group
efficiently get through an agenda, all without requiring the participants to
wear microphones or other sensors.

The research will have broader impacts in several aspects. Any steps to make
group meetings for complex, long-term projects more productive and easier to
control would result in immediate economic impact. The success of a service
system that facilitates long-term group interactions will result in a major
opportunity for technology transfer and a highly marketable hardware/software
platform for collaboration in domains including business, education, and
finance. The project will result in new group meeting data to be used by
researchers in different fields such as organizational psychologists, and
computer scientists. Finally, the project will produce highly visible
infrastructure for research and education that has the potential for greater
public engagement with science and technology.

The research will be realized at different scales in two existing physical
testbeds: the Smart Conference Room (SCR) at the Engineering Research Center for
Lighting Enabled Systems and Applications (LESA) and the Collaborative Research
Augmented Immersive Virtual Environment Lab (CRAIVE-Lab), a much larger space
with a tall, panoramic screen. Both testbeds will be expanded as part of this
project to integrate sensing and computing technologies developed by the
partners. The major technology modules include: (1) advanced time-of-flight
sensors for robust occupant tracking, resulting in centimeter-accurate, real-
time locations of all participants in the meeting without requiring video
cameras or wearable sensors; (2) custom beamforming microphone arrays for
acoustical tracking and sound source separation, allowing highly-directional
beams to be directed at each participant's instantaneous location, clearly
isolating their speech without requiring lapel or headset microphones; (3)
natural language understanding algorithms for extracting knowledge from the
speech, enabling the system to learn meeting-specific terminology, link
concepts, assess speaker roles, and summarize discussion; and (4) cognitive
computing tools for meeting facilitation, including assessments of participation
and productivity, ideation interventions for brainstorming, and active decision
support. The resulting service systems will be cognitive physical environments
that understand their occupants' locations, movement, speech, vocabulary, and
intentions. A key aspect of the research is a multi-year study that tracks
technical research groups that hold regular, unscripted meetings in the
testbeds, assessing the effectiveness of the service system.

The lead institution for the project is Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, with
investigators from the departments of Electrical, Computer, and Systems
Engineering, Computer Science, and Architecture. The industrial partners in the
effort are IBM Research (large business, Yorktown Heights, NY) and Heptagon
Advanced MicroOptics (large business, Zurich, Switzerland).

This award is partially supported by funds from the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Divisions of Information and
Intelligent Systems (IIS) and Computer and Network Systems (CNS).