* 1631965
* The International Beacon Satellite Symposium 2016; Trieste, Italy; June 27 - July 1, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Patricia Doherty, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 05/31/2017
* USD 24,764.00

This award provide support for the International Beacon Satellite Symposium that
will be held at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste,
Italy on June 27 to July 1, 2016 (BSS2016). This meeting is one of the more
important focused workshop conference meeting within the discipline of radio
science. The award would provide travel support and participant expenses for 10
students (4 US and 6 from developing countries). The Beacon Satellite Symposium
provides a unique opportunity for US scientists and students to meet scientists
from all over the world to share knowledge on the ionospheric effects on radio
propagation and space weather. Beacon Symposia have historically focused on
ionospheric electron content and scintillation. With more recent developments in
ionospheric imaging, remote sensing, tomography, occultation techniques,
assimilation models, distributed arrays of ionospheric measurements, monitoring
natural hazards from space, national and international space weather activities,
and satellite based navigation and communication systems; these studies have
gained new momentum and perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium is a
unique opportunity for US scientists and students to gain a worldwide
perspective on the state of the art of these research topics. This award has
significant broader impacts by creating opportunities for international research
collaborations and enhancing research in the United States. International
research collaborations yield opportunities to share and deploy ionospheric
sensing equipment to far away lands where ionospheric behavior and effects are
not well studied or understood.