* 1631281
* R/V Armstrong Operations- CY 16
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Timothy Twomey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2019
* USD 6,187,152.00

R/V Neil Armstrong is one of two new ships built by the Office of Naval Research
for the Academic Research Fleet (ARF). In CY 2016 the ship will transition from
construction to sea-going operations. The proposed operations will provide
access for over 4&lt;br/&gt;NSF Principal Investigators (PIs), including OOI, to
conduct multiple research sea voyages throughout the year. 57% of the 207 days
scheduled will support NSF programs. ONR will also support PIs this year to make
up the 43% of the 207 days. After the Science Mission Equipment is installed
during Phase III shipyard, Armstrong will conduct a series of shakedown and
Science Verification Cruises (SVCs) to check out the ship and equipment. In
April 2016 Armstrong is scheduled for both INSURV and NSF Inspection to assess
readiness for options as a UNOLS vessel.&lt;br/&gt;If successful, Armstrong will
conduct funded science voyages for OOI at the Pioneer site. Armstrong will
transition to OOI work in the Irminger Sea in July 2016 followed by an NSF
sponsored OSNAP Voyage in August. Armstrong will finish the year with additional
OOI voyages at the Pioneer site and a dry-dock availability before January 2017.
That yard availability will mark the end of the warranty
period.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects
supported by operations on R/V Armstrong in 2016 have been rigorously evaluated
for scientific and intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant
review and award process. The competitive nature of the award granting process
ensures a very high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the
discoveries made by the research programs&lt;br/&gt;supported by R/V Armstrong
will enhance understanding of the oceans and address a broad range of important
scientific questions. The goal of this proposal is to provide funding support to
safely and productively operate and maintain R/V Armstrong in 2016 and to ensure
it is maintained to support its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential
prerequisite for safe and successful scientific missions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;WHOI research vessels provide at-sea laboratories necessary
to effectively and safely take science to sea. This community includes senior
oceanographic scientists, post-doctoral and doctoral students, graduate and
undergrad students as well as engineers, technicians, and teachers. These
intellectual endeavors have broadened our understanding and have spurred on new
questions and scientific theory. Research supported by R/V Armstrong next year
will be important in understanding the Earths climate and how
it&lt;br/&gt;changes over time. In 2016 R/V Armstrong will exercise all of its
scientific mission equipment to evaluate its capability and what may need
further development on the nation's newest research vessel. Educational and
outreach programs will be featured on these voyages. All of these intellectual
endeavors will continue to broaden our understanding of the oceans, stimulate
new questions, and confirm&lt;br/&gt;scientific theory for years to come,
benefiting society at large. Oceanographic expeditions are an extension of
university classrooms and are an extraordinary educational experience. Voyages
expose participants to new ideas, teach fundamental
scientific&lt;br/&gt;principles through observation and practice, and inevitably
raise questions that stimulate new thinking about how the oceans work. An
increased awareness of our responsibility to bring this science into the
classroom and to the public has resulted in the development of new avenues to
share these scientific findings. The cruise web site concept has effectively
reached classrooms with real-time images,&lt;br/&gt;data and two-way
communication between scientists and students in schools across the country.
These efforts have extended the sea-going experience from a handful of
participants to thousands of students in classrooms across the country, as well
as to the general public. Scientists on WHOI vessels will use this tool to
present their data through web based approaches either at their home institution
or through web sites maintained by community organizations. The WHOI web site,
http://www.whoi.edu, has pioneered efforts to present the results of research
expeditions to the public. Outreach programs continuing in 2016 from WHOI
vessels with the Perkins School for the Blind and Disabled represent cutting
edge efforts to broaden the experience of conducting research at sea to every
American.