* 1631977
* Impact of Ocean Acidification on Planktonic Foraminifera in the California Current System During the Last 300 Years
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Thunell, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 412,497.00

More than one-quarter of anthropogenic CO2 emissions produced since the
beginning of the Industrial Revolution have been incorporated into the global
surface ocean causing large-scale declines in seawater pH. This phenomenon is
referred to as ocean acidification (OA) and is predicted to become particularly
acute in coastal regions, including the west coast of the US. As the oceans
become more acidic, it will become increasingly difficult for marine calcifiers
to produce their shells. This may have important consequences for the marine
food web and for various commercially important marine species. This study will
produce the first detailed record of changes in OA along the coast of California
during the last two centuries. This will be accomplished by examining the shells
of a group of calcifying plankton called foraminifera. These organisms live and
produce their shells at the sea surface, with the shells sinking to the sea
floor when the organism dies. Foraminiferal shells from a sediment core
collected from Santa Barbara Basin will be studied in order to reconstruct
changes in calcification over the last 200 years. Using these results,
predictions will be made as to how calcification will continue to change through
the end of the 21st century based on various scenarios for increasing
atmospheric CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling studies suggest that
the California Current System (CCS) and associated ecosystem have been and will
continue to be particularly vulnerable to ocean acidification (OA). To test this
concept, this study will quantify the effect of OA on calcification rates in
planktonic foraminifera from the Santa Barbara Basin region of the CCS since the
onset of the Industrial Revolution. A 20-year Santa Barbara Basin sediment trap
time series, together with the varved sediments from the basin will be used to
generate a nearly annually resolved record of changes in calcification for this
group of plankton in the CCS for the last 200 years. The proposed research will
take place in two phases. First, sediment trap samples and coincident water
column chemistry data will be used to calibrate the relationships among
foraminiferal shell morphology (area density), shell geochemistry (B/Ca), and
water column carbonate chemistry. Second, these morphologic and trace metal
proxies will be used to produce two independent records of changing carbon ion
concentration for the last two centuries using a 210Pb-dated varved sediment
record. These sediment-derived estimates of carbon ion concentration will be
compared with model estimates of this parameter for the last two centuries.
Taken together, the sediment trap and core samples will provide an incomparable
archive for quantifying the impact of OA on calcification in this
paleoclimatically important group of plankton.