* 1631439
* EAGER: Modulation of the Inflammatory Response for Accelerated Tissue Vascularization and Bone Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Ehsan Jabbarzadeh, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2017
* USD 110,000.00

1631439-Jabbarzadeh

There is a profound need for bone regeneration strategies due to trauma and
various musculoskeletal diseases. Current approaches to treat bone defects are
associated with limitations such as shortage of donors and risk of disease
transmission. Strategies built on tissue engineering offer alternative avenues
to repair and regenerate bone tissue. The transfer of tissue engineering
methodology from the lab to the clinic is limited by the inadequate vascular
growth and host inflammatory response. This study establishes the proof of
principle for the use of resveratrol, a natural compound found in berries and
grapes, to harness the potential of immune cells to drive blood vessel growth.
Through a systematic investigation of the effects of resveratrol on the
interactions between immune cells and stem cells, this research will pave the
way for a solution to the major clinical problem of bone regeneration.
Successful completion of this work will impact a wide range of patients
suffering from debilitating musculoskeletal conditions. The educational goals of
this proposal are tightly linked to the scientific aims. The educational
objectives of this proposal are to integrate research findings into a new course
curriculum, facilitate the dissemination of results to both the scientific
community and public, and promote participation of students from
underrepresented groups in the field of biomedical engineering.

This project addresses the profound need for bone regeneration strategies due to
trauma and various musculoskeletal diseases. Current approaches to treat bone
defects include autografts and allografts that are associated with limitations
such as shortage of donors and risk of disease transmission. Strategies built on
tissue engineering offer alternative approaches to repair and regenerate
tissues. The transfer of tissue engineering methodology from the lab to the
clinic is limited by the failure to adequately vascularize scaffolds following
implantation. The goal of this project is to promote the neogenesis of bone and
supporting vasculature in a synchronized manner similar to the physiological
process of bone growth during maturation. The project is transformative in
nature in that contrary to conventional methods, instead of trying to counteract
inflammation, the proposed approach establishes the proof of principle for the
use of resveratrol, a natural polyphenol, to regulate immune cell behavior and
use their secreted signaling molecules to drive vasculogenesis and bone
formation. The approach involves the use of (i) a resveratrol, a natural
polyphenol found commonly in grapes and berries, (ii) a biomimetic scaffold with
native bone extracellular matrix protein components, and (iii) mesenchymal stem
cells. Rapid perfusion throughout an implanted scaffold is a critical issue for
engineering the repair of a wide variety of tissues in addition to bone. The
study delineate the potential of resveratrol as a potent physiological cue to
control inflammatory response with many applications beyond the fields of tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine (e.g. tumor inflammation). The educational
goals include development of an elective course on principles of stem cells
engineering and promoting participation of students from underrepresented groups
in the field of biomedical engineering.