* 1631655
* WORKSHOP:  The iConference 2016 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Gregory Leazer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 26,013.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 22 promising U.S.
doctoral students along with distinguished faculty mentors in a doctoral
colloquium (workshop) on information science research, which will be held in
conjunction with the 2016 iConference to be hosted by Drexel University in
Philadelphia, PA, on March 20-23. Since 2005, the iConferences have provided a
forum where information scholars, researchers and professionals from around the
world gather to share insights on critical information issues in contemporary
society. An openness to new ideas and research fields in information science is
a primary characteristics of these events. Attendance has grown every year, a
testament to participants' appreciation for the inspiring sense of community,
high quality research presentations, and myriad opportunities for engagement.
The iConferences are presented by the iSchools, a worldwide association of
Information Schools dedicated to advancing the information field, and preparing
students to meet the information challenges of the 21st Century. Open to broad
participation, the iConferences have been successful in building a sense of
community around the information field, bringing together people who otherwise
might rarely interact with one another, and thereby helping to promote
interdisciplinary research. This year's theme of "Partnership with Society" will
examine the dynamic, evolving role of information science and the iSchool
movement, and the benefits to society. More information may be found online at
http://ischools.org/the-iconference/. The iConference doctoral colloquia
traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers focused on the interplay of information and
technology in a social context, allowing them to develop a network both among
themselves and with senior researchers. Participation is encouraged from a broad
range of relevant disciplines, thereby expanding attendees' perspectives on
their topics of study and promoting advancement of the field. The organizers
will proactively work to maximize diversity along such key dimensions as
institution type, research topics, methodological approaches, disciplinary
traditions, gender, ethnicity, and national or cultural backgrounds, so that the
students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their professional
development. The event organizers are committed to drawing a diverse group of
students. They expect a majority of the accepted students will be women, but at
a minimum will ensure that at least 10 of the 22 students are women, and that
furthermore no more than 4 students will be accepted from any single university.

The Doctoral Colloquium will be tightly integrated into the conference
experience, starting with an orientation event, highlighting specific content
during the technical program, and culminating in a full day focused on peer-
research critique and career development. The primary objective of the Doctoral
Colloquium is to help train the next generation of information science
researchers. To this end, it will provide the student participants with an
environment in which they can share and discuss their goals, methods and results
at an early stage of their research. By participating in the doctoral
colloquium, students will gain feedback on their work both from the mentors and
from other students, which should allow them to enhance their research. Students
will also develop a better understanding of the different research communities
engaged in the study of information science, and learn how to position their
work within the community. In addition, the colloquium will provide students
with opportunities such as poster sessions) to make new professional connections
beyond their own disciplines and institutions, and will also help them
successfully launch their careers whether in industry or academia.