* 1631964
* Air pollution, environmental justice and urban form
* ENG,CBET
* 01/25/2016,12/31/2016
* Julian Marshall, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 58,857.00

1236800 (Marshall). Outdoor air pollution is among the top 10 causes of
mortality in the U.S. (and is the largest environmental cause), annually
responsible for ~1% of total deaths. Those health risks are not evenly
distributed among the population. An important aspect of sustainable development
is to understand how urban design and urban environments can help meet social
and ?fairness? goals, including avoiding large imbalances in environmental risks
among subpopulations?especially along lines of race or income. This project will
uncover new relationships among air pollution, demographic attributes relevant
to environmental justice, and the spatial layout of urban areas; and will
develop an education and outreach program to engage disadvantaged youths.
Objectives are to (1) characterize spatial patterns in air pollution
concentrations throughout the U.S., and over time, (2) characterize spatial
relationships between air pollution and demographic attributes relevant to
environmental justice (EJ), covering multiple spatial scales (national, state,
county, and urban); (3) identify how shifts in the spatial layout of cities
relate to air pollution metrics relevant for EJ; and (4) integrate research
findings into education and outreach. The research approach uses an air
pollution model that incorporates available demographic data (US Census) and
pollution measurements by the U.S. EPA, satellite-based measures of air
pollution, and information about land uses (e.g., roads, built-up areas, parks).
The model offers spatial precision and therefore provides a good basis for
predicting how concentrations vary among communities. New knowledge generated
will be integrated into education and outreach activities, including a program
to engage high school students in disadvantaged communities and challenge them
to investigate and address EJ conditions locally. Targeted results will generate
new knowledge relevant to EJ conditions, how they are changing, and how they
relate to urban form. Research and outreach activities will identify and test
potential solutions. The project will provide observational evidence relating
air pollution and demographic attributes such as race and income; and, will
explore how those relationships (i) vary with spatial scale of analysis (from
within-urban to national-scale) and over time, and (ii) correlate with the
spatial layout of urban areas. The combination of available data, including new
satellite measurements, with cutting-edge, high-resolution pollution models will
provide a novel approach for understanding these issues. It is anticipated that
findings will advance theory and practice in environmental sustainability by
exploring a long-term factor influencing air pollution (urban form) and by
uncovering equity aspects of environmental impacts. The high-precision air
pollution models to be developed have the potential to be useful to researchers
in outside fields such as environmental epidemiology and environmental
economics. Findings will be integrated into existing curricula and programs
aimed at increasing science and engineering enrollment of underrepresented
students. A new program will challenge students to explore community-scale
solutions. Research findings, quantifying conditions relevant to EJ for cities
and regions throughout U.S., will be shared directly with local, state, and
national environmental policy makers. An interactive website will allow the
public to explore spatially precise estimates of long-term air pollution in
their neighborhood.