* 1631776
* NRT-DESE: NRT in Integrated Computational Entomology (NICE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,721,142.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of California, Riverside (UCR) will enable a team of investigators
from Computer Science/Engineering and Entomology/Life Sciences to prepare the
next generation of scientists and engineers to exploit the unreasonable
effectiveness of data to understand insects by integrating the disciplines of
computer science and entomological biology. The NRT in Integrated Computational
Entomology (NICE) will train students to be at the forefront of science in
computing for biological domains, providing biological scientists a foundation
in computing techniques and engineers an understanding of critical entomological
and ecological issues. The project anticipates training at least forty (40) MS
and PhD students, including twenty (20) funded PhD trainees from the life
sciences, computer science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be the first program of its kind, anywhere in the world, and will meet high
standards for innovation while offering a structure for demanding training in
entomology/life sciences integrated with computational techniques in machine
learning, data mining, and statistics. The NICE program recognizes and advances
Computational Entomology as an emerging interdisciplinary field. Computational
Entomology as a discipline recognizes that entomological and ecological problems
generate enormous amounts of data, and that fully exploiting this data will
require individuals whose knowledge spans two otherwise disparate fields. The
training and research structure of the proposed project seeks to bridge large
gaps in training, language, approach, perspective and knowledge that continue to
divide the engineering/informatics and life sciences disciplines. Through
coursework and joint projects with government agencies and companies, trainees
will experience the translation of research outcomes into implemented public
policy or agricultural/medical products and services. This project will scale to
include graduate student trainees at UCR receiving NRT support and those not
receiving funding, and will be sustainable at UCR as the new curriculum will
become incorporated across the participating departments and degree programs.
This project will also serve as a replicable Computational Entomology education
and training model for other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative scalable models for STEM
graduate education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective
training of STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research
areas, through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.