* 1631818
* SBIR Phase II:  Active Noise Reduction System With Voice Pass-Through
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* George Hutchinson, Invictus Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 891,455.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in line with the
trend in medicine towards a prevention paradigm, following the premise that
preventing problems is generally less costly than treating the problem or
managing a future deficit. Excessive noise in neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs) has been clearly linked to cognitive deficits among the patients of
these care areas. However, isolating the infants from any voice contact is also
detrimental to language skill development. This project will investigate and
develop a system that will provide for a more stable stay in the NICU, mitigate
neurologic complications leading to developmental delays, and lessen the
occurrence of hearing loss. The American Academy of Pediatrics? guidelines state
that neonatal patients should not be exposed to noises greater than 45dBA yet
hospitals struggle to achieve this. Deploying such a noise attenuation system
with voice pass through capabilities will help hospitals provide the proper
environment for their neonatal populations. Hospital administrators and clinical
directors have expressed enthusiasm for this solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project seeks to develop an
active noise reduction system for use in an NICU incubator, while allowing a
parent's voice to pass through essentially unattenuated. To achieve the noise
attenuation, the unwanted noise is monitored outside and inside the incubator
and a corresponding signal exactly out of phase with the detected noise is used
to largely cancel the unwanted noise. The system will employ a multi-channel
hybrid system employing both feedback and feedforward elements. While a more
complex approach, this has been shown to have performance advantages over
simpler solutions. In this phase, the size of the zone of attenuation will be
expanded, the algorithm will be adapted to multiple incubators having differing
shapes, and a set of fail-safe provisions will be implemented.