* 1631803
* PFI:BIC Next Generation Real-Time Distributed Manufacturing Service Systems Using Digital Process Planning and GPU-Accelerated Parallel Computing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Thomas Kurfess, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

The research project will enable scaling of novel manufacturing analysis
applications in a smart, human-centered manufacturing service system. This
manufacturing service system will enable highly functioning relationships
between a range of users, including service consumers (e.g., designers,
entrepreneurs, makers) and service producers (e.g., manufacturers). Design
organizations and new entrepreneurs have limited access to the advanced
manufacturing processes needed for innovation due to longstanding barriers
associated with: (1) cost and availability of advanced manufacturing platforms
and (2) technical skill and experience needed to design manufacturable products
in a correct-by-construction framework. While direct-to-print paradigms, such as
3D printing, have increased the capabilities for users to make parts directly
from digital product designs, the capital equipment for manufacturing functional
components are still housed in mostly private enterprise facilities.
Additionally, challenges to accurately specify product manufacturing
requirements remain as barriers toward facilitating large-scale, consumer-driven
manufacturing services. Smart manufacturing service systems that address these
persistent challenges will dramatically accelerate innovation across multiple
industrial sectors by removing technological barriers for functional
manufacture. The consumerization of manufacturing services will also enable
manufacturers with excess production capacity to access a significantly broader
customer base, facilitating stabilization of production capacity through
decentralization of service demand. Democratization of access to manufacturing
capabilities and the associated sharing economy benefits will lead to
transformative advances in product realization for the US economy.

To facilitate these collaborations, this research project leverages prior
discovery for rapid, digital process planning based on novel hybrid dynamic tree
representations and graphics processing unit (GPU) accelerated parallel
computing. To implement this novel discovery in a distributed service system,
the digital process planning method will provide product and process
intelligence for each user class. Human subjects experiments and user
requirements modeling will inform system design for user interface
functionality, service consumer cognitive processing, service provider
informational needs, and consumer-to-producer interaction requirements. The
service system architecture will be designed to interface with users, facilitate
user transactions, receive and shape input data, and enable archival
functionality. To realize the foundational digital process planning discovery in
a novel human-centered service system, new information models for manufacturing-
related data and service provider production capabilities will be established.
Advanced computational algorithms will also be derived for scaling GPU-
accelerated process analyses in a many-user, cloud-based environment.
Comprehensive system testing will inform efficacy of the underlying user
requirement models, service system architecture, manufacturing information
models and GPU-accelerated computing for generalized human-centered
manufacturing service systems.

The research project assembles a collaborative team of experts in the fields of
manufacturing, design, computing and psychology and a diverse range of
industrial partners and nonprofit agencies to realize a next-generation
manufacturing service system. The lead institution is Georgia Tech with faculty
from mechanical engineering, computing and psychology. The industrial partners,
Tucker Innovations (small business), Mazak (large business), Morris South (large
business), represent manufacturing technology developers and platform builders
with interest in facilitating broad access of enterprise-level technologies to
consumer end users. The partner industrial consortia, National Center for
Manufacturing Sciences (non-profit), National Center for Defense Manufacturing
and Machining (non-profit) and Digital Manufacturing And Design Innovation
Institute (non-profit), provide access to a strong membership base spanning many
industrial sectors. Collaborations at Georgia Tech with The Center for the
Enhancement of Teaching and Learning, Vertically Integrated Projects Program and
VentureLab will facilitate connections of research outcomes to educational
outcomes for the broad community of makers.