* 1631680
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Focused Electrical Stimulator for Targeted Neuromodulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mary Kay Lobo, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal 1631820&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: &lt;br/&gt;Focused Electrical
Stimulator for Targeted Neuromodulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;In the past 150 years
researchers have persistently explored how the brain works, the underlying
function and mechanism of each individual anatomical brain structure as well as
their combined brain networks. Invasive neuromodulation methods like deep brain
stimulation are effective in treating essential tremor, Parkinson's disease, and
dystonia. But it is not plausible to perform brain surgery for every research
volunteer subject or to effectively research DBS effects across different brain
regions. The ability to activate or block brain circuits at any desired location
with innovative neuromodulation techniques can help to not only understand how
the brain works but also aid in the development of novel approaches to treat
neural diseases. The objective of this project is the development and
application of a non-invasive technology to modulate neuronal activity in
precise brain regions, to ultimately alter behavioral output. The technology
will have a huge impact in both the science and the application to the brain to
alter behavior. Development of such a technology can lead to selective non-
invasive brain circuit targeting for therapeutic treatment of brain diseases. It
will also lead to other new innovations through new understanding of brain
function and circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is the development and application of a non-invasive
technology to modulate neuronal activity in precise brain regions, to ultimately
alter behavioral output. Development of such a technology can lead to selective
non-invasive brain circuit targeting for therapeutic treatment of brain
diseases. The first aim supports this objective with development of a method to
deliver a focused transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) tool,
termed confocal alternating current stimulator (CACS), into deep (and
superficial) brain regions. The second aim will test the ability of focused CACS
to alter fine motor behavior (i.e limb movements). The third aim will use a
valid model of depression to induce antidepressant outcomes with CACS treatment.
Aims 2 and 3 directly apply the CACS technology to specific brain regions for
focused neuromodulation, to alter behavioral output. They will determine the
efficacy and safety of CACS as a non-invasive neuromodulation technology by
probing a neuronal activation marker, as well markers that indicate neuronal
damage and death. The proposal builds upon a large body of evidence
demonstrating altered behavioral output and improved symptomatology in
neurological and psychiatric patients with invasive methodologies to alter brain
circuit function. Once developed and tested, the CACS technology will have a
huge impact in both the science and the application to the field of brain
research.