* 1631412
* Investigation into the Functioning of Early Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Barbara Wolff, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,713.00

This project, led by Drs. William Isbell (Binghamton University) and Barbara
Wolff (Montgomery College/Binghamton University), will evaluate comparatively
based generalizations about the nature of urbanism, archaic and modern, through
archaeological investigation of residential life within Huari, the prehistoric
urban capital of the arguably earliest Andean Empire. The PIs, along with U.S.
and Peruvian colleagues, will excavate vernacular residential remains at Huari
where preliminary research suggests an urban pattern that significantly deviates
from prevailing models of cities. Traditional models of urban centers, and
particularly archaic capital cities, emphasize the presence of large
socioeconomically and ethnically diverse populations. Urban diversity is
typically understood to include occupational specialization promoting economies
of scale, enabled by freeing part of the population from agricultural
production, since they are then supported by markets and interregional trade
that provide one of the greatest advantages of city living. Contrary to
expectations however Huari exhibits no apparent civic center suitable for large
public gatherings, no evidence of markets, and negligible evidence for social,
economic and ethnic diversity. Questions then arise: Is Huari an anomalous
example of urban living? How did residents experience urban life; and how did
they manage the seemingly universal demands of living in a populous capital
city? Over 3 or 4 centuries of occupation, did Huari move closer to or further
from traditional models of urbanism? This project will contribute to
understanding variation in urban life while training student archaeologists,
involving the descendent community, and contributing to heritage management
across a landscape with great potential for sustainable development.

This project will excavate residential remains of everyday domestic life. US and
Peruvian students will work alongside archaeologists experienced in
architectural excavation/analysis, ceramic analysis, lithic analysis,
paleoethnobotany, zooarchaeology, residue and trace element analysis, and data
base design as they gather diverse lines of information illuminating patterns of
social and economic diversity, from dietary preferences to specialized economic
activities, to the spatial and social organization of households and
neighborhoods. Project data and results will be published online and in print.
Huari significantly reshaped the trajectory of Andean imperialism and urban
life. This project will supplement comparative data sets describing archaic
cities while significantly expanding current knowledge of "the variable" as well
as "the universal" in urban life.