* 1631465
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO Hippocampal-Cortical Communication and the Extraction of Knowledge from Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Bruce McNaughton, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 653,196.00

A fundamental problem in psychology and neuroscience is to understand how the
transient memory of an experience becomes stabilized and available as long-term
memory. A general theory of memory is that sleep is important to make the memory
of an experience stable and resistant to interference. One specific theory has
proposed that there are two systems at work during learning, a fast acting
system that encodes temporary memories into a brain area called the hippocampus
and a slower system that transfer these memories during sleep into a more
permanent form in higher-level cortical regions. This process depends on a
communicative interaction between the hippocampus and cortex. The present
research is the first to directly test the hypothesis of the interleaved
interaction between brain regions in the formation of stable more permanent
memories from experience. Evidence of this interaction between fast-acting and
long-term representations has implications for understanding a number of
neurological problems involving memory, for explaining changes in memory with
aging, and for the development of new robust computer memory systems. The
project provides training opportunities for postdoctoral fellows and data and
tools dissemination. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Simultaneous electrical and optical
recordings from the hippocampus and neocortex will be made as rodents acquire
new memories and consolidate these memories into a stable more permanent form of
long-term memory. The project examines patterns of activity in these different
brain regions to test the hypothesis that interleaved activity patterns during
resting state reflects an interplay of recent and long-term memories. Further, a
comparison of brain activity in resting states and task-dependent states will
examine the question of whether stable long-term memories are regularized by
consolidation to be less detailed and more general. The research will measure
patterns in collections of spiking neurons along with global patterns of brain
electrical activity to test these hypotheses about the process of memory
consolidation.