* 1631943
* Annual Conference of the Society for Social Studies of Science:  Travel Grants for Graduate Student Participants
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Matthew Harsh, Society for Social Studies of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 55,000.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support a series
of conferences; it provides support for graduate student travel to upcoming
meetings of Society for Social Studies of Science. Funding will be used to
support travel over the next five years beginning in 2016 and ending in 2020.
Meeting locations are as follows: 2016 (Barcelona, Spain), 2017 (Boston, MA),
2018 (Sydney, Australia), 2019 (tentatively, New Orleans, LA), and 2020 (to be
determined). Participation in at least some of these conferences will enable
graduate students to professionally network, receive feedback from senior
scholars in their field, remain abreast of developments in their area, and
disseminate the results of their own research. The travel awards will also be
used to ensure the participation of underrepresented minorities; the inclusion
of such groups will serve an important selection criterion among others in
distributing travel awards. More generally, this support will contribute to the
growth of a strong science and technology workforce, a workforce that is made
all the more innovative and competitive through the involvement of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4S annual meeting brings together an international and
interdisciplinary group of scholars who share the common goal of understanding
the development of science, technology, and medicine and the way they interact
within a social context. Relatively new and impactful research as well as
theoretical ideas on these topics are shared and discussed at the annual
meeting. Supporting graduate student participation in such an atmosphere is
beneficial not only for the professional socialization of the students
themselves, but also for maintaining intellectual vitality within the
discipline; graduate students frequently introduce fresh perspectives on new and
old intellectual problems. The impact of graduate student participation in the
annual meeting also extends beyond the field since most them will go on to work
in an academic environment, a research institute or in some policy making body.
Facilitating their attendance at the annual meeting will facilitate their
becoming engaged and informed teachers, researchers, and policy makers,
potentially impacting countless undergraduate students and informing the
direction of social policy.