* 1631409
* Hazards SEES Type 2: Modeling to Promote Regional Resilience to Repeated Heat Waves and Hurricanes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Seth Guikema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,066,259.00

Communities are interested in becoming more resilient to weather extremes but
often lack the tools and resources to fully understand the problems and make
good decisions. This lack of understanding is understandable given the complex
and interrelated nature of the impacts from extreme events. Communities need to
design solutions for infrastructure management, land use planning, public
health, and emergency management, understanding how each is related to the
other. In areas that are subject to repeated events, the problem is exacerbated.
In this project, an interdisciplinary team of researchers will develop an
integrated model, the Integrated Hazard, Impact, and Resilience Model to better
understand the impacts of repeated hurricanes and heat waves on regional
vulnerability and resilience and use the model to develop approaches for
improving resilience to these repeated hazards. The team integrates expertise in
individual and organizational behavior, economic modeling, climate science,
infrastructure engineering, hazard modeling, public health, and spatial
landscape analysis. The work on this project will be grounded in and integrated
through systems modeling. The goal of the project is to significantly advance
the understanding of the impacts from hurricanes and heat waves on the
vulnerability and resilience of regions over time and the tools and resources
available to help regions better prevent repeated hazards from becoming repeated
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mid-Atlantic region will be the case study
for this project, grounding the work in a critical region of the U.S., one that
has a growing population facing increasing threats from weather extremes. The
team will also have strong international collaborators, helping to make sure the
work has broad applicability to other areas of the world. As part of this
project, a set of undergraduates, masters, and doctoral students as well as
postdoctoral scholars will be trained in trans-disciplinary hazards research and
modeling. This cadre of students and researchers will form a critical resource
for the nation, helping to improve regional resilience to repeated hurricanes
and heat waves.