* 1631819
* Collaborative Research:  NCS-FO: Flexible Large-Scale Brain Imaging Analysis: Diversity, Individuality and Scalability
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Vince Calhoun, The MIND Research Network
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 216,378.00

This project is designed to develop important analysis methods for brain imaging
data, provide new educational and outreach activities to help promote the
workforce, and create a software tool to foster big data analysis of the human
brain. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables noninvasive study of
brain function, typically through the estimation of functional networks of
connectivity. These networks are relatively stable, but it is also clear that
there is a wide degree of differences across individuals. Given that now large-
scale multi-subject data have now become available across multiple repositories,
there is a pressing need for the development of a flexible analysis framework
for large-scale fMRI data that can capture the global traits in brain activity,
while not losing the individual aspects of a given brain. Such an accurate
estimation of each subject's functional connectivity maps enables the leveraging
of large and distributed fMRI repositories. It also promises effective
comparisons across different conditions, groups, and time points, thus further
increasing the usefulness of fMRI in human brain research. The project provides
rich educational experience necessary for student training and workforce
development in this fast growing field. The benefits are permeated even further
via undergraduate research projects and public outreach programs such as brain
awareness weeks, in addition to scholarly dissemination through publications,
presentations, and workshop organization. The software toolbox developed as part
of the project is freely distributed and enables wider adoption and reuse of the
methods by the academia and the practitioners to move forward the brain research
collectively. Ultimately, the project outcomes contribute to the NSF's mission
of promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health,
prosperity and welfare.

Data-driven methods based on latent variable models such as independent
component analysis (ICA) have been increasingly adopted in fMRI data analysis.
Recently, there have been lively debates as to whether ICA leverages source
independence, exploits sparsity, or both, igniting active research in sparse
matrix models such as dictionary learning (DL) for fMRI analysis. Indeed,
synergistically balancing multiple notions of diversity remains an important
challenge. In this context, it is first recognized that jointly leveraging both
independence and sparsity enables a powerful and flexible framework for
analyzing large-scale fMRI data, by capturing the common traits as well as
individual details in a data-driven manner. Therefore, the complementary
strengths of the already widely used blind source separation approaches such as
ICA, and the more recent, sparse matrix factorization models such as DL are
advantageously integrated. Essential practical aspects for large-scale data
integration studies, such as decentralized computation and privacy-aware sharing
of the datasets across multiple repositories are also addressed by leveraging
the complementary expertise of the team.