* 1631329
* NCS-FO: Probing the Functional Significance of Brain Oscillations through Closed-Loop Phase-Locked Stimulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Naoki Saito, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 802,272.00

Oscillatory activity in the brain has been known for a long time, but its
functional significance is still being debated. It has recently been proposed
that neural oscillations play an important role in controlling how information
flows in the brain and which ensembles of neurons are able to exchange
information, allowing the brain to flexibly adjust to varying task demands.
While this view has been supported by recordings of brain activity from
particular subsystems, a rigorous test of the ideas requires manipulation of
brain activity to establish a causal link between synchronized brain activity
and neural communication. While experimental techniques for generally
suppressing or enhancing neural activity are readily available, addressing this
scientific question requires new technology for manipulating neural activity
with a precise timing relationship relative to ongoing neural activity. The goal
of this research project is to develop a closed-loop stimulation system that can
analyze ongoing brain oscillations in real time and that uses the resulting
information to trigger neural stimulation. This allows manipulating neural
activity time-locked to ongoing activity at another location in the brain.
Sharing this tool with the scientific community is expected to provide novel,
fundamental insights into the functional significance of synchronized brain
activity in a variety of neural systems, which cannot be obtained with currently
available technology. The technique might also find application in neural
prostheses and brain stimulation systems for the treatment of neurologic and
psychiatric disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves: 1) Developing
an algorithm that reliably extracts instantaneous frequency and phase of a
dominant oscillatory component from a local field potential and accurately
predicts the next occurrence of particular phase angles. 2) Implementing the
algorithm(s) in a combination of software and hardware that is fast enough for
real-time control of a stimulation device. 3) Validating the closed-loop
stimulation technique in vivo and developing applications for studying cortico-
cortical and thalamo-cortical communication. Successful development of such a
system would remove a major obstacle for testing theories about the functional
significance of the timing of neural signals, in particular synchronized
rhythmic activity. It would allow going beyond correlational measures and
exploring the behavioral (and neural) consequences of artificial manipulation of
neural signals contingent on the timing of currently ongoing neural activity.
With the help of this technology, a major advance in understanding the role of
the timing of neural signals in coding and transmitting information between
ensembles of neurons is expected.