* 1631656
* NCS-FO: A microfluidic MEMS approach to study force-induced changes in neurons
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Megan Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2020
* USD 885,000.00

CBET - 1631656&lt;br/&gt;Turner, Kimberly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is a
highly plastic organ, capable of learning, remembering and adapting. However, it
is also a plastic material with mechanical properties of strength, hardness, and
impact resistance. A major challenge in neuroengineering is to understand the
biophysical properties of the brain and how these differ between individuals. In
particular, how do differences in the mechanical properties of the brain alter
the experience of force and the consequences of impact? A major limitation in
the systematic study of force on the brain has been the inability to reliably
apply impacts or pressure to individual cells. The uHammer project aims to
develop just such a highly engineered tool for the application of force to
individual neural cells. These single cell studies will allow us to compare
individual differences in neural responses to force, including changes in cell
mechanics, structure, viability, and gene expression. This project, a
collaboration between industry and multi-faceted academic team, will support the
Ph.D. work of two graduate students, hold a workshop to bring together top
researchers interested in this important societal problem, and train
undergraduate research interns, while attempting to unlock some of the mysteries
surrounding the brain today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this work is to
probe the mechanical properties of neural tissue and the subsequent effects on
function. To examine the consequences of force on neurons, a device must apply
precise forces to single cells over a few microseconds. No existing devices
provide these force and temporal responses, and developing such a device would
enable broad, new classes of cellular measurements. The development of a MEMS
based device (the uHammer) that uses time gated magnetic actuation to deliver
milliNewton impact forces to single cells in a high throughput fashion, will
enable these measurements. The device, capitalizing on recent advances in micro
and nanoscale transduction, microfluidics, and analytical techniques, will allow
cells to be monitored in real-time and collected after impact for analysis. The
uHammer will enable entirely new classes of experiments, in which the biological
consequences of impact loading can be recorded and monitored as a function of
force amplitude, direction, duration, and time after loading. The focus is to
develop a significantly improved understanding of the role of impact and
pressure loading on individual neurons, neural progenitors, and brain tissue.
The technical goals are to Design, fabricate and test a tool (the uHammer) able
to apply physiologically relevant loads to single cell, optimize the device for
high-throughput manipulation of neural stem cells, and quantify the effect of
impact on single cell mechanics, structure, viability, colony formation and gene
expression. The uHammer team of engineers, neuroscientists, biologists and
industry leaders is able to tackle these challenging questions, while also
providing a unique learning environment for undergraduates and graduate
students. The multidisciplinary uHammer team has the ability to design new
technology with the end user in mind, enable new scientific discovery, and
transform it into therapies and treatments. The proposed technology will enable
experiments that are not presently possible, and the link to and commitment from
industrial partner Owl Biomedical, will enable rapid commercial developments.
With these partnerships and goals in hand, UCSB is poised to make game-changing
breakthroughs on problems including traumatic brain injury (TBI) and Alzheimers
disease