* 1631133
* PFI:BIC: Smart Human-Centered Collision Warning System: sensors, intelligent algorithms and human-computer interfaces for safe and minimally intrusive car-bicycle interactions
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Max Donath, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,015,733.00

This research project will develop a smart warning system to enable safe and
minimally intrusive interactions between motorists and bicycles. Interactions
with bicycles are rare for a typical motorist, therefore safety-conscious
drivers naturally focus on other motor vehicles in the roadway, and may not
become aware of the presence of a bicycle until it is too late. In contrast,
interactions with motor vehicles are commonplace for a bicyclist. Furthermore,
the bicyclist faces far greater consequences in an accident than a motorist.
Therefore it is appropriate for a collision prevention system to be the
responsibility of the cyclist. Continuous display of bright flashing lights or
loud sounds may suffice to bring attention to the cyclist, but they may
unnecessarily distract nearby motorists, or they may alarm passing drivers, and
cause them to move dangerously far from their own lane. The system under
development will guide motorists to pass bicycles with exactly as much distance
as safety requires. Furthermore, it will provide alerts only to those drivers
that have a significant probability of collision with the bicycle. The system to
be developed will incorporate a knowledge base of likely collision scenarios,
thus minimizing false alarms. The system will provide guidance cues to the
bicyclist, to ensure a safe and respectful response to motor vehicles. Human
factors studies will be used to design an alert system that provides motorists
with specific and effective audio-visual cues. These studies will also be used
to ensure that cyclists do not respond to the enhanced security by becoming more
reckless. It is expected that the technology developed in this project will
enable motorists to interact with bicycles safely and with minimal intrusion. It
will reduce the approximately 48,000 bicyclist injuries and 700 fatalities that
occur every year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a bicycle-mounted
collision avoidance system must address a number of challenges beyond those
required for a similar system on a car. These challenges include the need to
address more complex collision scenarios, the need to provide alerts to the
drivers of other vehicles, the need for inexpensive, light and smaller sensors,
and the need to rely on human users for effective functioning of the system.
These challenges will be addressed by development of unique custom-designed
sensors, novel estimation algorithms for vehicle tracking and use of a rigorous
human factors study to determine which warning systems will be effective and how
such warnings should be provided to the involved motorist and bicyclist in real-
world traffic scenarios. The warning presentation is designed to minimize the
trade-offs between low reaction time and unnecessarily intrusive disturbances to
nearby motorists. The custom sensors developed in the project include a triad
sonar transducer unit for side vehicles, and front and rear laser sensors on
real-time controlled rotational laser platforms to track vehicles at
continuously changing lateral and longitudinal distances. The human factors
studies in the project will enhance our understanding of human behavior in
multi-modal collision avoidance systems and analyze possible long-term changes
in behavior after prolonged use of the system. The project also includes an
intensive 6-month field operational test in collaboration with an industrial
partner to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed technology. The field
operational tests will involve 10 bicycles, bicyclist volunteers with
significant daily urban commutes and extensive analysis of bicycle data recorded
in real-world traffic conditions. Due to the close industrial collaboration, the
research conducted in this project will accelerate the path to commercialization
of this smart system with its potential benefits to the country. The project
will educate two graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, providing
them experience in inter-disciplinary research as well as an opportunity for
strong industrial interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration between The University of Minnesota (Mechanical Engineering,
Computer Science and Human Factors Engineering/Psychology) and primary
industrial partner Quality Bicycle Products (QBP), (Bloomington, Minnesota,
Large business). Broader context partners include The Minneapolis Bicycle
Coalition, (Minneapolis, MN, nonprofit).