* 1631967
* 2016 Presidential and AAAS Mentor Alumni Meeting:  New Directions for Inclusive STEM Education & Career Mentoring
* EHR,HRD
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Nafeesa Owens
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,993.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Education and
Human Resources Programs will conduct and implement a 12-month project with
recipients of the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and
Engineering Mentoring (PAESMEM) and AAAS Mentoring Awards focused on effective
mentoring practices.

The goal is to convene a working group meeting of recipients of both honorary
awards. Participants will reflect on what is known about effective science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) educational and career mentoring
and to identify new directions to scale-up effective STEM mentoring. The
objectives for the proposed working group meeting are to:

(a) review the progress of STEM mentoring over the last 20 years, including
revisiting the recommendations in the 2006 AAAS report on Report from Study
Group Meetings to Develop a Research and Action Agenda on STEM Career and
Workforce Mentoring. (b) identify and summarize what is known about effective
STEM Mentoring at all educational and career stages, including reviewing and
discussing the recent 2015 publication, "Successful STEM Mentoring Initiatives
for Underrepresented Students: A Research-Based Guide for Faculty and
Administrators" by Becky Wai-Ling Packard. (c) identify barriers and challenges
to effective STEM mentoring at all educational and career stages. (d) identify
key strategies and tools to scale-up effective STEM mentoring over the next 10
years, at all educational and career stages. (e) review and identify new
directions for the PAESMEM guidelines.

An online report highlighting findings from the meeting will be produced,
including tools and resources. The project will be guided by a steering
committee that will include PAESMEM and AAAS Mentor awardees.

The on-line report and recommended tools will promote inclusive mentoring
practices in all educational settings and an inclusive workplace. Creating a
sense of belonging in STEM significantly increases the representation of
underrepresented minorities, women,and persons with disabilities in all STEM
fields. 2016 marks the 20th anniversary of the inaugural PAESMEM honorary awards
and the 25th anniversary of the AAAS Lifetime Mentor Award. PAESMEM inaugural
awardees will be acknowledged during the meeting.