* 1631563
* Individual variation, plasticity, and learning in human brain evolution
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Todd Preuss, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 970,704.00

The human ability to create and use technology far surpasses that of any other
species. How did our advanced technological skills evolve, and what can this
evolutionary perspective tell us about the basis of modern human technological
learning? A team of investigators from Georgia State University and Emory
University will use a multidisciplinary approach, integrating expertise in
neuroscience, informatics, anthropology, biomedical engineering, and educational
psychology, to address three main questions: (1) What aspects of human brain
connectivity show greatest variability across individuals? (2) Are these highly
variable regions responsive to real-world technological skill training, and, if
so, what are the factors mediating individual differences in response to this
training? (3) Which aspects of the underlying brain networks are present in
humans but not our closest living relatives, chimpanzees, and therefore
implicated as a likely substrate for unique human abilities for technological
learning? The findings will have the potential to reveal the functional
significance of any unique features of human brain organization that may be
related to the learning and transfer of complex technological skills, thereby
expanding knowledge of ourselves and of the brain with implications for STEM
education. The award is from the Integrated Strategies for Understanding Neural
and Cognitive Systems program, with funding from the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports fundamental research that advances the research
literature on STEM learning, and the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(SMA) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hypothesize that the
ability to learn complex technological skills evolved by means of adaptations to
prefrontal-parietal-temporal association networks, and that the high individual
variability of these regions is due to selection for increased plasticity and
protracted development, allowing for a greater input of individual experience,
social learning, and cultural context. The researchers will examine human brain
morphology and connectivity before, during, and after two STEM learning
experiences (tool making and computer programming) and relate the pre-post
changes in the brain to differences in connectivity in humans and chimpanzees.
The human brain map produced will also provide a normative foundation to support
and stimulate research on other questions, such as neural predictors of
individual variation in behavior or in disease states). Finally, the team will
develop an open source analysis tool, voxel-based connectivity, that will help
the field by closing a gap in current neuroimaging methodology.