* 1631759
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: A Computational Neuroscience Framework for Olfactory Scene Analysis within Complex Fluid Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jose Principe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 405,644.00

Most animals survive in turbulent air or water environments and are living proof
that it is possible to quantify odor signals in complex turbulent flow
conditions to track and find sources of odors (such as food, mates, etc.).
However, our engineering knowledge is still incapable of formulating simple and
effective measurements that will enable man-made systems to predict, navigate
and utilize properties of this turbulent flow to locate sources of chemical
release. This project builds on recent exciting computational modeling of the
neurobiology of organisms by the proposers, which predict that lobsters are
capable of estimating not only the concentration of odors but also the time
since the last odor was encountered. Lobsters accomplish this by using ensemble
competition across a population of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs), called
"bursting ORNs". Bursting ORNs function to compute the time since last encounter
of an odor that, along with concentration, can provide a measure of the distance
to the odor source. This research will seek to increase understanding of how
ORNs perceive odor concentration and intermittency measured within an odor
plume, and how this information is integrated within the lobster?s brain. An
additional goal is to develop new neurobiology-based theories in the search for
odor sources that can be implemented within human-engineered autonomous
underwater vehicles that have the ability to navigate in turbulent chemical
plumes.

The broader implications of this work stem from the large potential market for
defense and civilian applications of a new generation of electronic noses for
tracking chemicals in natural or man-initiated disasters. Through this project,
there are also excellent resources and outreach opportunities for integrated
education and training of students at the intersection of fluid dynamics,
neuroscience, computer engineering and information processing. Outreach will be
coordinated through the Center of Innovative Brain Machine Interfaces at the
University of Florida and will provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate research, promote neurotechnology innovations, and foster
entrepreneurship activities in order to create potential future start-up
companies.

The research will include laboratory experiments of chemical plume mixing and
ORN responses to odor encounters by lobsters, theoretical analysis of search
optimization, as well as numerical simulations and novel system architecture for
electronic noses. This research brings together a multidisciplinary and
complementary team of experts, including a fluid dynamicist, a neurobiologist,
and an electrical engineer with the very clear goal of understanding and
exploiting olfactory scene analysis in turbulent flow. In this new light,
neurobiologists will understand new sensing strategies for olfaction, and
engineers can improve the quantification of turbulent mixing and replicate these
sensory strategies to propose novel bio-inspired sensors capable of quantifying
the dispersion of chemical plumes and improve the search for the source.