* 1631428
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Operationalizing Students' Textbooks Annotations to Improve Comprehension and Long-Term Retention
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Michael Mozer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 307,176.00

While traditional textbooks are designed to transmit information from the
printed page to the learner, contemporary digital textbooks offer the
opportunity to study learners as they interpret and process information being
read. With a better understanding of a learner's state of mind, textbooks can
make personalized recommendations for further study and review. How can the
learner's state of mind be determined? Open a used printed textbook and the
answer is clear: students feel compelled to engage with their texts by
annotating key passages with highlights, tags, questions, and notes. Despite
students' spontaneous desire to annotate as they read, this form of interaction
has reaped few educational benefits in the past. At best, highlighted passages
are re-read to study for exams, a strategy not nearly as effective as other
strategies such as self-quizzing. This project will develop a new methodology
that: assesses student knowledge level automatically based on annotations,
transforms highlighted passages into appropriate study questions, and provides
each student with well-timed, personalized review. Because the project is based
on free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed materials from OpenStax that have been
widely adopted at a range of institutions, particularly community colleges, the
technology will reach beyond elite institutions to provide a broad spectrum of
underserved students with access to a potentially powerful learning
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adopts a big-data approach that involves
collecting annotations from a population of learners to draw inferences about
individual learners. The project will determine how to exploit these data to
model cognitive state, enabling the team to infer students' depth of
understanding of facts and concepts, predict subsequent test performance, and
perform interventions that improve learning outcomes. A tool will be developed
that administers appropriately timed quizzes on material related to a student's
highlights. A collaborative-filtering methodology will be employed that
leverages population data to suggest specific passages for an individual to
review. The proposed tool will reformulate selected passages into review
questions that encourage the active reconstruction and elaboration of knowledge.
The design and implementation of the tool will be informed by both randomized
controlled studies within the innovative OpenStax textbook platform and
coordinated laboratory studies. These studies will address basic scientific
questions pertaining to why students annotate, how to improve their annotation
skills, and techniques to optimize the use of annotations for guiding active
review.