* 1631704
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Rebuilding Neural Pathway Function Using Miniature Integrated Optics for Neuron-Level Readout and Feedback
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Victor Bright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

1631912/1631704&lt;br/&gt;Gibson/Gopinath&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a
miniature implantable device to allow transfer of neural information from one
brain area to another will have a major impact on the understanding of brain
function and will be applicable to treatment of brain disease. The proposed
research spans neuroscience, materials science, physics and engineering, and
will&amp;#8232;provide excellent interdisciplinary research opportunities for
students. Dissemination of&amp;#8232;the work will occur through teaching,
additional educational outreach, opportunities for undergraduates, and journals
and conference publications. The capability of this research to develop an
optical feedback control to repair brain function will captivate these future
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-invasive feedback control to repair brain
function is one of the ultimate goals in neuroscience. The recent and evolving
development of genetically encoded fluorescent indicators and optogenetics makes
optical readout and control a real possibility. However, there is still a
critical need to understand how an optical feedback system can fully recover
function in an awake behaving animal. This proposal seeks to demonstrate for the
first time the actual recovery of function in an awake behaving animal using an
engineered optical feedback system. The project will be performed by a highly
interdisciplinary team with extensive expertise in neuroscience, optogenetics,
and cognitive research in awake behaving animals along with experts in optical
and MEMS devices. The proposal combines the technology development side with
behavioral research with the potential for major discoveries. Unprecedented
progress in the study of brain function will be enabled with the proposed
device. The PIs have recently developed technology for a lightweight head-
mounted miniature multiphoton microscope that can image over hundreds of neurons
in three dimensions in brain tissue. The technology is the first to use
electrowetting optics for non-mechanical steering of the excitation laser and
enables single cell resolution imaging. We propose to combine a spatially shaped
second laser at a different wavelength from our excitation laser to allow both
imaging and directed optogenetic stimulation of neurons. Importantly, modulation
of neural activity on the level of individual neurons is essential for
controlling function in the brain. Therefore readout and control by optics has a
real potential to restore function as opposed other methods such as ultrasound,
EEG, and fMRI that are theoretically limited in spatial resolution. We propose
to readout and control firing of individual neurons in the piriform cortex using
a real-time feedback control system. We will use behavior studies in mice to
determine if association of olfactory identity with reward can be recovered as
we selectively turn on and off the input nerve connections to the piriform
cortex where odor identity is thought to be represented. The study will allow us
to identify which neurons contain information essential for decision making. The
oscillatory basis for information transfer can be tested using certain frequency
ranges or phases of neural activity. These studies will be useful for testing
models of neural circuit function and applicable for neuroengineering devices
for therapeutic use.