* 1631562
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* ERIC EATON, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 03/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

The purpose of this project is to support the participation of a select group of
US-based PhD students in the doctoral consortium at the 2016 International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI). IJCAI is a premier conference in
Artificial Intelligence (AI), drawing wide domestic and international
participation, including many top researchers. In particular, the doctoral
consortium seeks to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in this
field of research, and we expect to have diverse participation in terms of
gender, ethnic background, academic institution, and geographic location. In
addition to technical exposure, this experience will give students the
opportunity to interact with a broad range of researchers and educators involved
in the AI field. This will help the students to become members of the
international community of scholars, and to develop into the global scientists
that are needed for the future. In the longer term, having engaged and informed
scientists will help advance science and high-tech industry in the US.

The wide variety and significance of the topics typically presented at IJCAI, in
both the technical program and the doctoral consortium, will provide a great
opportunity for students to share, exchange information, and learn from each
other and from the best in the field. Participation in a conference is a great
motivator for graduate students, and we expect the IJCAI doctoral consortium
will generate additional long-term interest among graduate students in pursuing
a research-oriented career in artificial intelligence. Doctoral consortium
participants will also have the opportunity to receive feedback on their
doctoral research from established scientists who will serve as mentors
throughout the proceedings.