* 1631858
* 11th International Conference on Environmental Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanoparticles, Golden CO,  August 4 - August 18, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* James Ranville, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2016
* USD 36,642.00

PI: Ranville, Kames Proposal #: 1631858 Nanotechnology holds great promise to
benefit society by creating materials with novel properties and functions. The
technological developments in the application of nanotechnology must be
accompanied by careful examination of possible unwanted environmental
consequences. This conference provides a venue for presentation of the latest
research on nanotechnology and its potential impact on the environment. Feedback
and discussion at this conference will provide ideas for refinement of
experiments and future work on nanotechnology in natural systems. This will help
advance this field to better manage potential environmental risks associated
with nanotechnology. It is anticipated that 250 participants from industry,
government, academia, and non-governmental organizations will participate. The
participants will include a large percentage of junior scholars (Ph.D. students
and postdocs), with all students receiving partial travel support to encourage
their participation. Invited speakers have largely been selected from amongst
young researchers who are less than 10-years post-graduation. The conference
will thus provide networking opportunities for scientists at different career
stages. It is expected that collaborations across networks (SUN, LCnano, CEINT,
etc) will result from discussions at this conference. A preconference workshop
will train a small group of participants in novel characterization tools for
nanoparticles. Overall this gathering will stimulate interactions that will push
nanoscience research forward in the critical area of environmental health and
safety (EHS). The conference will attract the leading scientists and engineers
whose focus is on the EHS aspects of nanomaterials. A public outreach program is
planned for Wednesday afternoon of the meeting and will allow for interactions
between research scientists and middle school science teachers and students. We
expect to produce educational materials that will then be used in future local
K-12 programs. The proposed three and half day schedule will include a number of
open discussions that will foster interactions between young investigators and
more established researchers. Participants of the ICEENN will come from not only
the U.S. but around the globe, ensuring a diverse and international expert group
to facilitate productive discussions.