* 1631993
* Executive control in sentence production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Akira Omaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 11/30/2019
* USD 577,408.00

In everyday language use, speakers are able to produce sentences effortlessly,
weaving together multiple words while following complex grammatical rules. The
ease with which sentences are produced has led to speculations that sentence
production may not rely on executive functions such as inhibitory control. This
project aims to test whether inhibitory control plays a role in grammatical
production by focusing on subject-verb agreement 'attraction' errors. In
English, the subject of the sentence agrees with the verb in number (e.g., "The
lion is red," "The lions are red"). Attraction errors arise when the sentence
contains a second noun with a different grammatical number than the subject
noun, as in "The lion next to the birds ARE red." Understanding the role of
inhibitory control in sentence production could provide key insights on how to
evaluate and treat language impairments, as well as how to develop more
effective pedagogical methods for children who produce non-adult-like syntactic
structures. The proposed research provides opportunities to bring together
undergraduate and graduate students in medical and cognitive science research,
and the outcome of this research will be disseminated to the broader public
through community outreach programs and aphasia rehabilitation
projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses two approaches to investigate
whether subject-verb agreement errors are independent of executive (inhibitory)
control. The first approach uses a combination of experimental techniques that
manipulate inhibitory demand with advanced statistical modeling to test the
contribution of different types of inhibitory control to the prevention of
attraction errors. Second, the experiments are extended to 6- to 8-year-old
children to investigate how the development of executive control abilities
aligns with the developmental trajectory of agreement production abilities.