* 1632471
* New Methods for Molding Models to Specific Cases to Enhance Policy Predictions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Nancy Cartwright, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 214,579.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance
policy effectiveness by focusing on ways to improve models that are used to
estimate whether a social policy will achieve its intended outcomes when
implemented in the setting at hand, in the way it would be implemented in that
setting. The project will provide a systematic, theoretically grounded approach
for deciding what kinds of evidence are good to collect, and for deciding how to
put the evidence together to ascertain what it shows about the chances of
success. Policy outcomes will always be uncertain, often greatly so. This
project has promise to substantially improve predicting outcomes in individual
cases by providing methods for molding models to the cases at hand. The results
of this research will have potential to improve policy effectiveness and to
suggest new kinds of scientific studies to support policy prediction; they will
be disseminated across a number of policy
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is an investigation of the kinds of evidence, both local and scientific,
that can be used to build full enough models to make reasonable, albeit
uncertain, policy predictions. The methodology is primarily analytic, and it
builds on studies in the history, philosophy, and sociology of science on
evidence, objectivity, and causal modeling. It also builds on the PI's recent
work on evidencing singular causal claims and on causal mechanisms. The project
involves in-depth study of cases in the natural and the social sciences,
engineering, and the law of successful single-case prediction and post-hoc
evaluation in complicated systems. It will develop categories of evidence, and
it will refine and test the proposed model structure to see how well it fits
successful cases. The project should contribute to the philosophical
understanding of singular causation, currently a big topic in philosophy. It
should advance understanding of causal modeling, in principle and in practice,
especially in the social sciences.