* 1632575
* SBIR Phase II:  New dwarfing genes to improve yield and abiotic stress tolerance in wheat
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Kulvinder Gill, Geneshifters, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,138,943.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to improve wheat yield globally by
deploying newly developed, region-specific dwarfing genes. World population is
predicted to grow to 9.6 billion by 2050. Wheat demand is expected to increase
also due to a shift from rice to wheat consumption due to an expected increase
in wealth around the globe. The increased wheat demand will have to be met under
less land area and changing climate. Water use efficiency and increase in wheat
yields will be important factors in meeting this demand. The proposed technology
is poised to increase wheat yield under abiotic stress conditions. All of these
benefits are expected to have a major positive impact on humanity. The wheat
seed business is currently valued at up to $8.3 billion. The proposed technology
will provide a competitive advantage to capture a significant market share of
the wheat seed industry while contributing positively towards food security
during the changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR phase II project
proposes to further develop and test alternative dwarfing genes to improve wheat
yield and abiotic stress tolerance around the globe. Responsible for the "green-
revolution," dwarfing genes are required to obtain higher yields, but the two
dwarfing genes present in more than 90% of the currently grown wheat varieties
have serious ill-effects including abiotic stress sensitivity, reduced root
length and biomass, seedling emergence, and vigor. During the Phase I research,
four new dwarfing genes were identified and shown to be significantly better
than the currently used genes. Phase II will focus on the comparison of the new
genes with the old genes to show their true benefits. This research also will
generate valuable data required for the development of "release-ready"
varieties. Genetic background effects will be studied by transferring one of the
new dwarfing genes into two different backgrounds followed by field and
controlled condition evaluation. Future competitive advantage will be maintained
by pyramiding the new dwarfing genes with complementary gene action. Closely
linked DNA markers will be developed for an efficient transfer of the technology
into diverse backgrounds.