* 1632273
* The Role of Residence Location in the Establishment of Community Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Sissel Schroeder, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 72,227.00

This research project addresses the question of how communities adapt to
accommodate new migrants. Migration happens at a range of spatial scales, may
involve temporary or permanent relocation, occurs in multiple directions, and is
undertaken for a variety of reasons that involve pull factors, such as the
promise of abundant resources or religious freedom, and push factors, like
escaping an oppressive regime or culture of violence. In such contexts, people
may choose to flaunt the distinctive and highly visible markers of their
identity or opt to mask their identity by emulating or mimicking the material
culture of their neighbors, and each strategy has different implications for the
successful integration of community members. Many of the less visible attributes
of material culture, especially those that are the product of motor skills
learned early in life are not easily changed and therefore are strong indicators
of cultural origin. Sissel Schroeder will investigate both the high visibility
and low visibility attributes of material culture and their spatial distribution
at a Mississippian town that formed through population coalescence and rose to
prominence in the midcontinent of North America in the 13th century AD, a time
of considerable population movement across North America. Gaining insights into
how a multi-cultural community forms, is successful for multiple generations,
and dissolves has implications for global issues of ethnic unrest in the world
today. Undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the project will
gain practical hands-on training in archaeological laboratory methods, material
culture identification, and curatorial best practices, as well as organizational
and analytical skills.

Through the investigation of low visibility attributes, like the directional
twist of the fibers used to make cordage and the kinds of clay and temper
materials mixed with the clay to make pottery, it will be possible to identify
learning communities of people from diverse backgrounds; by also incorporating
some high visibility attributes, it will be possible to more fully explore the
role of material culture in the constitution and transformation of cultural
identity. The research will be conducted on existing archaeological collections
that have been curated since the 1940s, thereby enhancing the value of these
irreplaceable materials, promoting the importance of archaeological curation,
and significantly augmenting basic understanding of the social complexity of an
individual community. Dr. Schroeder will apply a novel investigative approach to
the study of fabric. Since fabric rarely preserves in the humid Eastern
Woodlands, archaeologists are restricted to studying it through impressions left
on the exterior of ceramic vessels. Reverse-engineered 3D models developed from
high resolution digital photographs of fabric impressions will reveal details of
textile production without having to take impressions of the fabric using modern
media that contaminate and damage the ancient materials.