* 1632445
* The Relationship between Natural Environments, Fatigue, and Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Marc Berman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 07/31/2019
* USD 402,182.00

The United Nations estimates that by the year 2050 roughly 70% of the world's
population will be living in highly urbanized areas. This increase in urban
living comes with many benefits: sustainable spaces for living, increased flow
of ideas and innovation, better proximity to services, and diverse communities.
Unfortunately, urban life as it stands is also associated with increased stress,
worse physical and mental health, and shorter life expectancy. All of these
negative effects alter our physiology, brain, and behavior. By understanding the
psychological, neural, and physiological mechanisms underlying the relationship
between exposure to nature and cognitive performance, future studies will be
able to more easily implement interventions aimed at improving built spaces in
order to enhance the potential for human productivity and vitality. This
research is guided by Attention Restoration Theory, which posits that
incorporating natural elements into the built environment can counteract some of
the negatives of urban life. Results from this proposal could be used to help
design schools, offices, homes, cities and towns to optimize human
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Philosophers, writers, and lay people have had
the intuition for centuries that interacting with nature has myriad benefits to
human functioning. While this intuition is appealing, it needs rigorous testing.
This project aims to identify the mechanisms through which interactions with
natural environments might enhance both behavior and brain function, using
cutting edge neuroscience, psychophysiological and machine-learning tools. The
primary objectives of this research project are the following. First the
research will examine the psychological, physiological, and neural processes
that are altered during interactions with natural environments. It will address
questions such as how hard must the brain work when processing more natural vs.
more urban stimuli, and how does this processing affect people's ability to
focus. Second, the research will determine some of the characteristics (e.g.,
low-level visual features such as color, edge content, fractalness, etc.) of
natural and urban environments that lead to psychological improvements or
decrements. This information will aid understanding of some of the visual
features that may be producing these benefits, which could then be used to help
design new built spaces or retrofit existing built spaces. Third, the research
will test whether individuals who are in more mentally fatigued states will
benefit more from natural vs. urban environment exposure. This aspect of the
work will help to define the neural and psychophysiological basis of mental
fatigue. In summary, this research project aims to understand how interactions
with different environments affect human functioning, and what interventions can
be made to improve human functioning at large scales.