* 1632679
* EAGER: Identifying the Limitations of the Contemporary Planetary Boundary Layer Schemes Using an Extended Self-Similarity-based Framework
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Sukanta Basu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 63,189.00

The atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) spans the lowest few hundred meters of the
earth's atmosphere and intensively exchanges mass (e.g., moisture), momentum,
and heat with the underlying surface. Wind fields in this turbulent layer play
major roles in a wide range of industrial (e.g., stack gas dispersion, wind
energy generation), biological (e.g., evapotranspiration, pollen transport,
migrations of birds and insects), and natural (e.g., soil erosion, transport,
and deposition) activities and processes. Mesoscale models in conjunction with
robust planetary boundary layer (PBL) schemes are needed to reliably capture the
dynamical evolution of the ABL. At present, rigorous benchmarks for the
validation of PBL schemes do not exist in the literature. In this EAGER project,
the project will research a novel scaling-based benchmarking approach based on
the extended self-similarity (ESS) framework. The study has roots in the
classical turbulence literature and it is expected to be quasi-universal in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The salient features
of this EAGER project are: (i) creation of an unparalleled simulated wind
database using a suite of PBL schemes; and (ii) identification of the strengths
and weaknesses of various PBL schemes utilizing the ESS framework. This research
will not only improve the ability of contemporary mesoscale models to better
capture the dynamics of wind fields, it will also make fundamental contributions
to the field of classical turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Through this EAGER project, a post-doctoral research
associate will gain expertise in mesoscale modeling, and be exposed to the
emerging field of scaling laws and self-similar processes. The findings from
this project will be disseminated to the broad audience via peer reviewed
publications, conference presentations and seminars.