* 1632054
* Conference: Summer School on Active Complex Matter (Cargese, France, July 12-23, 2016)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Marchetti, M. Cristina &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1632054
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference: Summer
School on Active Complex Matter (Cargese, France, July 12-23,
2016)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to support expenses
related to the registration and travel of young scientists and students from the
US to attend the summer school on "Active Complex Matter," to be held in Cargese
(Corsica Island, France) in July, 2016. About 15 US participants (10 graduate
students and 5 post-docs) are expected to be supported through this grant, who
would not otherwise be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active fluids are
those where the presence of active particles that can self-assemble, or can move
and pack in different ways, give different macroscopic properties to the fluid.
The focus of the summer school will be on areas that are very research active,
including microorganism swimming, collective cell behavior, and blood flow. The
aims of the proposed workshop are to i) address challenges in the modeling of
active (synthetic, biomimetic, and living) matter, ii) discuss approaches to
overcome these challenges, and iii) to educate and inform young scientists
(mainly graduate students), who will be attending not only lectures on
techniques and fundamentals, but also seminars on current research topics given
by internationally known experts in the field, from the US and from around the
world. The conference has a strong interdisciplinary character involving
researchers from different disciplines (physics, engineering, applied
mathematics, biology) as well as different generations (expert senior scientists
and students).