* 1632727
* WORKSHOP: The IEEE VR 2016 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Toni Pence, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,448.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 8 promising graduate
students from educational institutions in the United States, along with about 5
senior members of the academic and industrial research communities as mentors,
in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with the IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR) 2016 conference that will take place March 19-23 in
Greenville, SC, and which is collocated since 2006 with the IEEE Symposium on 3D
User Interfaces (3DUI). Virtual reality is a multidisciplinary field involving
human-centered computer simulations that seek to imitate or augment real world
senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and experiences. VR research includes
the development and assessment of methods and systems, and facilitating and
understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and behaviors. First organized by the
IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and held annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual Reality
is the premier international conference and exhibition in this field and
includes technical paper presentations, workshops, tutorials, research
demonstrations, and exhibits from industry. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://www.ieeevr.org/2016. The goal of the
Doctoral Consortium is to provide a unique venue for interactive, supportive,
and prestigious mentoring for mid-level graduate students in virtual reality, to
afford these students a valuable opportunity to get independent perspectives on
their research from senior individuals with a wide collective breadth and depth
of knowledge, and to build a cohort of young researchers within the VR
community. Special efforts have been made by the organizers to achieve diversity
among the students across institutions, and to recruit participants from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the field of computer science, including
women, persons of color, and people with disabilities.

This year's IEEE VR Doctoral Consortium builds on the successful format of the
first three such events, which were also supported by NSF. The event will begin
with a dinner on Saturday, March 19, immediately prior to the start of the IEEE
3DUI Symposium, to welcome the students and provide initial mentorship and tips
for networking at the conference. The main activities will take place on Sunday,
March 20, in parallel with the second day of IEEE 3DUI. The workshop will
include morning and afternoon sessions in which each student presents his/her
work to the other student participants and a panel of senior VR researchers,
with sufficient time set aside after each talk for discussion and constructive
feedback that addresses the strengths of the work, challenges and issues that
may arise, and implications of the results. A group working lunch attended by
all the students and mentors will be particularly valuable for unifying the
individual goals and projects presented within the group as part of a "big
picture" envisioning of the future of the field over the next 10-20 years. Each
student will also be asked to prepare a poster on his/her research that will be
on display during the conference as part of the poster sessions, and to submit a
short (2-page) abstract to be archived in the IEEE Digital Library. The VR
conference will begin that evening, with a welcome reception where Doctoral
Consortium participants will network with what they have learned over the first
two days. Additional smaller activities will take place at scattered times over
the rest of the week; in particular, small groups of 2-3 students will meet for
mentoring lunches and/or other networking events with senior members of the
VR/3DUI community.