* 1632899
* RII Track-2 FEC. Collaborative Research and Education on Synergized Transformational Solar Chemical Looping and Photo-Ultrasonic Renewable Biomass Refinery
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Chin-Pao Huang, Jackson State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 5,999,113.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Methods to convert biomass into energy
involve burning in the presence of oxygen (combustion), reaction at high
temperature with controlled amount of oxygen and /or steam (gasification), and
decomposition at elevated temperature in the absence of oxygen (pyrolysis). This
project focuses on biomass pyrolysis to produce fuels and biochar and then
chemically modify biochar for use in applications related to carbon dioxide
capture, water purification, and food production. The project is
interdisciplinary and is a collaboration among four institutions (Jackson State
University, University of Mississippi, University of Delaware, and the
University of Wyoming) in three states. The project aims to diversify the
workforce through partnerships with Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) in the
region, hiring and mentoring of early career faculty and postdoctoral fellows,
and training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;Using solar
energy with chemical catalysis and steam pyrolysis, this project aims to produce
liquid fuels and value-added biochar from biomass (e.g. corn stover). The goal
is to develop technologies for biomass refineries that produce net zero or
negative CO2 emission. The project combines experimental work with computations
based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) to better understand the
thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport in the chemical looping energy
production system. The photochemical and ultrasonic chemistry and
functionalization of biochar will use graphene related nanostructures and enable
technologies for CO2 capture and utilization, water purification, and soil
quality improvement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is interdisciplinary and
addresses science and engineering issues in biomass conversion and will
contribute to advances in materials chemistry, heterogeneous catalysis, and
reaction theories. Each of the collaborating institutions brings complementary
expertise in research and will hire new faculty in the areas related to Food,
Energy, and Water. The project seeks to diversify the workforce through
partnerships with Minority Serving Institutions in the region, national
laboratories, and other national and international institutions.