* 1632661
* Workshop:  Cognitive Neuroscience at the Interface with the Arts, Social Sciences, and Humanities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Simon Penny, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,996.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support
for an international interdisciplinary conference to take place at the
University of California at Irvine in December 2016. The goal is to establish a
new interdisciplinary field of inquiry, which brings together cognitive
neuroscience and arts by bringing about a complex conversation encompassing
neuroscience, cognitive science, anthropology, design, human-computer
interaction, the arts, and philosophy. The conference seeks to bring together
approximately 200-250 attendees encompassing all levels of faculty, postdoctoral
scholars, and graduate and undergraduate students from the sciences, arts,
social sciences, and humanities. Participants will include designers/ theorists
from Holland, an art historian from Mexico, and cognitive neuroscientists from
all over the country. The project will integrate research and education by
creating a new undergraduate preparatory class, which will introduce students
from all disciplines on the UC Irvine campus to research at the intersection of
cognitive neuroscience and the arts. Proceedings and video documentation of the
conference will be freely available, and an affiliated three-month public
exhibition will serve to address the societal implications of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will bring the arts and sciences together in a new context that holds
the promise of new opportunities for research; arts and cultural practices have
for long confounded cognitive scientific explanation, and have been excluded
from consideration as cognition. The conference seeks to leverage current
neurocognitive research and the perspectives of embodied, distributed, and
enactive cognition to develop new discourses in arts and cultural practices. It
also seeks to generate international interest in the new coalition of cognitive
research and theory that justifies a (qualified) rejection of
cognitivist/computationalist paradigms of cognition. Meeting these goals will
serve to define a new interdisciplinary field, consistent with the embodied and
material turns, but inherently critical, for example, of some aspects of
neuroaesthetics. Finally, the conference will enable artists worldwide to use
the latest developments in cognitive neuroscience to inform their artistic
practice, and it will enable scientists in these disciplines to use the insights
from these new art forms as the basis for new collaborative research with
cognitive neuroscientists.