* 1632469
* Organism, Evolution, and the Social Environment in American Philosophy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Trevor Pearce, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 153,327.00

General Audience Summary

This project is to support research for a book on the American pragmatists and
late-nineteenth-century biology. The researcher is building an argument to show
that the philosophical tradition of pragmatism owes an enormous debt to specific
biological debates in the late 1800s, especially those concerning the role of
the environment in development and evolution. He is drawing from both published
writings from the period as well as extensive archival evidence to make his
case. The main potential benefit to society of this project is to change the
conversation about the relationship between biology and the social world. The
current conversation about this relationship is dominated by socio-biologists
and evolutionary psychologists, whose work has been roundly criticized by
philosophers of science. Pragmatism provides an alternative model: Although we
are, fundamentally, organisms modifying and being modified by our environments,
in the contexts of science, ethics, and education, the environments that matter
are social, and thus it is social science rather than biology that bears
directly on these contexts.

Technical Summary

This research project will demonstrate that we cannot fully understand
pragmatism and its influence without understanding its connection to biology.
For example, the pragmatists used the dichotomy of "organism and environment" as
an abstract framing device, applying it in logic, ethics, and even aesthetics.
This organism-environment framework brought together biology, philosophy, and
the social sciences, resulting in pioneering work such as that of W.E.B. Du
Bois, The Philadelphia Negro (1899), which argued that many of the problems of
the black community in Philadelphia were due to their social environment. The
pragmatist philosophers were influential across a range of fields, from
education to sociology. William James, after opening the first United States
laboratory devoted to the teaching of psychology at Harvard, published one of
the discipline's most influential textbooks; John Dewey, an outspoken champion
of progressive education, founded what is now known as the Laboratory School at
the University of Chicago; George Herbert Mead, one of the fathers of social
psychology, motivated the sociological approach of symbolic interactionism. By
revealing its roots in nineteenth-century biology, this project promises to
transform our understanding of American pragmatism, and to enhance our
understanding of the critical role of social environments.