* 1632302
* Modeling and Analysis of Liquid Sloshing and Its Effects on Vehicle Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 569,376.00

Liquid sloshing has a significant impact on the dynamics and stability of
highway, rail, marine, and space transportation systems. Nonetheless, because of
the lack of computational algorithms and high fidelity models necessary to
develop the knowledge and better understanding of the sloshing effect on vehicle
dynamics and stability, transportation of hazardous materials has resulted in
deadly, costly, and environmentally damaging accidents. Liquid can produce
significant forces as the results of the interaction with containers and/or tank
cars mounted on trucks, aircraft, railroad vehicles, missiles, rockets, offshore
structures, and marine applications among many others. Existing simple liquid
sloshing approaches commonly used are not designed for complex motion scenarios.
While the use of computational algorithms is necessary to predict the response
of detailed vehicle models, there is no in existence today an efficient and
accurate continuum-based liquid sloshing approach to quantify the sloshing
effect which can be significant during curve negotiations, rapid lane changes,
and acceleration and braking scenarios. This award supports fundamental research
to develop the first generation of liquid sloshing computational algorithms for
modeling complex motion scenarios, developing safety guidelines, and accurate
accident reconstructions. In particular, hazardous material accidents, which
result in significant economic loss, environmental contamination, loss of lives,
and property damage, can be avoided or significantly reduced through better
understanding of the effect of sloshing on highway, rail, marine, and space
transportation systems. This project will also lead to the development of new
knowledge, approaches, and tools that can be used in the education of senior
undergraduate and graduate students at University of Illinois at Chicago which
is designated as a minority serving institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use
of efficient continuum-based liquid sloshing models that capture the liquid
distributed inertia and viscosity can overcome the limitations of existing
liquid sloshing models. To this end, new liquid sloshing models will be
developed and integrated with multibody system (MBS) algorithms that allow for
developing and solving the differential/algebraic equations of vehicle models
that include significant details. In order to achieve efficient integration of
liquid sloshing/MBS algorithms and avoid the difficulties of integrating
existing Eulerian-based fluid formulations with the Lagrangian-based MBS
algorithms, new total-Lagrangian non-incremental liquid sloshing solution
procedures will be introduced. Three different liquid sloshing approaches will
be developed; the finite element (FE) absolute nodal coordinate formulation
(ANCF) will be used to develop high fidelity MBS models, the floating frame of
reference (FFR) formulation will be used to develop low-order MBS models, and
the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method will be used to develop a
different model to assess the effect of the liquid turbulence on vehicle
dynamics. The Lagrangian approaches will allow for accurately capturing the
effect of the fluid inertia in complex vehicle motion scenarios.