* 1632826
* 2016 Workshop on Bioinformatics for Precision
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Yufei Huang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Precision medicine is a new approach for disease therapy and prevention. It
considers individual variability in genomics makeups, environment, and lifestyle
in determining a more personalized treatment. As precision medicine heavily
relies on individual genomics and proteomics markers for disease diagnosis and
proper treatment selection, computation models and signal processing are
important components. The PIs propose to organize the Workshop on Bioinformatics
for Precision (the Workshop) in conjunction with the IEEE International
Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI), 2016.

An important mission of the Workshop is to promote participation of graduate
students, especially women and minority students, and foster student education
on computational biology for precision medicine. This grant will be used to
provide travel awards to qualified graduate students, whose papers are deemed of
high quality, to support their participation in the conference. The Workshop
organization includes the student award committee, which will be responsible for
evaluation and selection of student awardees. Particularly, 20-30% of the awards
will be allocated to encourage women and minority students to participate and
submit papers to the Workshop.

The goal of the workshop is to provide a unique platform for the bioinformatics
and computational biology researchers in especially IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBS) and Signal Processing Society to interact and
exchange research ideas among them and with others in Biomedical and Health
Informatics community and discuss future challenges in Precision Medicine. As
integrated bioinformatics and medical informatics approaches become one of the
focus areas in Precision Medicine, this workshop is uniquely positioned to spark
novel ideas and promote new collaborations between researchers in these two
communities. The theme of workshop will be precision medicine and will address
the computational issues in precision medicine.