* 1632015
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Gaze Patterns During Video-mediated Interviews
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Shelley Feuer, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,988.00

This research project will explore how and why the small self-view window (a
window with a live video feed of oneself in the corner of the screen) in video-
mediated communication (such as Skype) can affect people's disclosure of
sensitive information during survey interviews. In an earlier study, respondents
in the self-view condition disclosed more socially undesirable (that is, more
embarrassing) behaviors and perceived the interview to be less sensitive. This
project will expand on earlier research by tracking where survey respondents
look on the screen while answering sensitive questions via video. Examining gaze
patterns and how they might differ for different respondents or questions will
provide a basis for understanding why people disclose more and find the
interview less sensitive with a self-view window. The findings will increase
understanding about how nonverbal behaviors correlate with disclosure. Video-
mediated interviewing is a potentially cost-effective mode of data collection
that could facilitate the collection of policy-relevant data on some hard-to-
reach populations. The data collected may be useful for informing the design of
new video-based data-collection interfaces. Project results will be presented at
conferences and publication venues that maximize impact across several
disciplines. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is
provided to enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent
research career.

Video-mediated interviewing offers a unique combination of features that differ
from those in other face-to-face or audio interactions, including the ability to
see oneself in a self-view window. This research project will compare the
responses and gaze patterns of adult participants interviewed in a controlled
laboratory setting over Skype. The experiment will use a set of sensitive and
non-sensitive questions from U.S. government and social scientific surveys.
Respondents will be randomly assigned either to a self-view (respondents can see
themselves and the interviewer) or no self-view (respondents can see only the
interviewer) condition. Measures of gaze will be recorded using an unobtrusive
eye-tracking system. The data will be analyzed to determine when and how often
self-view respondents look at the images of themselves, whether respondents who
disclose more look at the self-view more, and how gaze location, duration, and
frequency of glances differ for sensitive vs. neutral questions and for less
socially desirable answers.