* 1632734
* Workshop: Advancing Anaerobic Digestion of Wastewater Solids and Food Waste for Energy and Resource Recovery: Science and Solutions  Location: Alexandria, VA.  Date:  June 5, 2017.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Lauren Fillmore, Water Environment and Reuse Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2018
* USD 49,942.00

1632734 Fillmore

Water resource recovery facilities with anaerobic digesters can increase their
production of biogas for energy recovery through co-digestion of food waste with
wastewater solids. Much of the non-wastewater organic material used in co-
digestion is food waste, typically from food industry operations, commercial
food waste and post-consumer food waste from institutions or residential
sources. The biogas (methane) produced can be used to generate heat, power,
and/or electricity. This workshop will provide a significant scientific basis
for the development of best practices to ensure the benefits of appropriately
designed and implemented renewable energy recovery through co-digestion with
minimization of side-effects that can curtail this process as currently
practiced. This workshop will also address a Federal goal to promote biogas
utilization and expand the biogas industry through renewable feed-stocks such as
wastewater solids and food waste.

It is estimated that 100 water resource recovery facilities located in the
United States currently import organic waste for co-digestion with wastewater
solids. As co-digestion is implemented, some municipalities collect empirical
data on anaerobic digester performance and operations. The co-digestion of food
waste with wastewater residuals using the built infrastructure at water resource
recovery facilities, diverts organic wastes from landfills and recovers the
energy in food waste in a sustainable manner at a competitive energy cost.
However, there are far less data available to predict digester performance with
the addition of food wastes than for wastewater solids alone. Understanding the
relationships between the science and operational practice is essential to make
co-digestion an efficient process to be implemented by utilities so to become a
viable option for food waste disposal and promote renewable energy recovery.
There is potential to improve the process and practice of anaerobic digestion
through science. This workshop will provide a technical, economic and practical
framework for co-digestion, and identify current and future research gaps,
processes enhancements and control points. The Water Environment Research
Foundation (WERF) proposes to hold a workshop to integrate research findings and
advance science on anaerobic digestion and co-digestion with the needs of WRRF
AD practitioners. WERF is well positioned to convene this workshop and
disseminate the results. With more than 270 members representing much of the
sewered population, and 8 years of research on co-digestion, WERF has become the
industry leader.