* 1632492
* I-Corps:  The Planetary Laboratory: A networked platform for engaging K-12 STEM learning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Stacy Rosenbaum, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) project focuses on an educational platform that
can be used to produce materials for STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Planetary Laboratory is a desktop/mobile website that helps research labs and
informal learning institutions like museums and zoos deliver engaging education
programs to large audiences. Such organizations typically have educational
mandates and special educational value because they connect students directly to
cutting edge STEM research and innovations. However, these organizations often
have limited reach because curriculum distribution is a secondary priority. The
curricula and resources they produce are "siloed" on individual websites and may
not reach a broad audience. The Planetary Laboratory is a cost effective way for
organizations to produce and distribute content that is aligned with national
education standards for formal instruction and amenable to out of school
learning. This will help organizations satisfy their 'broader impacts' goals,
improve their ability to secure funding, and expose more students to STEM
education materials that may be more effective than traditional text book based
lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Planetary Laboratory will operate an online
learning management system (LMS) that curates and hosts educational content from
multiple organizations. The LMS will present this content in a way that aligns
with national education standards and makes it easy for teachers and students
(K12 in particular) to use. Each learning challenge (a set of multimedia
materials that will guide the student through content on a specific topic) will
connect users with a network of organizations that produce relevant curriculum.
By linking related curricula and projects across organizations, this team will
build larger networks of students/teachers and learning materials, which
improves the reach of each individual organization. Content can be organized to
cover different types of standards (e.g., Next Generation Science Standards,
Common Core) across topic areas and grades. The Planetary Laboratory will use
organizations' content to create better STEM education programs for students. It
will connect STEM learning with other educational goals, particularly literacy
and social and emotional learning. The barriers that schools put between
different types of learning (e.g., math class teaches math; reading class
teaches literacy) do not exist in the real world. The Planetary Laboratory will
help teachers break down these barriers and give students a better sense of how
improving their literacy, or knowing how to manage their peer relationships, is
relevant to scientific enquiry and STEM careers. It will also help teach more
science at earlier ages - science education is often not emphasized until middle
school even though it is relevant and teachable far sooner.