* 1632467
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Solid-State Cerenkov Detector for Portable and Wearable Neutron Radiation Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Roy Clarke, Endectra, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 01/31/2019
* USD 899,658.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the potential to bring a disruptive neutron
detector technology to market, filling an urgent demonstrated need for real
time, portable and wearable radiation detectors. Successful commercialization of
the innovative Cerenkov BoroSilicate Glass (CBSG) technology will serve a broad
customer base in the nuclear detection and verification industry. Market
research indicates large scale potential, in the billions of dollars. This
market is currently well served with gamma ray and x-ray detection devices, but
the capabilities for portable and wearable neutron detectors are not as well
established. The proposed technology will close this gap and is anticipated to
have a very broad impact. The Cerenkov detector technology can also be
transformative in enabling new kinds of directional arrays for neutron imaging
and portal detectors, helping to make the nation's borders more secure against
illicit nuclear materials and providing improved tools for nuclear safeguards
and verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to commercialize an innovative neutron detector
module based 100% on solid-state technology. The overall objective of the
project is to build on the successful Cerenkov BoroSilicate Glass (CBSG)
detector prototyping in Phase I/IB to develop a small, low cost, modular neutron
detector which can be integrated with existing gamma detector technologies to 1)
form a comprehensive, scalable, networked solution to the problem of Special
Nuclear Material detection; 2) enable inexpensive in-house and third party
integration of neutron detection technology into radioisotope identification
devices and personal radiation dosimeters; and 3) allow for further testing and
advanced product development relating to directional neutron detector networks,
direct fast neutron detectors, and neutron spectroscopy. The research objectives
include a thorough quantitative assessment of the detector front-end material
response to neutron radiation and evaluation of its optoelectronic
characteristics. In particular, in collaboration with a specialty glass
manufacturer, the isotopic composition of glass front-end will be optimized for
fast neutron detection. The anticipated result is a novel and disruptive neutron
detection approach.