* 1632210
* Collaborative Research:   Systematic Evaluation and Further Improvement of Present Broadband Radiative Transfer Modeling Capabilities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Eli Mlawer, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2019
* USD 88,871.00

The terrestrial climate system is sensitive to the radiation budget. Thus,
accurate knowledge about the solar and thermal infrared radiation in the coupled
atmosphere-ocean system is critical to robust climate study. An example of this
sensitivity is the suggestion that a 1% decrease in the solar constant could
lead to an ice age. The effect of doubling CO2 on radiative forcing is
approximately 4 Wm-2, whereas uncertainties in radiation simulations due to, for
example, insufficient knowledge about the optical properties of clouds, may be
larger than this value. During the 1980s and 1990s, many researchers made
substantial progress in developing and improving radiative transfer schemes used
in general climate models (GCMs), and various intercomparisons of GCM radiation
codes were published. Since that time, significant progress has been made in
light scattering computational methods, in-situ measurements and laboratory
studies of the optical and microphysical properties of clouds and aerosols,
gaseous absorption line parameters and the water vapor continuum absorption,
optical properties of various oceanic constituents, and the efficiency of
numerical schemes for solving radiative transfer equations. There is a pressing
need to incorporate the aforesaid progress into radiative transfer modeling
capabilities. Moreover, the ocean and atmosphere are not coupled in many
existing radiative transfer models. The scattering and absorption of radiation
by oceanic water, dissolved organic matter (the so-called yellow substance), and
phytoplankton have an influence in heating the uppermost water layers, and
consequently affect thermal and dynamic properties such as the sea surface
temperature and depth of the mixed atmosphere-ocean layer. The reflection of
radiation by the oceans, including the effects of a wavy air-water interface and
whitecap, can also affect the spectral characteristics and magnitude of
radiation and, thus, the radiative heating and cooling rates in the atmosphere.
The overarching goal is to systematically evaluate and further improve current
radiative transfer modeling capabilities.

Intellectual Merit: The outcomes of the study will include 1) systematic
quantification of the potential errors/inaccuracies of the aforesaid radiative
transfer models, 2) extension of the current radiative transfer modeling
capabilities to an atmosphere-ocean coupled system, 3) implementation of
spectrally consistent parameterizations of ice clouds and dust aerosols, and 4)
development and implementation of a computationally efficient radiative transfer
solver.

Broader Impacts: The research effort will improve the radiative transfer package
currently used in climate models, and be a valuable contribution to the
atmospheric radiative transfer and climate study communities. Furthermore, the
light scattering modeling and parameterization capabilities can find potential
applications in other areas such as remote sensing of dust aerosol and ice cloud
properties. The associated educational pursuits will focus on mentoring a
postdoc researcher, training a graduate student, and developing teaching
materials. This effort will contribute to training young researchers in the
discipline of radiative transfer and light scattering that is a quite unique
branch of atmospheric physics. Furthermore, the integration of RRTMG into
classroom teaching will directly benefit the educational program in atmospheric
sciences, particularly, in hands-on experience in atmospheric radiative transfer
simulation.