* 1632945
* EAGER: Developing a Framework for Mitigating Environmental Externalities in the Power Sector to Maximize Regional Outcomes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Kelly Sanders, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1632945&lt;br/&gt;Sanders, Kelly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
develop the foundation for a potentially transformative and interdisciplinary
approach to reduce the environmental and social impacts of the electric power
sector through a dynamic market-based solution. There are two major research
objectives: (1) understanding the fundamental drivers of variations in local
power plant efficiency, and (2) developing a new approach to formulating a
mathematical framework for power plant dispatching based on the spatio-temporal
prioritization of local air quality conditions, water constraints, and
anticipated levels of climate stress. Although modifying the "business as usual"
dispatching protocol would likely result in higher direct costs to consumers,
this project will analyze the benefits that could result in achieving air,
water, and climate improvements and how this strategy compares in cost to other
mitigation strategies. The proposed strategy is targeted to determine the best
power plant fleet to meet demand reliably, while minimizing environmental and
social consequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impact of this research
is potentially far-reaching, offering an innovative mathematical framework that
may reduce the social and environmental costs of power generation without new
power infrastructure investments. While many sustainability investments may
disproportionally benefit populations that are able to pay a premium, the
proposed framework offers a systems-scale intervention that strategically
identifies regions that would benefit the most from reductions in local power
generation. The geostatistical framework proposed can also be used more
generally to inform the placement of new infrastructure investments and regions
that could be targeted for new sustainability interventions based on greatest
potential benefits.