* 1632975
* Conference Proposal: Student and Junior Faculty Travel Support for International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST) 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Thomas Seager, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

1632975 &lt;br/&gt;Seager, Thomas P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST) will cover a spectrum of
issues for assessing and managing products and services across their life cycle,
as well as the design, management, and policy implications of sustainably
engineered systems and technologies. The conference will have significant
participation from students and young faculty members. The requested funds will
help to expand the participation of students, underrepresented groups, and
junior faculty from across the United States. Among others, three particular
sessions planned for this year are (1) resilient infrastructure systems, (2)
diverse photovoltaic stakeholder inputs and advancing life cycle analysis
methods, and (3) approaches that bring together diverse groups and encourage
high levels of participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISSST paradigm is that
solutions to complex sustainability issues are achieved via trans-disciplinary
approaches. At ISSST, cross-pollination of ideas among natural scientists,
engineers, social scientists, industry representatives, and policy makers
facilitates the development of a holistic understanding of sustainability
applicable to engineered systems. All sessions will be live broadcasted on the
ISSST Youtube channel, and authors will have open access to the publications on
the digital journal, Figshare. Authors' research will be licensed, assigned a
DOI, and indexed by Google Scholar and the Library of Congress.