* 1632392
* Long-Term Human Land, Forest, and Water Management in a Tropical Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Vernon Scarborough, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 231,563.00

The goal of this research is to understand the processes which led to the
emergence of complex large scale social groups in tropical environments. The
researchers wish to understand the land and water management strategies that
support such occurrences in regions of potentially low carrying capacity.
Archaeology provides a valuable way to gain insight because it has the potential
to trace such processes over extend periods of time. A team of researchers from
the University of Cincinnati together with an international group of colleagues
have identified a site, which through excavation and field research will permit
them to achieve this goal. Investigation of the hydraulic, agricultural, and
forest management strategies that allowed the persistent occupation in the face
of changing environmental and political economic conditions will provide
insights that will broaden understanding of the rise of social complexity, the
expansion of political economy specifically and, in general terms, the
trajectory of cultural evolution. The research will provide for training of
graduate students and the results will be disseminated through institutional
websites, popular media, undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as through
scientific journals and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
archaeological site of Yaxnohcah located in the Mayan lowlands provides a test
case. It grew into a large urban center early in the Preclassic period, survived
a broader regional collaples and continued to be occupied in later prehistoric
times. It is hypothesized that the complex topography associated with
Yaxnohcah's location between two bajos,(lowland swampy areas) as well as the
many embayments created a landscape with a great diversity of drainage and soil
types and forest cover that provided early occupants with an ideal location to
experiment with a wide array of cultigens and management practices that were
adapted over time to changing environmental and cultural circumstances. In
particular, the research addresses the development of hydraulic systems at
Yaxnohcah, especially as they contributed to agricultural activity, forest
clearance and exploitation of the bajos. The acquisition of LiDAR imagery of the
site area and environs in 2014 allows selection of a variety of topographic
settings, probable ancient agricultural fields, reservoirs/aguadas, and
residential areas for excavation and coring, thus providing data on resource
management across the spectrum of environmental contexts and social strata
present at Yaxnohcah.