* 1632751
* Stigma, Social Networks, and HIV Testing, Linkage and Care
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Emmanuel Koku, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 187,883.00

This research seeks to understand how stigma affects a person's decision to test
for HIV or adhere to care, and how the influence of stigma depends on an
individual's social networks. Stigma remains one of the foremost barriers to
effective HIV prevention, treatment and retention in care. HIV stigma undermines
HIV prevention efforts by making it difficult for people to get tested for HIV,
reduce their risk of infection, as well as seek and remain in care, if they are
living with HIV. As a result, scholarly attention has centered on continuing
refinement and conceptualization of stigma. Contemporary approaches to HIV-
related stigma recognize the role of individual characteristics (such as their
level of education, understanding of HIV, risk behaviors, etc.) and their social
environments in shaping stigma and its experiences. However, stigma by
definition is a byproduct of interpersonal relationships or an individual's
social networks. An individual's relationships - whom they know, to whom they
talk, in whom they confide, in fact, their social capital - are just as
important in determining their propensity to stigmatize and be stigmatized.
Unfortunately, scant attention has been paid to analyzing how stigma is shaped
by the characteristics of the social networks of those enacting stigma and their
targets. Insights from the project's findings will inform HIV prevention
policies and programs as well as anti-stigma interventions and efforts to
increase HIV testing and retention in care. The project also broadens
participation of underrepresented groups in science, and trains undergraduate
and graduate students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Emmanuel Koku of Drexel University will examine the effects of stigma and social
capital on two health outcomes: getting tested for and adherence to HIV
treatment. He and his research team will interview and conduct a social network
survey with over 300 African immigrants (one of the fastest growing groups of
migrants to the United States, and one that is increasingly at risk of HIV
infection) in the greater Philadelphia area. They will (i) explore how HIV and
its stigma is constructed, understood, and assigned in African immigrant
communities, (2) document the experiences of stigma within the community, (3)
analyze the influence of social networks and interpersonal relationships on
experiences of stigma, HIV testing and adherence to care. Through these efforts,
the proposed research will contribute to conceptualizations of stigma by linking
it to social network theories, particularly social capital. The project's
conceptual approach departs from dominant methodologies that view social capital
as positive, evident in community norms of trust, reciprocity, and civic
engagement. Conversely, the project examines how local and personal networks can
be negatively constituted, influencing stigmatization within certain
communities.