* 1632247
* SBIR Phase II:  Plant Bioproduction of Therapeutics and Antibodies for the Treatment of Ebola and Other Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ryan Shepherd, PhylloTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 915,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of genetically
engineered tobacco plants that produce antibodies for the treatment of
individuals infected with the Ebola virus. In the recent Ebola outbreak, a new
antibody-based drug was shown to be effective in treating infected patients that
was based on a transient tobacco-produced Ebola antibody cocktail called ZMapp
(Mapp Biopharmaceutical, Inc, San Diego, CA). Unfortunately, Mapp
Biopharmaceutical's supply of antibody was quickly depleted, as the
manufacturing method was not able to keep up with demand. The technological
innovation in this proposal is the targeted production of antibodies within the
gland cells of the tobacco leaf surface structures called glandular secreting
trichomes. The research objectives will be to demonstrate the secretion of
antibodies to the Ebola virus from tobacco trichome glands. The goal is to
generate a line of N. tabacum plants that is optimized for antibody production
in plant trichomes to provide a biomanufacturing platform for the large-scale
production of antibodies that may be used in the treatment of Ebola infection,
and in the future, other diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project proposes to use a recently developed plant-based biomanufacturing system
to scale-up the production of antibodies to the Ebola virus for use as a
therapeutic treatment. Mapp Biopharmaceutical has produced a drug based on
antibodies to the Ebola virus produced in a tobacco plant transient gene
expression system. Using this system, they have identified a glycosylated
antibody variant (glycoform) with enhanced antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity.
Using glycosyl-transferase knockout lines of N. benthiamiana and transient
expression strategies, the company utilizes plants to produce glycosylated
antibodies that produce optimal recruitment of natural immune effector cells
(Olinger et al., 2012). Other expression hosts (Chinese hamster ovary cells,
yeast) yield product with reduced potency, and are not suitable alternatives. To
recover active antibody with their current plant expression technology, Mapp
Biopharmaceutical must destructively harvest plants, and isolate antibody from
plant tissue homogenates. Unfortunately, this method has not been able to
produce enough antibodies to satisfy the demand. The proposed method will allow
for the production of antibodies in tobacco plants in large scale. In addition,
the proposed system will use antibody harvesting strategies that do not require
destructive homogenization as the antibodies will be secreted onto the surface
of the leaf, and recovered by washing. The goals of this project are to increase
the functionality of plant-produced antibodies, scale-up production, and reduce
the costs of production further through system optimization.