* 1632483
* SBIR Phase II:  Millimeter-Scale Wireless Sensor Node for Intracranial Pressure Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* ZhiYoong Foo, CubeWorks Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2018
* USD 740,612.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project allows for the realization of a commercial
millimeter-scale intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring product that can help
neurosurgeons in treating patients with hydrocephalus. While the goal of this
SBIR Phase II project is the development of said ICP monitor, the technology can
also be translated to the development of 'smart dust', opening up the next
generation of computing paradigm. This will mark a significant milestone towards
massive-scale realization of internet of things, dramatically accelerating the
technology adoption and research impact of millimeter-scale wireless sensor
nodes. The technology adoption can be introduced to multiple markets including,
but not limited to, medical, industrial, and consumer spaces. This would open up
many new commercial opportunities that were previously limited by energy
consumption and size, heralding a new era of computing in an unprecedented form
factor and lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the development of a millimeter-
scale intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring for improved treatment of
hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus is a condition in which cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
builds up in the brain's ventricle area, causing head enlargement, epilepsy, and
death. The only practical treatment for hydrocephalus is surgical implant of
medical shunts, which relieves excess CSF to other parts of the body. The
biggest problem with existing shunts is that they lack any embedded monitoring
feature. Once the shunt is installed, there is no way to measure the internal
pressure outside of hospital settings. The proposed monitor enables a 'smart
shunt' solution, which continuously records ICP information inside the shunt for
many years. This data is read out wirelessly and can be used to prevent shunt
failures and improve the treatment of this lifelong disease.