* 1632982
* Workshop: The Mechanical Properties of Biofilms: State-of-the-Art and Research Needs, at University of Notre Dame in late July or early August of 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Robert Nerenberg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2019
* USD 75,643.00

1632982 Nerenberg

Biofilms arise from microorganisms in natural and engineered systems from
organic substances that are produced by the organisms and are outside of the
cell. While biofilms are needed for many environmental treatment processes, such
as the moving bed biofilm reactor and the granular sludge reactor, in many other
environmental processes they are detrimental. For example, biofilms cause
fouling of membrane filtration systems, greatly increasing energy requirements.
They also can harbor pathogens in water transmission mains and clog porous
media. Biofilms also are problematic in other fields. For example, in industry
they can cause bio-corrosion in water and oil pipelines and biofouling cooling
towers. In shipping, they initiate the fouling of ship hulls, resulting in a
major increase hydraulic drag and energy consumption. In the health field,
biofilms produce recalcitrant infections of prosthetic devices, lung infections
of people with cystic fibrosis, and are the primary cause of dental caries. A
workshop on biofilms is proposed with a focus on their mechanical properties.
The workshop will tentatively be held at the University of Notre Dame in late
July or early August of 2017.

Biofilms can cause fouling in environmental, industrial, and clinical settings,
leading to enormous economic costs. Yet little is known about the mechanical
properties of biofilms, which is key for developing effective biofilm management
strategies. The proposed workshop will bring together researchers from various
disciplines to define critical research needs to better understand biofilm
mechanical properties. In addition to five experts from Notre Dame, the PI
expects to invite up to 60 leading US researchers in the field of biofilms and
biofilm mechanical properties to participate with support from this grant.
Leading researchers from other countries will be encouraged to participate,
using outside support, in person or via video conference. Many of the
researchers will come from disciplines that normally would not intersect, such
as environmental engineering, mechanical engineering, chemical engineering,
microbiology, materials science, medical science, and applied mathematics. The
workshop will address the following: 1. What are the problems from the science,
engineering, and medical fields, where biofilm mechanical properties play a key
role? 2. What types of information are needed to characterize biofilm mechanical
behavior? 3. What physical, chemical, and microbiological factors affect the
mechanical properties of biofilms? 4. How are biofilm mechanical properties
described? 5. What are the experimental approaches for determining biofilm
mechanical properties, and what are their advantages and disadvantages? What
type of parameters are obtained? 6. What types of models are available to
describe biofilm mechanical properties and for which types of problems are the
models most suitable? The outcome will be a summary of the state the knowledge
on biofilm mechanical properties and a definition of critical research needs for
environmental, medical, and other applications.