* 1632042
* SBIR Phase II:  A Plug-and-Play Bioprinting Educational Toolkit for Next Generation Science and Engineering Students
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Mayasari Lim, SE3D INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 886,512.00

Three-dimensional (3D) bioprinting technology is giving rise to new methods and
innovation in multiple fields across the biomedical and biotechnological
industries. On-going progress is generating growth in the bioprinting market
creating demands for new job skills in the near future. To address industry
needs, schools must ready themselves with the right tools and equipment to train
next generation students. Moreover, increased accessibility of technology in
education can help to empower students and expand their scientific creativity.
However, current 3D bioprinting instrumentation are primarily designed for
industry use and expensive. Technical barriers further prohibit many schools
from gaining access. To truly democratize technology innovation for next
generation scientists and engineers, a sustainable solution catered to the
education market is necessary. This SBIR Phase II project is aimed at addressing
this opportunity gap and will create an affordable 3D bioprinting equipment and
educational toolkit catered to high schools and colleges. The proposed
bioprinting equipment will be multi-functional so that teachers can use it for a
variety of classroom applications. In addition, the educational toolkit will
include student-friendly software tools facilitating experiments in 3D
bioprinting, bioreagent kits, and curriculum to support teachers in using the
bioprinters in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to create a highly
functional and versatile bioprinting equipment and educational toolkit for the
high school and college education market. The motivation behind this work is to
increase accessibility of new and cutting-edge tools to next generation students
who will not only benefit from gaining industry-relevant skills they need in the
near future but provide them with the opportunity to innovate. The proposed
multi-functional bioprinting equipment will facilitate increased hands-on
learning activities in the classroom, a key component in learning science and
practice engineering, and project-based learning. To this end, the development
of curriculum to support use of the 3D bioprinter is critical in manifesting
adoption in the classroom. From the hardware engineering perspective, the
project will focus on engineering design to achieve integration of multiple
functionalities in the proposed bioprinting equipment. Software tools that
facilitate design and creation of bio-experimentation, and evaluation of
experimental results through imaging tools will be developed to support
activities spanning across the entire bioprinting process. Finally, bioreagent
kits will be created to support consumable needs for the 3D bioprinter.