* 1632576
* SBIR Phase II:  A novel multicolor cell line engineering platform that enables high-throughput microscopy-based screening of living cells for drug discovery
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Mary Ludlam, Cairn Biosciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 909,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of new tools to understand
the dynamic behavior of cellular machinery that is disrupted in disease.
Unraveling the dynamic aspects of cellular physiology that may be targeted
therapeutically requires new technologies capable of profiling the response of
entire signaling pathways to pharmacological intervention targeted at single
pathway nodes. The availability of physiologically relevant live-cell models
that are compatible with visualizing and quantifying the spatiotemporal
regulation of disease-relevant signal transduction pathways and cellular
machinery will be key to enabling this approach. The ability to monitor multiple
facets of key cancer signaling pathways in this way represents a valuable
opportunity to identify potent and selective therapeutic inhibitors of
"undruggable" targets, such as the Ras protein, which is a crucial driver of
more than 30% of cancers. By enabling development of a robust and scalable high-
throughput live-cell assay platform, this technology may reduce the time and
cost to pinpoint the mechanism of action and off-target effects of
pharmaceutical chemicals, thus delivering new capabilities to rapidly and cost-
effectively identify safe and effective therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase II project will develop a robust and flexible platform for rapid
generation of precision-engineered, multicolor fluorescent cell lines and
associated high-throughput microscopy-based assays. This platform contrasts with
industry standard methods for developing such cell lines and assays, which are
lengthy and inflexible. The project comprises optimization and execution of four
components: 1) Generation of a panel of cell lines compatible with rapid,
reliable stable reporter integration; 2) Delivery of a library of approximately
25 multicolor reporters of the Ras/MAPK pathway; 3) Rapid generation and
validation of a library of approximately 100 validated stable reporter cell
lines expressing all therapeutically relevant mutations and isoforms of the
Ras/MAPK pathway; and 4) 384-well plate assay development and screening of these
Ras/MAPK reporter cells using tool compounds. The project aims to demonstrate
the capability of the platform to rapidly pinpoint compound mechanism of action
and potential off-target effects by monitoring multiple facets of previously
inaccessible biology associated with a critical, high-value oncology target in
live cells. The standardized platform established in the course of this project
will allow rapid expansion to additional clinically relevant signaling pathways.