* 1632724
* Facilitating Access to Pavlov's Twenty Years of Objective Study of the Higher Nervous Activity of Animals
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Olga Yokoyama, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 87,427.00

General Audience Summary

This award provides seminal support for a research infrastructure project to
translate into English I. P. Pavlov's most important contribution to psychology,
first published in 1923 as Twenty Years of Objective Study of the Higher Nervous
Activity of Animals. The project will culminate in uploading the complete text
to eScholarship and indexing it in WorldCat, making the entire work available in
English for the first time. The investigator is an experienced linguist and
translator with medical background and a track record of success in large-scale
translation projects. The final product will include two introductions, one by
an American psychologist and the other by an American historian of science.
Producing a translation of Pavlov's most influential piece of work and rendering
it accessible to and searchable by anyone with access to the internet will be of
potential interest not only to scholars and specialists (psychologists,
historians, translation scholars, learning/teaching specialists, or therapists),
but may also inspire young scholars and students, as well as lay persons
interested in the implications scientific ideas have for common life. The
proposed resource will show readers the controlled step-by-step experiments in
which some of the 20th century's most seminal scientific knowledge was produced,
and will potentially stimulate public scientific literacy and public engagement
with science. Many of Pavlov's papers describing experiments with dogs'
salivation end, unexpectedly, in paragraphs that informally bring in parallels
with human psychology and try to address the social condition and human
suffering. These turns reflect Pavlov's concern with the vexing question for all
scientists today: What is the relevance of basic science to the public at large?

Technical Summary

The potential of the proposed activity to advance knowledge can be judged on the
basis of the importance of having access to an accurate rendering of the work by
the 1904 Nobel Laureate Ivan Pavlov. Despite his exceptionally high ranking in
both physiology and psychology today (e.g., in a survey of professional opinion
he ranks with Freud and Piaget among the most frequently named "greatest
psychologists of the 20th century in the overall field of psychology"), the
existing translations of Pavlov's seminal work into English are incomplete in
coverage and flawed in quality. Moreover, they are not indexed, searchable, or
available online. Anglophone scholars, students and the general public deserve
better. The proposed project would address the problems of coverage, translation
quality, and accessibility. The resulting exposure may well lead to a re-
evaluation of Pavlov's ideas in several sub-fields of psychology, and further in
applied fields related to them. As long as we believe that change in societal
and individual attitudes is ultimately related to learning, wide access to an
accurate presentation of Pavlovian conditioning principles would also benefit
our approach to psychopathology, social psychology, and sociology in general.