* 1632584
* RUI: Physiological and Cognitive Correlates of Error-Related Alpha Suppression
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Rebecca Compton, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 274,175.00

The ability to shift attention rapidly under highly demanding performance
conditions is critical for many occupations, such as driving, aviation,
military, and medical personnel. The human mind has evolved a capacity to
continually self-monitor, checking ongoing performance against goals,
maintaining alertness to possible errors, and rapidly adjusting attention when
performance shows signs of slipping. The present research project will
investigate the processes by which performance errors are detected, leading to
heightened physiological arousal and adaptive changes in cognition that
momentarily refocus attention on task-relevant information in the environment.
Using both EEG measures of brain activity and measures of pupil diameter to
quantify physiological arousal, the research will test the hypothesis that
arousal elicited by performance errors leads to enhanced attention. In addition
to its scientific goals, the project will strengthen the research environment in
cognitive neuroscience at a highly selective liberal arts college that sends
disproportionate numbers of graduates on to doctoral-level research in STEM
fields.

Effective control of cognitive performance depends on noticing and responding to
performance errors in ways that are behaviorally adaptive. The proposed research
tests a novel model of error-reactivity that focuses on error-related alpha
suppression (ERAS), which refers to the reduction in EEG alpha-band activity in
the inter-trial interval following an error compared to a correct response. The
model posits that ERAS reflects transient arousal resulting from norepinephrine
projections that ascend from the brainstem locus coerulus to activate cortical
regions in response to salient events. The arousal model predicts that ERAS
should covary with error-related pupil dilation, which is mediated by the
norepinephrine system. In addition, based on adaptive gain theory, the model
predicts that error-related arousal leads to enhanced attention to task-relevant
cues, which will be measured both behaviorally and with EEG measures. Finally,
using current time-frequency analysis techniques, the research will directly
compare ERAS to other error-related oscillatory phenomena that are present in
different EEG frequency bands (i.e., error-related theta and gamma effects).
Results will provide novel information to inform theories of error-related
cognitive control by detailing how performance mistakes lead to momentary
arousal responses and by examining the relationship between error-related
arousal and behavioral performance.