* 1632774
* CVS Symposium:  The future of visual attention
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Ben Hayden, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Attention is a core component of vision that profoundly influences perception.
For example, when an observer focuses their attention on a single object, such
as a friend at a crowded party, this can lead to an almost complete filtering of
the background. Because of its early and important role in cognitive
neuroscience, attention research has remained central to our study of the brain.
Recent experiments have suggested that the role of attention is more ubiquitous
to brain function than originally appreciated, playing a key role in other
domains such as decision-making, executive control, and social interaction. The
field of attention research has grown and diversified over the past 20 years,
but there has not been a corresponding increase in communication among major
thinkers. The goal of this conference is to therefore bring together a diverse
group of scholars who study attention and related areas, who take unique,
creative, and future-oriented approaches to the problem. Key foci for the
meeting will be new multivariate techniques for analysis of neural data,
naturalistic behaviors including foraging and social attention, the relationship
between attention and learning, and exploration of attention in diverse systems,
including babies and patient populations. The meeting will lay out an agenda for
the next 20 or 25 years of research in attention and related fields. Because of
its orientation towards the future, a key ingredient of our proposal will be the
close involvement of post-docs and graduate students, and the explicit focus on
attracting a diverse group of attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The Future of
Attention" symposium will be held at the University of Rochester in June 2016.
Twenty speakers will be invited to attend; all speakers will be high caliber
scientists whose work touches on the topic of attention, but whose approach is
novel, creative, and/or unusual. The audience will consist of both scientists at
the University of Rochester and visitors from around the country. The symposium
will be advertised through posters mailed to speakers and other prominent
scientists in the field. Plenary talks will be presented along with a poster
session and brief presentations. The symposium will be part of a long-running
series hosted by the University of Rochester's Center for Visual Sciences. The
series has run a meeting every other year, on average, for 50 years. The long
history of these meetings has been a key part of the historical field of vision
science, broadly speaking; our meeting will carry on that tradition.