* 1632402
* STTR Phase II:  A Novel Abdominal Stimulator to Assist with Ventilator Weaning in Patients
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Franco Laghi, Liberate Medical LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,407,653.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project, in which a non-invasive respiratory muscle
stimulation device and approach to weaning patients from mechanical ventilation
will be developed, is a reduction in public health care expenditure and a
reduction in morbidity for the half a million patients who have difficulty
weaning from mechanical ventilation each year in the US. These patients suffer
from an array of clinical complications (for example, pneumonia) and cost the US
health care system $16 billion annually, a great deal of which is borne by
Medicare and Medicaid. In addition, the current reimbursement landscape
economically incentivizes hospitals to wean patients at the earliest possible
time. The proposed innovation has the potential to positively benefit society by
providing a solution to this serious healthcare problem. In addition, it
promises to improve our scientific understanding of respiratory muscle
physiology and mechanics in difficult to wean patients. It will also improve our
technical understanding of non-invasive respiratory sensors and biofeedback
algorithms for the purposes of electrical muscle stimulation. Finally, as
demonstrated by the number and cost of difficult to wean patients, as well as
current healthcare reimbursement policies, the proposed innovation has potential
to results in a considerable commercial impact. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop a non-invasive electrical stimulator that
automatically applies stimulation to the respiratory muscles in synchrony with a
patient?s voluntary breathing pattern. This approach is expected to address the
imbalance between respiratory muscle strength and respiratory muscle load - a
major factor responsible for weaning difficulty - by assisting ventilation
during weaning sessions and strengthening the breathing muscles that have become
weakened as a result of mechanical ventilation. In Phase 1 a functional
prototype was developed; clinical feasibility of the approach was also
demonstrated. The Phase II proposal focuses on refining the stimulation
algorithm to maximize its clinical effectiveness and on developing a novel
stimulation electrode system so that the device can be quickly applied to
patients. In addition, methods will be developed to interface the technology
with a mechanical ventilator to expand its clinical application. Finally, a
complete works-like, looks-like prototype will be developed that is designed to
international standards and is safe for clinical testing. The work completed in
this Phase of the project will enable a controlled clinical trial of the
proposed approach and ultimately allow the device to gain FDA regulatory
clearance.