* 1632533
* SBIR Phase II:  Reliable, Scalable Projection Mapping Systems with Reusable Content
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Kevin Karsch, Lightform, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project includes new ways to inform, educate, advertise
or entertain through a technology called projection mapping. This technology
uses commodity video projectors to augment the surfaces of ordinary objects;
applications range from advertising, events, and entertainment, to educational
experiences at museums or schools, healthcare applications for rehabilitation
and visualization, and simulation (e.g. military or employee training). Through
multiple deployments at retail locations across the country, the company's
prototypes have demonstrated that these applications will benefit not only the
brands and companies that employ the technology, but also the end-users
(students, consumers, etc), resulting in better engagement and faster learning
when compared to achieving these same tasks through other media such as videos.
Research performed during the Phase II project will allow the company to develop
a scalable product and fulfill many deployments, bringing projection mapping to
new markets. A free version of the company's software will also be available for
non-commercial and academic use, enabling interdisciplinary research in fine
arts and computer science. The R&amp;D results generated from the research will
be published and disseminated to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build a commercially
viable and scalable projection mapping system. While projection mapping has a
long academic history, this captivating medium still remains out of commercial
reach. As learned from over 50 customer discovery interviews, retailers are
shifting towards location-based experiences to increase customer engagement and
sales. Many other industries have a similar need to attract attention and convey
information, but without a scalable product that can be easily deployed and
maintained, they lack the means to provide these experiences. To address this
need, the company will develop hardware and software systems to enable
captivating and immersive projection mapping experiences. The core of this
system is in software: the developed algorithms will robustly calibrate
projection mapping systems comprising any number of projectors/cameras,
automatically align projected content to the scene and perform color-correction
when the display surfaces are non-white/textured. These algorithms will be
validated through standard benchmarks, resulting in novel, state-of-the-art
practices. Additionally, these methods will allow for reusable projection
mapping content, a critical feature lacking in existing software, as well as
cloud deployment and monitoring. New hardware configurations will also be
developed to achieve new uses for projection mapping.