* 1632601
* Scholars Award: Industrial Patronage and the Cold War University
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Joseph Martin, Martin                  Joseph         D
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 76,519.00

After World War II, science began to drive the development of new consumer and
military technologies. The proposed research will focus on the history of
academia-industry scientific research collaborations. It will deepen our
knowledge of how science was conducted in the post-war era. This proposed
investigation will illustrate the common ground between academic and industrial
scientific interests. By doing a historical study of these relationships the
proposed research will provide a thorough understanding of how academia and
industry have formed successful collaborations in the past. By focusing on
historical cases in which universities and businesses crafted partnerships, the
proposed research identifies historical models that can inform contemporary
research policy.

The proposed research will advance our historical understanding of how and why
academia and industry collaborated to support scientific research during the
Cold War. Historians have previously investigated university-industry
collaborations to show how some of them supported American military interests
during the Cold War and at times steered their research towards economic and
military interests. This proposal will do a broader survey of institutions in
order to situate existing understanding of academia-industry partnerships within
a larger, knottier story about American science, technology, academia, and
industry. The proposed research will develop case studies through historical
research in university, foundation, and corporate archives. These studies will
help answer the questions of 1) the extent to which the motives driving
industrial investment in science were contingent, and less rigid than is
sometimes assumed, and 2) the degree to which individual institutions had agency
to determine the shape and direction of their research programs and the
character of their institutional partnerships.