* 1632291
* Collaborative Research: Testing Individualized Cognitive Training Interventions Based on a Multifaceted Theory of Working Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Gene Brewer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,888.00

Working memory is the ability to actively maintain, manipulate, and retrieve
relevant information during everyday tasks. An individual's working memory
functioning is strongly and positively related to important outcomes such as
intelligence, reading comprehension, mathematic proficiency, and resistance to
distraction. An important question is what specific cognitive processes can
explain why working memory is so critical for these diverse aspects of behavior.
A related question is whether increasing a person's working memory functioning
via computerized memory exercises will lead to improvements not just in working
memory but also in related outcomes, such as intelligence and reading
comprehension. This research project will provide the foundation for new
theoretical perspectives about working memory that have the potential to
drastically alter the future of cognitive training research and
commercialization. The information gained via this project comes at a critical
juncture, as the public, K-12, and medical use of computerized cognitive
training is increasing, along with recent estimates of billions of US dollars
spent on such computerized training. The investigators will provide workshops
and lectures to students, faculty, community members, and K-12 teachers and
administrators, both in-person and via Internet-based materials. In addition,
the project will provide a variety of hands-on research opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate a novel approach to cognitive training, by first
identifying specific working memory strengths and weaknesses in a large sample
of young adults, and then developing specific cognitive training exercises that
target an individual's working memory functioning. This approach differs from
the typical one-size-fits-all method of cognitive training that does not
consider the individual's particular cognitive profile. Before and after
training, participants will complete various cognitive tests designed to assess
whether the training leads to very specific improvements (i.e., outcomes similar
to the training program) or broader improvements (i.e., intelligence, reading
comprehension). The design of the project will provide the strongest and
clearest evidence yet about the potential utility of working memory training to
produce meaningful changes in working memory, intelligence, and reading
comprehension.