* 1632530
* The Multisensory Training Benefit for Speech and Speaker Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Lawrence Rosenblum, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,458.00

When listening to someone in a noisy environment, you can better understand what
they say when you look at their face while they talk. Providing audiovisual
information about speech, not just audio information alone, has also been shown
to help infants develop language. In some cases, using audiovisual information
to train speech perception helps adults learn a second language, helps aphasic
patients produce more fluent speech, and improves perception of heard speech by
listeners with hearing impairments. This last group is of particular interest
because roughly a third of U.S. adults have some degree of hearing
impairment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this audiovisual training advantage is
well established, it is unclear how exactly the effect works. Research will be
conducted to determine the principles behind the effect, how and why it works,
and in what circumstances. The investigators also explore why audiovisual
training typically does not help hearing-impaired individuals who received
cochlear implants after early childhood. One possibility is that their years of
experience before receiving the cochlear implant required a heavy reliance on
lip reading, leaving them over-reliant on information from the talker during
audiovisual training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific issues examined are
rooted in theories of multisensory learning. These issues include: a) whether
simultaneous auditory and visual speech is necessary for the training advantage
to occur; b) to what degree the advantage generalizes across different talkers
for a given listener; and c) whether the use of other sensory channels, in this
case audio and touch, results in a similar training advantage. Parallel
experiments will be carried out with both normal-hearing individuals and
individuals who received cochlear implants after early childhood. The research
should not only improve speech perception training regimes for individuals in
this clinical population but should also improve our understanding of typical
speech and talker perception. More generally, the research should inform our
understanding of perceptual learning and plasticity, as well as multisensory
integration.