* 1632566
* SBIR Phase II:  High Quality Carbon Nanotubes for Radio Frequency Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Dawei Wang, Carbon Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,165,698.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project can be found across the semiconductor industry
with its initial market in wireless communications. Due to the extraordinary
properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), applications include low noise amplifiers
(LNAs), mixers, and RF power amplifiers (PAs). Looking forward, carbon nanotube
transistors (CFETs) can reshape analog radio frequency electronics, enabling the
higher data rates and improved capacity demanded by next generation wireless
systems due to their intrinsic linearity and associated low out of band
interference . CFETs are highly efficient, dissipating less unwanted power than
current state of the art technologies while handling high power levels. This
translates into more battery life for mobile devices with lower cooling costs.
With more linear RF transistors, many billions of dollars of spending on
additional base stations, larger batteries, and radio spectrum can be avoided,
at great savings to consumers and industry. More speculatively, the creation of
reliable grwoth techniques for CFETs and associated manufacturing processes may
offer an excellent sensor platform or better ways to form on chip interconnects.
The key problems being investigating of in situ growth of high performance
nanotubes are applicable to the fabrication of CNT based devices for many
electronic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop electronic devices for radio
frequency applications using carbon nanotubes (CNTs). CNTs are a one dimensional
material with diameters in the nanometer range. CNTs have unique and highly
desirable properties ranging from superior mobility to current carrying
capability to thermal stability. Calculations show CNT amplifiers will be
inherently linear with noise suppressed to the lowest possible quantum limit.
These properties allow for electronic devices that will perform better than
existing technologies, such as silicon and gallium arsenide. Just as
importantly, the cost for making these devices will be dramatically lower due to
the relatively simple method for material synthesis and device fabrication. This
work will enable wafer scale arrays of high density in-situ tubes to be grown on
silicon enabling the development of carbon electronic components a manner
comparable to silicon devices. This work will enable cost effective wafer scale
growth of devices which exploit the groundbreaking linearity that CNTs can
deliver.