* 1632058
* Explaining Ethnic Peace
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Emily Bacchus, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

General Summary

Division among ethnic groups is often seen as a dangerous force that encourages
violence and threatens the stability of democracy. Furthermore, such conflict is
perceived to be unavoidable when ethnic identities are deeply held and strongly
felt. This study seeks to explain why some countries in which ethnicity is
salient experience violence while others do not. The PI examines the difference
by first mapping demographic patterns, and patterns of political and economic
competition in two countries and match by space and time violent and non-violent
locations. This project uses two Caribbean nations (Guyana and Trinidad &
Tobago) as the cases of interest. These two countries are similar in their
historical, economic, and political backgrounds, including being comprised of
two major ethnic groups. While it is certainly important to understand potential
threats to the democratic stability of countries in close proximity to the
United States, the ultimate goal of this project is to provide more general
insights into factors that encourage and prevent ethnic violence that can be
applied to many other countries around the world. Technical Summary

How have some countries with intense, ethnic political competition managed to
escape the violence that plagues many other multi-ethnic polities? The PI
develops a theory that advances the idea that ethnic violence is shaped by
social and political relationships, specifically the nature of clientelistic
exchanges and civil society activity. This theory generates novel implications,
which are investigated through original quantitative data collection and
analysis, an exploration of matching methodologies, and subsequent qualitative
research through fieldwork in both Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago. The employment
of various matching methods to compare localities in Guyana and Trinidad will
offer opportunities to gain important substantive information about the two
countries, as well as contribute to ongoing methodological debates regarding the
relative merits of various matching techniques. The ultimate goal of this
project is to provide more general insights into factors that encourage and
prevent ethnic violence that can be applied to many other countries around the
world.