* 1632716
* Fluid Systems, Biologies, and Digital Activisms: The Open Source Data Movement Among Type 1 Diabetics (T1D)
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Samantha Gottlieb, Gottlieb                Samantha       D
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 146,965.00

The proposed research will analyze a U.S.-based patient advocacy movement of
type 1 diabetics (T1D). Patients of T1D are managing their health condition
through the increased use of digital and mobile technologies. The proposed
research will document how patients are controlling and customizing their health
technologies via open source software. In addition it will provide data on
individualized health management that can be used to shape broader social and
regulatory processes. The proposed research will examine how data tracking
practices are being embraced and critiqued by users. The proposed research will
also contribute to educating stakeholders about health data and analyses used by
users and experts alike. Results from this proposal will be of interest to
users, policy makers, health care practioners and patient advocates working with
data access from medical devices. By studying the T1D patient advocacy, the
proposed research will identify insights into how new technologies in healthcare
will shape patients' relationships to their health and bodies.

The proposed research will provide an anthropological perspective on how T1D
patients re-purpose and reclaim healthcare technologies. It will explore how
digital tools and online communities reshape medical and scientific practices.
Research sites will include digital and in-person data collection. Through
ethnographic, mixed methods data collection, the study will trace the multiple
contexts -- legal, medical, digital and material -- in which T1D patient
activists advocate for improvements to managing their condition. The proposed
research will analyze the relationship between patient activism and contemporary
technologies, to consider how technologies reconfigure forms of patient
advocacies, and how patient advocates may reshape technologies. The proposed
research will identify how movements that seek data liberation, corporate
transparency, and open source digital platforms, unrelated to healthcare, may
inform T1D individuals' health seeking behaviors and health information. The
proposed research will examine whether software and internet hacking cultures
reconstitute American pharmaceutical, FDA regulatory, and clinical practices.
The insights from the proposed research will contribute to understanding
patients' experiences as citizens, consumers, and owners of their health data,
as well as how data is embodied and lived.