* 1632244
* SBIR Phase II:  Simple and Effective Fouling Release Coatings To Make Industrial Heat Exchangers More Energy Efficient
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Sebnem Inceoglu, Nano Hydrophobics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 909,902.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
develop and commercialize an innovative coating which minimizes the accumulation
of mineral fouling on industrial heat exchanger surfaces. Heat exchangers are
used to heat or cool fluids in industrial processes, such as chemical
manufacturing, oil refining, power generation, food processing, electronics
manufacturing, and many more. Air conditioning for factories and large
commercial buildings also represents a significant use of heat exchangers.
Fouling occurs when naturally dissolved minerals in water, often called "hard"
water, precipitate out of the water when it contacts a hot surface. This fouling
can be seen in a typical home on the surface of a teakettle or showerhead. The
resulting mineral crystals adhere strongly, and form an insulating layer that
materially reduces the thermal efficiency of industrial heat exchangers. Mineral
fouling is estimated to cost U.S. industry $40 Billion per year, and waste $3
Billion of energy, representing upwards of 1% of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
In addition to wasting energy, this worldwide, never-ending problem increases
factory downtime and maintenance costs, causes industry to spend large amounts
on chemical treatment of water supplies, and decreases the useful life of heat
exchanger systems. An effective coating will result in substantial environmental
benefits including the elimination of greenhouse gas emissions resulting from
the wasted energy, and a reduction of the water treatment chemicals, which
eventually enter community wastewater streams.

The coating material is a low surface energy, self-assembling hydrophobic
material which is a composite of a host polymer and a nanoparticle. The low
surface energy of the coating impedes the attachment of the minerals to the
coated heat transfer surface. Phase I results showed that any fouling
accumulation on a coated surface exhibits low adhesion strength, which allows
any fouling that does occur to predominantly be dislodged by the force of the
water flowing over it - a phenomenon call "self-cleaning." The coating is very
thin - less than 500 nm - which minimizes impedance of heat transfer due to the
presence of the coating itself. Phase II research will focus on optimizing the
properties of the coating, including substrate adhesion, surface energy, and
toughness to ensure a useful life under industrial conditions. This will be
accomplished by changing the host polymer chemistry to facilitate self-assembly,
and also by changing the chemistry of the nanoparticle to obtain a covalent bond
between the host polymer and nanoparticle. Work will also be performed to design
the application process for industrial scale, and validate lab results with
field trials at industrial sites.