* 1632593
* A Social and Historical Study of Interdisciplinary Collaborations between Biologists and Philosophers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* J. W. Phillip Honenberger, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 88,695.00

General Audience Summary

This project uses historical and social scientific methods to study
collaborations between biologists and philosophers of biology during a
particularly productive period during the second half of the twentieth century.
The investigator will use quantitative analyses, archival research, and oral
history interviews to track and describe the behavior of hundreds of actors. The
study will make a significant contribution to the history of biological science,
as well as to the understanding of scientific collaboration, disciplinarity, and
interdisciplinarity. It provide a novel framework for addressing such questions
as the division of epistemic labor and authority between humanities and natural
science disciplines, as well as questions about the motives, institutional
supports, mechanics, effects, and appraisal of interdisciplinary research.
Outcomes include two publically accessible archives: an electronic archive of
raw and processed data and select archival materials, to be stored at an online
repository at Arizona State University, and an archive of oral history
interviews with some of the most influential biologists and philosophers of
biology of the twentieth century, to be stored at the American Philosophical
Society. In addition, the project will produce a series of papers in academic
journals that will contribute to ongoing and widespread discussions and policy
evaluations of interdisciplinarity. Finally, it will produce a book written for
a broad audience showing how researchers in the humanities have effectively
collaborated with those in the exact sciences with mutually beneficial results
that impact both fields.

Technical Summary

From the 1950s to the present day, professional biologists and professional
philosophers have often worked together to address questions about the
anthropological and sociological reach of biological models, the relation of
evolutionary and organismic explanations and perspectives to molecular and
physical ones, and the interpretation of such contested concepts as "species,"
"gene," "fitness," "race," "biological function," and "ecological diversity."
These collaborations helped shape the field today known as "philosophy of
biology." The project promises to shed new light on the history of both biology
and the philosophy of biology in the late twentieth-century. It also makes a
contribution to contemporary research on interdisciplinary collaborations.
Biological science has raised and confronted fundamental questions throughout
its modern history. By providing a detailed historically and theoretically
informed study of how researchers from the prima facie quite different
disciplinary backgrounds of biology and philosophy addressed these questions
during the period in question, both separately and in dialogue and
collaboration, the project helps us to see biology and its implications for
intellectual life and culture in a new way.