* 1632802
* Modeling Ion Extraction from First Toroidal Electron-Cyclotron-Resonance Ion Source
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Michael Weinstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 194,000.00

This project will use computational modeling to test the feasibility of a novel
source of ions for particle accelerators, one of the most ubiquitous tools
within the scientific community, with uses ranging from fundamental research to
applications to cancer therapy, materials science, and nanofabrication. Several
particle accelerators worldwide accelerate ions to very high velocities,
approaching the speed of light. For example, the Large Hadron Collider at CERN
accelerates ions of lead; the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Brookhaven
collided ions of gold to recreate and study the physics of the first 10
microseconds after the Big Bang. All require a source of ions. They also require
the ions to have high charge, that is, to be stripped from as many electrons as
possible. And they require many ions per unit time. The new concept proposed
here builds on a type of ion source called an Electron Cyclotron Resonance Ion
Source, but in a new doughnut-shaped geometry inspired by nuclear fusion
experiments. Such a source, investigated within this project, would have greatly
improved characteristics over those presently available.

There have been attempts over the years to increase the density, temperature and
confinement-time of Electron Cyclotron Resonance Ion Source (ECRIS) plasmas,
resulting in ions of higher charge. In fusion plasmas there is a push to
increase the 'triple product' of nearly the same quantities for the sake of
increasing the fusion reactivity. Inspired by this analogy, this project will
numerically explore the ion-source-relevance of toroidal confinement, and
compare it with the linear ECRIS paradigm, a magnetic mirror combined with an
hexapolar field. At a first glance, the toroidal geometry is highly attractive.
It makes a better use of the magnetic field, where toroidal ECRIS could be
heated and confined at the same field. On the other hand, ion extraction will
not be as straightforward as from a linear ECRIS. This project will numerically
address this aspect by comparing magnetostatic, electrostatic and drift-based
extraction techniques. The second aspect to investigate is how transport and
confinement compare in a linear and a toroidal ECRIS: while hot ions of H, D and
T are well-known from fusion research to be better confined in toroidal devices
than linear ones, the same is not guaranteed for cold collisional ions of heavy
species. Both problems will be addressed by numerically tracing the orbits of
several "test ions", by means of symplectic integrators, and by letting these
ions undergo collisions - according to a distribution function - with each other
and with ions and electrons from the background plasma.