* 1632465
* SBIR Phase II:  Design and Optimization of a Biocompatible Protein-Based Retinal Implant for the Treatment of End-Stage Retinal Degeneration
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Nicole Wagner, LambdaVision, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,047,071.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop and commercialize a high
resolution, protein-based retinal implant intended to restore vision to the
millions of patients blinded by retinal degenerative diseases, particularly
retinitis pigmentosa and age-related macular degeneration. These currently
incurable and blinding diseases affect between 30-50 million people worldwide,
and lead to a loss of independence for the individual, as well as an increased
burden on their caregivers. While improved quality of life is the most vital
outcome of this technology, reduction of medical costs of treating chronic
retinal degeneration and limiting time with doctors will also be of benefit to
the broad healthcare field. The work outlined in this SBIR proposal also has the
potential to significantly impact our understanding of retinal degenerative
diseases, which will help in developing better and more effective treatments for
a number of ophthalmic indications. The subretinal implant under development
provides the framework for the next generation of high-resolution retinal
prosthetics, while offering a cost-effective solution to vision restoration, and
will help these patients regain independence and thus improve their quality of
life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will expand on the data
collected from the in vivo surgical development and ex vivo efficacy studies
supported by our Phase I/IB awards. First, a 40-animal rat study will be
undertaken to further investigate the biocompatibility of the retinal implant.
Second, previously developed surgical procedures will be refined in pigs to
ensure reproducible and safe subretinal implantation. Third, a high-throughput
in vitro assay will be designed to investigate a number of implant parameters,
as well as the integrity and biostability of the retinal implant using retinal
pigment epithelial cells. Additionally, medical device sealants will be
investigated in this in vitro study, and the functional integrity of the implant
will be measured using time-resolved absorption spectroscopy and an ion-
sensitive detector, which is being developed specifically for this application.
Lastly, this ion-sensitive detector will provide an opportunity to further
measure the spatial sensitivity of the retinal implant with high resolution.
These in vivo and in vitro studies are vital for the continued evaluation of
biocompatibility, surgical feasibility, and efficacy of the implant. The results
from these studies will further demonstrate the commercial viability of the
technology under development.