* 1632539
* SBIR Phase II:  A Cloud-Based Tutoring Software For Teaching Coding to K-12 Students through Integration with Popular Video Games
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Stephen Foster, ThoughtSTEM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,095,356.00

This Phase II project proposes to develop a computer science (CS) educational
software that has the potential to inspire millions of U.S. K-12 students to
learn computer programming. This software will leverage the motivational power
of a popular video game, to teach CS to students by teaching them to reprogram
the video game itself. The United States currently has a severe deficit of
students pursuing CS. The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that over 1
million computing job openings will go unfilled by U.S. workers by 2022. By
leveraging the power of a popular video game, the technology proposed in this
Phase II project has the potential to expose millions of K-12 students to coding
in the next 5 years. The commercial impact of the underlying technology
developed in this Phase II project does not stop at the over 100 million users
who currently play the popular video game with which the current educational
software integrates. Because the underlying technology is transferable to any
moddable (i.e. reprogrammable) video game, the technology has the potential to
be used to teach CS with other popular titles from the rapidly growing video
game industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase II project proposes to continue
the development of a software product that is a web-based coding environment for
novice programmers. This software goes beyond the state-of-the-art technologies
in this space (i.e., scratch.mit.edu) in several ways: 1) It uses automated
tutoring techniques to customize the educational experiences for novices, 2) it
facilitates writing programs that manipulate objects and terrain in a 3D
environment, 3) it allows the novice user to reprogram a popular video game, 4)
it has an in-browser, WebGL-based 3D runtime environment, 5) it supports both a
novice-friendly visual programming language (Blockly) as well as a text-based
language (JavaScript), 6) it leverages gamification techniques such as badges,
points, and unlockable items, and 7) it supports multi-user, collaborative
coding. The objectives of this Phase II project concentrate on improving student
experiences in order to increase customer retention and acquisition and to
finish the development of a marketable product that will teach 5 million K-12
students in the next 5 years. The first objective of this project involves
developing and extending the browser-embedded game engine. The second objective
focuses on improving systems that match students with appropriate educational
content and motivate students to continue learning. Finally, the third objective
involves implementing new systems that incentivize students to create and share
with the community.