* 1632850
* Developing a Climatology of Horizontal Convective Rolls over Oklahoma:  Combining Observational Data Sets to Increase Understanding
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* David Stensrud, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 484,146.00

Horizontal convective rolls (HCRs) are a common occurrence in the warm season
and influence planetary boundary layer (PBL) mixing, PBL structure and
convection initiation. Yet very little is known about the climatology of HCRs.
This oversight is worrisome as HCRs are present in convection-allowing models
and studies suggest that these modeled HCRs can be caused by inaccuracies in PBL
parameterization. The goal of the research is to use the Twin Lakes, Oklahoma
(KTLX), WSR-88D to observe HCRs during the warm season and merge this
information with ancillary data to develop a rich, multi-year data base for
studying HCRs. From the KTLX observations we will pursue the following
scientific objectives: 1) Develop a 10-year warm season climatology of HCR
occurrence frequency and characteristics (time of onset and decay, wavelength,
orientation angle, year-to-year variability) using observations from April to
September 2005-2014; 2) Determine PBL depth and mean PBL winds and wind shear
using Rapid Update Cycle (RUC) or Rapid Refresh (RAP) analyses, and hence
calculate HCR aspect ratios, for each day with HCRs; 3) Use Oklahoma Mesonet
observations from three surface stations underneath the KTLX clear-air radar
volume to calculate sensible heat flux and other surface parameters associated
with HCR formation and maintenance; 4) Test and identify a robust automated
approach to HCR identification that could then be used in a subsequent studies
to extend the HCR climatology nationally using all available WSR-88D observation
locations. The resulting large data set on HCRs will then be used to examine the
mechanisms of HCR formation and help improve our understanding of this common
boundary layer phenomenon.

Intellectual Merit: The created HCR data set will be novel in terms of the
number of cases (several hundred) and the richness of the ancillary
environmental data on surface fluxes and PBL structure, and will be used to
define the warm season HCR frequency, aspect ratios, orientation angles, typical
onset time and longevity for the first time ever. These data will be incredibly
beneficial to compare with the frequency of HCR formation in convection-allowing
numerical weather prediction models. This type of comparison will help determine
how well PBL schemes function as horizontal grid spacing continues to decrease
below 3 km.

Broader Impacts: The project will enhance graduate, undergraduate, and
precollege education, including the mentoring of a graduate student, graduate
student participation in development of inquiry-based activities for
undergraduate meteorology courses, and implementation of a week-long K-12
teacher workshop using adaptations of these activities followed by academic year
support for K-12 classroom implementation. This will lead to enhanced K-12
teachers' and students' understanding of research strategies utilizing radar
data to study mesoscale atmospheric phenomena and will increase graduate
students' and K-12 teachers' understanding of the systems thinking involved in
meteorological research, while also enhancing researchers' and graduate
students' understanding of inquiry-based teaching practices and communication
skills with non-technical audiences.