* 1632486
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Metal-Organic Framework Material for the Separation and Recovery of Unprocessed Natural Gas During Oil and Gas Production
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,10/31/2020
* OSMAN OZDEMIR, framergy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,228,083.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to provide a usable stranded and associated gas
collection capacity for oil & gas exploration companies. During drilling
operations, valuable gas is lost through intentional venting and flaring,
causing losses in natural gas delivered to the power plant or city gate. With
the sector's expansion into more remote low-volume sites, these losses are
increasing dramatically. Through this project's proposed novel Metal-Organic
Framework (MOF) based storage technology, this project seeks to deliver a re-
usable and transport ready intermodal container, to store gas at low pressure,
eliminating the need to use expensive gas capture, purification and multi-stage
compression systems. An economically feasible unprocessed natural gas storage
technology would provide a useful tool for the domestic oil & gas industry in
capturing what would be flared or vented and delivering it to the American
economy. Taking the proposed novel MOF technology to the bench and pilot scale
will show the feasibility of a flexible, transportable, low-cost infrastructure
to abate flaring and venting. Successful developments in this project will help
develop the knowledge for scale-up to large-scale vehicular tanks to allow for
commercial implementation.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are the development of stable
and low-cost Metal-Organic framework (MOF) based storage technologies for the
collection of usable stranded associated gas during drilling operations. In
order to harness point source emissions, before being vented or flared, the
project will develop a nano-engineered, MOF based sorbent for low-pressure
capture and storage of unprocessed natural gas. The project will seek to develop
a robust and scalable method to synthesize new MOFs containing other high-
valence transition metal ions such as Al3+, Fe3+ and Cr3+. Furthermore, the
project will screen a range of organic ligands for improving MOFs' surface
property and storage capacity. Finally, by following alternative synthesis
routes with low cost catalysts, the project will identify sorbent synthesis cost
reduction strategies. The sorbent material will be tested with simulated
vent/flare-gas compositions in a cyclic pressure range and the sorbent stability
will be verified by an assortment of X-ray, spectroscopy, and microscopy
methods. Following sorbent development, an ANG tank will be built and flare gas
slipstream testing will be conducted in shale gas sites.