* 1632417
* Shaping Environment for Creativity and Innovation: A Multilevel Examination of Industry Conditions, Leadership, HRM Systems, Teams and Individuals in Established and Start-up Firms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Hui Liao, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Researchers have examined creativity and innovation from either a micro or macro
perspective. The micro perspective focuses on examining the effects of
individual characteristics such as personality, goal orientation, values,
thinking styles, motivation and affects, and team characteristics such as team
structure and composition, team climate and process. The macro perspective
focuses on examining the effects of industry conditions such as market structure
and firms' characteristics such as size and network position on firm innovation.
This disconnected approach has resulted in divergent or even conflicting
business practices and research findings, leading to fragmented understandings
of the phenomena. Some important questions that are of interest to researchers,
policy makers, and business owners and managers remain unanswered. The current
research project integrates literatures from multiple disciplines including
strategy, psychology, human resource management (HRM) and organizational
behavior, and develops a multilevel framework of creativity and innovation.
Specifically, this research, using data collected from two research sites,
examines the following questions: First, within and across industries, how do
top managers of a firm make sense of the external environment and make decisions
on creativity and innovation? Second, how can firms cultivate an innovative
internal environment within the organization to facilitate creativity and
innovation? Third, what factors shape the external and internal environments
critical for creativity and innovation in start-up firms?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research offers a number of theoretical,
methodological, and practical contributions to the field of creativity and
innovation. Theoretically, the multilevel approach helps bridge the "micro-
macro" divide and provides a concerted picture of how factors from different
levels of analysis may jointly shape the external and internal environments
supportive for creativity and innovation, and delineate the boundary conditions
for such processes. Methodologically, using both qualitative and quantitative
data from two important research sites obtained through three phases of data
collection (interviews/ observations, surveys, and field experiments), the
research design provides findings that are not only of strong external and
internal validity, but also contribute to the discovery of new theories.
Practically, this research bridges the "research-practice" divide, enhances
"evidence-based management", and helps government policy makers and
organizational management better design and implement policies and practices
that are conducive to creativity and innovation.