* 1632322
* SBIR Phase II:  Activation and Mobility Profiling for High-mobility Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Abhijeet Joshi, Active Layer Parametrics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,110,105.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to accelerate advancement in high-mobility
materials. These materials are being increasingly used in the electronics device
industry. This project's goal is to enable better devices by providing complete
data on the effects of manufacturing processes and better enabling their
optimization. Innovative electronic device structures such as faster computer
chips, and more powerful RF circuits require development of smaller and smaller
devices employing more advanced materials. The innovation that is being advanced
through this Phase II program directly impacts this
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop a deployable system to directly measure high-
resolution mobility, resistivity, and carrier concentration profiles for high-
mobility semiconductor materials. Current electrical profiling methods provide
partial data for these material systems that form the basis of the multi-billion
dollar semiconductor logic device and RF/power chip industries. The objectives
of this Phase II program are to further demonstrate a prototype by developing
and integrating high-reliability sub-systems to build a beta-level measurement
tool with nm-level resolution. This is expected to reduce the semiconductor
wafer area needed to evaluate high-mobility materials, and develop the
measurement capability to target all high-mobility materials with potential
applications in IC and RF/power industries.