* 1632222
* The Effect of Action on Perception and Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jessica Witt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 08/31/2021
* USD 354,603.00

Baseball players who are hitting well proclaim that the ball looks as big as a
grapefruit. Tennis players in the zone remark that the ball seems to move in
slow motion. These examples, both of which have been confirmed in experiments as
a psychological reality, suggest that what a person sees may not be the true,
physical state of the world but rather can be biased by action. In the case of
athletes, such misperceptions may be inherently interesting, but are unlikely to
have a major impact on people's lives. In contrast, similar errors in perception
by airplane pilots of runway size, drivers of car distances, or doctors of tumor
size are quite concerning. Given the important role of vision in daily life and
especially as it relates to safety, it is critical to understand the processes
underlying this fundamental ability of the mind. The research project is
designed to explore when and how people's visual perception is biased by action.
In addition, the research project contributes to the education and training of
several graduate students and dozens of undergraduate students. These students
are also being trained on how to work alongside scientists with opposing views
through a process known as adversarial collaboration. Although this kind of work
presents its own challenges, the science is likely to benefit from such
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many important and nuanced ways
that action could give rise to errors in perception. Airport runways could
appear smaller when the airline pilot is not performing well, fatigued, or
hungry, or when environmental conditions are poor such as high winds or strong
rainfall. The research project examines the potential impact on vision of
action-related effects due to 1) energetic demands of the task, 2) difficulty of
the task, and 3) whether or not a task is even possible. In doing so, the
research project will uncover the boundaries for which perception is prone to
errors explicitly caused by action. The scientists conducting the research are
considering the extent to which any effects are artifacts of the experimental
setting, as opposed to genuine effects on perception that would impact how
perceivers see the surrounding environment in the real world. This is a critical
step for ensuring that the studied effects will have implications for daily
life. Indeed, many of the experiments forgo traditional laboratory settings to
explore how action influences perception in both real environments and in
environments that simulate the real world using virtual reality.