* 1632540
* Workshop:   Toward Sustainable Groundwater in Agriculture - An International Conference Linking Science with Policy - Burlingame, California, June 28-30, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2016
* Thomas Harter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 11/30/2016
* USD 49,980.00

1632540 Harter

Groundwater is the lifeline for many rural and agricultural regions and their
associated cultures and populations around the globe and a cornerstone of global
food production. Groundwater constitutes one-third of the worlds drinking water
supplies, often the soul source of drinking water in rural areas; more than one-
third of the world's irrigation water supply. In many regions, groundwater is
the insurance against surface water shortages due to drought. Drought; overuse;
groundwater salinity; nonpoint source pollution from agricultural activities
(including animal farming, ranching, and forestry activities); and groundwater
quality and quantity conflicts at the urban-rural interface have reached global
dimensions and threaten the health and livelihood of this planet. This
conference will serve as a state-wide, national, and global forum for
scientists, agricultural representatives, NGOs, consultants, and policy and
decision makers to discover and discuss solutions to managing, sharing,
assessing, and protecting groundwater resources within agricultural landscapes.
The meeting will be held at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Burlingame, California,
conveniently located within a few miles of the San Francisco International
Airport June 28-30, 2016.

California is among the global leaders in agricultural production, with nearly
10 million acres of irrigated agricultural lands, providing over 400 different
commodities worth $50 billion, and consuming well over 32 million acre-feet of
water annually for irrigation. California is also the leader in U.S. milk
production, responsible for over 20% of U.S. dairy output. While California's
agriculture is unique in many ways, it shares many aspects of its nexus with
groundwater with other irrigated and non-irrigated agricultural regions in the
United States and around the world. Many intensively farmed regions are
overlying unconsolidated sedimentary aquifer systems similar to those in
California. Irrigated agricultural lands are common in semi-arid and arid
climates. While irrigated lands represent merely one-fifth of the global
agricultural lands, provide for 40% of overall agricultural production
worldwide, underscoring the importance of irrigated agriculture to global food
security. This conference is comprehensive in its organization and will be
broken into several separate but related areas; 1) Groundwater Management,
Governance, Policy, and Regulation, Agricultural Water Use,
Conjunctive/Integrated Management, 2) Socio-Economic Aspects of Agricultural
Groundwater, Climate, Energy, and Agricultural Groundwater, 3) Agricultural
Groundwater Quality and Contamination, Regulation, 4) Groundwater at the
Agriculture-Urban Interface, 5) Groundwater Linkages to Groundwater-dependent
Ecosystems, and, 6) Forecasting and Modeling. The meeting will follow a format
where each of the three conference days is divided into four meeting periods:
early morning, late morning, early afternoon, late afternoon. Each period will
be approximately 100 minutes in length, featuring 3-4 speakers per session. The
early morning period on each of the three conference days will be reserved for a
plenary session on a key conference theme, featuring 3-4 keynote speakers and
allowing for participation and discussion among the entire audience. The
remaining periods will feature four parallel sessions to accommodate for a wide
range of themes and participant interests. The final panel will provide a lively
and critical ad hoc review of topics discussed at the conference and reflect on
next steps and future challenges in moving toward global sustainability of
groundwater in agricultural regions. With respect to outreach, the Water
Education Foundation and other conference partners (UC Water, PPIC) will be
interfacing with social media (Twitter, Facebook, etc) before and during the
conference.