* 1632484
* SBIR Phase II:  Boron Nitride Nanotube Cyclotron Targets for Recoil-Escape Production of Carbon-11 For PET/CT Medical Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Johanna Peeples, BTI Targetry LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,924.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project intends to meet
the need for low cost dose-on-demand production of Carbon-11 isotope for
biomarker and radiotracer applications in nuclear medicine. Biomarkers and
radiotracers are commonly used for Positron Emission Tomography and Computed
Tomography (PET/CT) metabolic imaging, in support of research, drug discovery,
and detection of cancer and other illnesses. They are also used for therapy
staging of cancer, to determine if treatment is effective. Common examples
include myocardial perfusion imaging of the heart to visualize blood flow and
function, PET scanning of the brain to detect early onset Alzheimer's and brain
tumors, and Choline PET/CT for the diagnosis and staging of prostate cancer.
Carbon-11 is an important radiotracer/radiopharmaceutical that offers unique
advantages due to its ability to be easily incorporated into many molecules
without impacting biological activity. Carbon-11 is currently produced by using
specialized targets on high-energy commercial cyclotrons. These cyclotrons cost
millions of dollars to install, and existing targets are inefficient. Low energy
cyclotrons are significantly less expensive, and are currently under development
by multiple commercial companies. This project seeks to develop a novel
cyclotron target methodology for producing Carbon-11 at low energies using
unique nanomaterials, resulting in significantly lower costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is in the use of
novel nanomaterials to produce Carbon-11 more efficiently and at lower cost,
through development of recoil escape targets. It is challenging to find a good
target material suitable for both efficient production of Carbon-11, by one of
several available nuclear reactions, and efficient recovery of the produced
radiotracer in a usable form. The produced Carbon-11 can be difficult to
recover, as it is easily trapped in many conventional target materials,
resulting in low yields. Recent advances in nanoscience and technology allow for
production of novel materials with unique characteristics. Boron nitride
nanotubes (BNNT) are composed of fibers with single atomic thickness, or at most
a few atoms thick, allowing Carbon-11 to be efficiently produced and recovered
in the form of carbon dioxide gas using low energy cyclotrons. Prototype
production targets will be developed and tested at commercial cyclotron sites.
The process for collecting the produced Carbon-11 gas will be optimized to
achieve the highest yields of usable radiotracer material. Efforts will be made
to further develop BNNT materials with ideal characteristics, including high
purity and optimal density.