* 1632556
* Postdoctoral Fellowship:   A Clinical Ethnography of Pediatric Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* C.J. Pascoe, University of Oregon Eugene
* Fellowship Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed research will explore cultural ideals of childhood and how they
shape and inform pediatric practices to heal children. In addition it will
explore how pediatric practices reproduce ideals of childhood. The proposed
research will contribute to providing improved support and education for
patients' families and the healthcare delivery system for children. It will
contribute to the creation of a new model that describes how science and
technology in bio-medicine are impacting childhood. Outcomes of the proposed
research will be a blog to provide and share information to and between patient
families. Publications from this proposed research will educate new patient
families, pediatric practitioners, hospital administrators, social workers,
child life specialists and educators as to ways to support patients and their
families.

The proposed research will study how contemporary constructions of childhood
shape medicine and will explore how they are reproduced through the everyday
routines and practices of a pediatric hospital in the United States. The
proposed research will employ ethnographic research methods, including one year
of observation in a pediatric hospital, visits to other pediatric hospitals, and
interviews with hospital staff and patient families. It will investigate how the
process of healing children is understood and actualized by pediatric
practitioners, patients and their families. The proposed research will
contribute to improving healthcare delivery through data that will inform the
administration of treatment protocols, the management of hospital resources,
older children transitioning to adult care, and the identification of inequities
in the distribution of healthcare.