* 1632749
* Magnetic Field Mapping of Vortex Hotspots and Identifying the Sources of Losses in Superconducting Accelerating Cavities
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Jean Delayen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Research in a number of areas of physics relies on the use of accelerators to
generate beams of particles moving at high energy that are used in a broad
spectrum of activities, from fundamental research to medical treatments to
materials processing. Most accelerator designs rely on moving the particles
through a series of magnetic resonant cavities, similar to a microwave oven, to
supply energy to the beam. The very high energies that can be reached through
accelerators today has been enabled by the use of superconducting magnets to
supply the energy to the cavity. But with any cavity, the behavior of the beam
is strongly influenced by the structure of the magnetic field within the cavity.
This work aims at improving the performance and efficiency of superconducting
resonator cavities used in modern particle accelerators by addressing the impact
of irregularities in the magnetic field within the cavity. A novel experimental
apparatus will be developed along with new theoretical models to carry out this
study. This research will provide an opportunity to train one undergraduate and
two graduate students in the field of particle accelerators and solid-state
physics and will provide new methods to reduce the cost of operation of particle
accelerators used in basic and applied sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate the mechanisms of trapping and dissipation of vortices
in superconducting radio-frequency (RF) niobium cavities under different
conditions, such as cool-down rates, surface treatments and residual magnetic
field. A novel combined temperature and magnetic scanning system will be
developed to detect and quantify the amount of trapped flux and its impact on
cavity RF losses. The experimental work will be integrated with numerical
reconstructions of the vortex distribution and theoretical investigations of
trapping of vortex bundles during the cool-down of the cavity through the
critical temperature, and the contribution of vortices to the surface resistance
at high RF magnetic field amplitudes.