* 1632106
* PFI:BIC: Smart Factories -An Intelligent Material Delivery System to Improve Human-Robot Workflow and Productivity in Assembly Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Matthew Hallowell, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

Manufacturing represents a quarter of all employment in the US. To reshore jobs,
improve operations, and recruit, retain, and retrain skilled workers, companies
are increasingly using robotics technology. Ideally, robots will not replace
humans but team with them to improve productivity. However, most industrial
robots are poorly integrated into human workflow, causing expensive work
stoppage problems ($1.7M per hour), worker stress, and talent loss. The research
goal of this project is to address this problem by designing novel methods to
improve human-robot workflow and productivity in assembly manufacturing through
the use of an intelligent material delivery system (IMDS), which will closely
integrate with and support the manual work process. This project will
investigate innovative, multi-disciplinary approaches to this research area,
dramatically advancing the state-of-the art in smart manufacturing and human-
centered robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will make the
following contributions to human-centered smart service systems: 1)
Revolutionize the use of robotics in assembly manufacturing processes to closely
support skilled human workers, enabling them to focus on tasks they value (their
trade) as opposed to tasks that distract from their talent (material movement).
2) Dramatically improve the productivity and flexibility of factories through
nimble, real-time scheduling of an IMDS system that dynamically incorporates
real-time models of human workflow. 3) Deeply explore the socio-technical
implications of having an IMDS system in the workplace, in terms of human
workers' cognition, fatigue, affect, and job satisfaction. The project's
approach serves as a direct contrast to industry state-of-the-art, which relies
on strict bifurcation of human and robot work, and rigid delivery schedules that
fail to take local trim-line variations into account. By closely integrating an
IMDS into the manual work process and understanding worker and material status,
the project will readily enable flexibility and reconfigurability of a human
workforce, an absolute necessity in made-to-order, small-batch manufacturing
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help the US manufacturing
sector dramatically improve their operations by using automation to directly
support a talented, skilled workforce. It has the potential to impact all major
US manufacturing sectors, including automotive, construction, healthcare,
energy, and goods. It will help US companies reshore operations, as well as
create new opportunities for US worker STEM skill acquisition. Furthermore, this
project involves a detailed investigation of multiple human worker implications
of the transition from traditional to intelligent material delivery using
robotics. By understanding reactions to such change, there will be new
understanding on how to optimize a system not only for workflow and task
efficiency but also for the human experience. Such knowledge is critical to
maintaining job satisfaction, safety and health, and long-term well-being of the
human workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is the University of
Notre Dame, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, in collaboration
with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Aerospace and
Aeronautics (Cambridge, MA) and University of Colorado at Boulder, Department of
Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering (Boulder, CA). The primary
industrial partner is Steelcase, Inc. (Grand Rapids, MI), a large manufacturer
that specializes in customizable, made-to-order
furniture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by The Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Divisions of
Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) and Computer and Network Systems (CNS)