* 1632551
* International Conference on Knots, Low-Dimensional Topology, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kenneth Millett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2017
* USD 34,000.00

This NSF award provides partial support for U.S. participation in the
international conference on knots, low-dimensional topology and applications,
titled "Knots in Hellas 2016," to be held at the International Olympic Academy,
Ancient Olympia, Greece, from July 17 through July 23, 2016. This cross-
disciplinary conference will enable the exchange of methods and ideas as well as
the exploration of fundamental research problems in the wide fields of knot
theory and low-dimensional topology, from theory to applications to the life and
physical sciences such as biology, chemistry and physics, as well as to
engineering. It will provide opportunity for high quality interactions across
fields and for generations of researchers, from graduate students to senior
scientists. Graduate students and new PhD's working in these fields are
especially encouraged to participate. This project will enable the participation
of roughly twenty outstanding US based young researchers in the conference
fields that might not otherwise be able to benefit from this exposure to cutting
edge research relevant to their interests or be able to present the results of
their own efforts on an international stage.

Knot theory is a core area of topology that interacts significantly with many
fields across theoretical and applied mathematics. Knots in Hellas 2016 brings
together researchers from the whole spectrum of such research. This project will
expose at least twenty excellent US based graduate students to cutting edge
research relevant to their interests. The conference will feature plenary
lectures, research sessions, and tutorial workshops providing focused research
introduction for graduate students and young participants. The focal topics
include the wide range of historical and contemporary invariants of knots and
links and related topics such as virtual knots, topological quantum field
theory, skein modules and algebras, quandles and their homology, knot algebras;
braids and orderability of groups; hyperbolic knots and geometric structures of
three dimensional manifolds; physical knots with applications to fluid flows,
polymer and biophysics, DNA enzyme mechanisms, protein structure and function,
and biochemistry. The program will be organized so as to facilitate inter-
disciplinary discussions and research interactions. The program, size, and
location of this international cross-disciplinary conference is ideal to enable
exploration of fundamental problems, exchange of ideas, methods and contemporary
and developing research problems, and to provide high quality interactions
across fields and generations of researchers, from graduate students to the most
senior researchers. The conference website is at:
http://www.math.ntua.gr/~sofia/KnotsinHellas2016/