* 1632299
* Workshop: Responsible Innovation at the Interface between Neuroscience, Brain Research, and Technological Convergence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Diana Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,999.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for a
two-day international workshop; specifically, it provides travel support for
workshop participants. The workshop will be jointly hosted by Arizona State
University, the European Commission, the Institute of Medicine, and the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Its focus is open and
responsible innovation at the interface between neuroscience, brain research and
technological convergence. It will draw together researchers working on national
brain initiatives with social scientists working on bioethics, law, public
policy and science and technology studies. Its goal is to increase clarity and
better mutual understanding amongst all stakeholders about the implications of
ethical, legal, and social values in brain science and the development and use
of emerging and converging technologies within the field of brain research.
Outputs and recommendations stemming from the workshop shall be used to inform
policy makers and other groups to strengthen values of responsible innovation in
public sector research funding, development and implementation of regulatory
frameworks, public and private sector research activities and
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an opportunity to stimulate
interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration around responsible brain research
and related technology development. It will offer a platform for members of the
scientific community, policy makers, funders, regulatory agencies and civil
society to address a number of issues. They will consider options to increase
the creativity and social responsibility of brain science and neuro-
technological innovation through more open and collaborative approaches. They
will analyze mechanisms to integrate values of open and responsible innovation
into major brain research initiatives and funding programs, and consider the
role of standards for the development of industrialized process and products. In
addition, they will work to identify opportunities for brain science and neuro-
technology innovation to inform the broader set of stakeholders in biomedical
research, engineering, policy, regulation, funding and commercialization about
the societal needs and desires in science and technology.