* 1632124
* PFI:BIC - Energy Smart Community - Leveraging Virtual Storage to Turn Advanced Metering Infrastructure into a Smart Service System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Thomas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

Smart meters, which measure electricity use in near real-time, have been
installed in more than 40% of homes in the United States, yet the promises of
smaller electric bills, reduced electric generation capacity, greenhouse gas
reductions, and a more energy-engaged society, have yet to materialize. This
Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
seeks to enable a next generation residential energy market that will reduce
consumers' costs, increase the flexibility of the electric grid to integrate
renewable energy of all types and sizes -- roof top solar to large scale wind
farms -- while increasing the robustness of electricity delivery. This project
will test whether adding rechargeable batteries (electric storage) to individual
smart meters will turn these potential benefits into reality. This research
leverages a new Energy Smart Community (ESC), comprised of 12,000 smart meters
and a wireless data network in the Ithaca NY area deployed in response to New
York State?s Reforming the Energy Vision strategy. The network of 12 thousand
homes equipped with smart meters will become the test bed for this project.
Researchers, working with the primary partners, will actively engage residential
customers in the design of the smart service system and involve consumers in the
testing and optimization of the virtual storage systems. A smart service system
will control when the battery charges (purchases electricity from the grid) and
when it discharges (avoiding purchasing electricity from the grid) allowing the
thus far unrealized savings for consumers, while creating potential new business
opportunities and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The resulting smart service
system will be highly marketable and readily transferable to other communities
and utilities throughout the United States and the world. This project is an
integrated collaboration that is uncommon for universities. It engages a
regulated utility, for-profit corporations, venture investors, residential
community members and government agencies with a shared intent to bring
solutions to the market at scale. This team will develop the smart service
system infrastructure that will allow the retail energy market considered
crucial to 21st century power distribution, to emerge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
signature of this project is the use of computer models to simulate residential
batteries, which may be either stand-alone or contained within an electric
vehicle, allowing researchers to test situations where most residential homes
have a battery without the cost or challenges of purchasing and installing them.
A small number of homes will be outfitted with real batteries to ensure the
computer models accurately capture how real batteries function. Five cross-
disciplinary and cross-organizational tasks will leverage the team's skill sets:
(1) Develop and test a unique experimental economics platform that will guide
the design of market mechanisms that focus on customer-based distributed storage
and generation capacity in electricity distribution systems, (2) Design,
implement, and test a fully instrumented, control and communication capable,
prototype smart service system at the individual residence level, (3) Develop
virtual storage simulation modeling tools to integrate into the ESC advanced
metering infrastructure (smart meters) to enable the efficient testing of
different time-varying rate scenarios at low cost, (4) Design, implement, and
analyze cross-disciplinary survey and focus group efforts to understand, engage,
and collect feedback from the consumer, and (5) Carry out customer choice and
consumer incentivization research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is
Cornell University with its units the Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future,
Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Communications, Natural Resources, Applied Economics and Management, and
Information Science (academic non-profit). Primary Partners are: AVANGRID, Inc.
(New Haven CT, large business), BMW North America (Woodcliff Lake NJ, large
business), SolarCity (San Mateo CA, large business) and Cornell Cooperative
Extension -Tompkins County (Ithaca NY, non-profit). Distributed Sun (Washington
DC, small business) is a broader-context partner.