* 1632976
* NRT-DESE: Network Biology: From Data to Information to Insights
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,959,866.00

An urgent issue facing today's researchers in the life sciences is coping with
the data explosion resulting from the advent of powerful new technologies. More
data does not yield better information without the interdisciplinary tools
required for such a transformation. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Maryland, College Park will build
an innovative, cross-disciplinary model for graduate education that addresses
this challenge by preparing students to pursue a range of STEM careers at the
nexus of the computer, physical, and life sciences. Trainees will learn to
combine physics-style quantitative modeling with data processing, analysis, and
visualization methods from computer science to gain deeper insights into the
principles governing living systems. The project anticipates training
approximately sixty (60) PhD students, including thirty-five (35) funded
trainees, from the physical, computer, and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how data-derived interaction
patterns can give insights into complex biological phenomena is the research
focus of this program. Through an innovative combination of cross-disciplinary
training, collaborative research, and outreach activities, NRT trainees will
become experts in the process of transforming raw biological data into useful
information from which new biological insights can be inferred. Participants
will receive training in four different areas of network analysis: quantitative
metrics for biological networks; mechanistic models of biological networks;
network statistics and machine learning for biological applications; and
visualization techniques for large, complex, biological datasets. This training
will provide the foundation for research in one or more of three application
areas, covering a wide range of biological scales: biomolecular networks;
neuronal networks; and ecological/behavioral networks. Research experiences,
interdisciplinary coursework, peer-to-peer tutorials, and internships with
partners will provide graduate students with the skills needed to communicate
complex scientific ideas to diverse audiences in order to maximize impact.
Outreach activities will extend the benefits of the program to undergraduates,
middle/high school students, and to the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.