* 1632829
* Collaborative Research: Instabilities, Dynamics, and Energetics accompanying Atmospheric Layering (IDEAL)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dale Lawrence, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,736.00

The vertical structure of the free atmosphere under stable conditions from very
low altitudes into the stratosphere and above is often characterized by thin,
strongly stable, non-turbulent "sheets" separated by thicker, more weakly
stratified, and often turbulent "layers". The occurrence and morphology of
"sheet-and-layer" (S&L) structures in the free atmosphere are believed to be
governed by larger-scale wind shears, gravity waves (GWs) at various
frequencies, local S&L instability dynamics, turbulence and mixing, and their
interactions.

S&L structures have been known for several decades to play important roles in
optical and radiowave propagation and in transport and mixing of heat, momentum,
and constituents. There is also evidence that these small-scale flow features
can have important implications for larger-scale dynamics, including
instabilities and momentum transport accompanying GWs propagating to higher
altitudes. However, little progress has been made in understanding the
underlying dynamics or addressing the roles of instabilities and turbulence, the
interactions among them, or the consequences of these flows for transport and
mixing. In particular, the sources, morphologies, and statistics of intermittent
turbulence events in stable stratification, and their dependence on
environmental conditions remain to be defined observationally (e.g., instability
character and statistics of S&L thicknesses, turbulence structure parameters and
scales, and mechanical and thermal energy dissipation rates).

Our lack of understanding of these dynamics to date can largely be attributed to
observational and computational challenges in capturing the relevant atmospheric
structures and dynamics with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. The
research program IDEAL, Instabilities, Dynamics, and Energetics accompanying
Atmospheric Layering will conduct ground-based and in-situ measurements and
associated modeling combined to quantify these processes and provide key
insights into S&L dynamics and effects throughout the stratified atmosphere. The
IDEAL will perform measurements either at Dugway Proving Ground (DPG) in Utah or
at Camp Guernsey Joint Training Center (CG) in Wyoming, where restricted
airspace is already assured.

Intellectual Merit: For the first time, the dynamics underlying ubiquitous S&L
structures in the free troposphere will be observed with multiple, coordinated,
high-resolution, in-situ sensors together with the integrated sounding radar
profiler and radiosondes from ~50 m to 4 km. Guidance and interpretation of the
observations will be aided by high-resolution DNS, enabling identification of
key dynamics and evaluation of theories and models of stratified turbulence,
mixing, and transport.

Broader Impacts: A more quantitative understanding of S&L dynamics in the stably
stratified atmosphere will contribute to parameterization of their implications
for transport and mixing and improve predictive capabilities of relevance to
many research communities. These include applications as diverse as pollution
and fugitive emission impacts, micro-climate forecasting, and aviation safety.
The project will train two graduate students in state-of-the-art studies in
atmospheric science, aerospace engineering, and computational fluid dynamics.
Measurement technologies and techniques developed in this work will benefit
future field research campaigns and regulatory compliance mandates.