* 1632051
* PFI:BIC: iSee - Intelligent Mobile Behavior Monitoring and Depression Analytics Service for College Counseling Decision Support
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Anil Jain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 994,999.00

Depression is the leading health issue on college campuses in the U.S. Today,
college students are dealing with depression at some of the highest rates in
decades. Unfortunately, university counseling centers (UCCs), which are the
primary access points for students to receive mental health services, are facing
significant challenges in meeting the increasing demands. Specifically,
clinicians at UCCs still rely on patients' inaccurate and biased self-reported
symptoms for depression assessment. In addition, UCCs provide mental health
services only during working hours in clinical settings. The lack of service
access when needed could leave patients floundering helplessly and lead to
lifelong consequences. Furthermore, with tight budgets, clinicians at UCCs have
not grown and some UCCs even downsized. As a consequence, more students did not
receive timely treatment. This project focuses on designing and developing iSee,
a smart device based behavior monitoring and analytics platform. iSee harnesses
smartphones/wristbands to extend the reach of mental health care far beyond
clinical settings and to deliver timely therapies when needed. Furthermore, the
continuously tracked depression symptoms allow UCCs to be more accurately
informed with the severity of each patient and thus reduces unnecessary visits
so that clinician time can be better utilized. If successful, iSee has the
potential to enhance mental health services in thousands of colleges and
universities, benefiting millions of college students. Although focusing on
depression of college students, the technology can be extended to other mental
health conditions such as anxiety, bipolar disorder, dementia, and
schizophrenia; adapted to patients beyond college students; and deployed at
other settings such as public hospitals and private
clinics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iSee consists of a smartphone/wristband sensing
system running on the patient side to continuously and passively track patient's
daily behaviors using onboard sensors; a behavior analytics engine using machine
learning and causality analysis algorithms running on the cloud side to
translate behavior sensor data into meaningful analysis results for identifying
the patient's depression severity and revealing behavioral causes that lead to
the mitigation or the deterioration of the patient's status; and a dashboard
running on the clinician side to visualize behavior information as well as
analysis results to help clinicians make clinical decisions and conduct
treatment. The system would allow clinicians to access an objective,
quantitative, and longitudinal record of patients' daily behavior to support
evidence-based clinical assessment. This project involves a multi-disciplinary
and cross-organizational team of researchers from Michigan State University
(lead institution) and Northwestern University (Chicago, IL). The primary
industry partner is Microsoft Research (Redmond, WA), which is a large business
company in U.S. Michigan State University Counseling Center (East Lansing, MI),
which will be the test bed for the integration and evaluation of the iSee smart
service system. Finally, the broader context partners include the MSU Office of
the Vice President for Student Affairs and Services and MSU Technologies (East
Lansing, MI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is partially supported by funds
from the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS).