* 1632023
* Modeling and Detection of Learning in Cognitive Diagnosis
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Hua-Hua Chang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 389,572.00

This research project will develop statistical models that describe the way
students learn and will design efficient training methods to help them learn
efficiently. The project will advance psychometric theory by developing dynamic
cognitive diagnosis models that capture the skills a student has mastered in the
course of his training. It will impact psychometric and educational methodology
by improving the design of e-learning environments and intelligent tutoring
systems, where students are trained in a large number of skills. One of the
final products of this research will be publicly available software that will
incorporate the methodologies to be developed in this work. The theoretical
knowledge that will be gained in this project will be incorporated into the
material of graduate-level courses that cover item response theory and
sequential analysis. Two graduate students will play key roles in conducting
this research, and undergraduate students will be involved in certain aspects of
the project. The investigators will make every effort to include qualified
students of underrepresented groups in these research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address two fundamental questions.
First, how do students acquire the skills to master a series of tasks? Second,
how should these tasks be selected in real time in order to help students learn
efficiently? The first question will be answered with the development of complex
statistical models that are grounded in the theory of cognitive diagnosis. The
second question will require the development of on-line algorithms for detecting
quickly that a student has mastered a skill and for selecting the best possible
tasks in order to facilitate learning. These algorithms will be developed
through the fusion of statistical techniques from the fields of sequential
change detection and experimental design. The methodologies developed to address
these two distinct research questions will be merged by having the developed
learning models inform the detection and task-selection algorithms. Overall,
this project will consider statistical problems at the heart of educational and
instructional practice, and it will highlight the interplay among the fields of
cognitive diagnosis, latent class modeling, quickest change detection, and
adaptive design.