* 1632429
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid Calculation of Earthquake Repair Costs for Pricing of Building Risk
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Curt Haselton, Haselton Baker Risk Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will enable a group of customers we
call Risk Pricers (specifically, property and casualty insurance underwriters
and mortgage bankers in financial firms) to profit from tailoring pricing on
their products. They can do this by rapidly predicting financial losses for
buildings having specific configurations, using the software developed in this
proposal. These customers can then tailor pricing of earthquake insurance and
mortgage terms based on refined analyses that we facilitate. Besides offering a
clear financial benefit to Risk Pricers, this new analysis approach will also
fundamentally change market forces and incentives around building safety. If a
building's owner is incentivized to improve its earthquake performance (via
lower insurance and mortgage costs), then high-performance buildings become more
appealing and this will encourage design of better buildings. As the company's
software makes more explicit the links between building properties and financial
costs, society will benefit from more efficient resource allocation, ultimately
leading to increased societal resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop algorithms and
software tools that provide financial guidance to customers interested in repair
costs and closures of buildings due to earthquakes. To complete the development
of its tool, the company will focus on calibrating statistical models to predict
displacements and accelerations in a wide range of building types, when they are
subjected to earthquake shaking. The company's method for rapid estimation of
structural responses utilizes principles of engineering mechanics, but applied
in a domain where academic research does not focus (i.e., estimating response of
a structure whose properties are not fully known to the analyst). The key
identified need is to calibrate a statistical predictive model for the response
of a structure that is effective over all popular construction types of interest
to customers in the insurance and mortgage banking markets (i.e., light frame
wood, steel, concrete, concrete tilt-up). The company will also develop loss
metric and calculation outputs that incorporate insurance contract conditions
such as deductibles and limits, in order to link the calculations to customers'
workflows.