* 1632338
* Risk-sensitive Decision Making: Subsistence Diversification in Response to Novel Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Karen Kramer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 246,655.00

This project conducts a natural experiment to ask how inequality arises out of
an unstratified economy, and which traits preadapt certain individuals and
groups to differentially succeed under economic diversification. Rapid social
and economic change offer many new opportunities that are of possible benefit to
individuals. However, adopting new modes of social organization and ways of
making a living are also risky because traditional knowledge may be inadequate
when evaluating the costs and benefits of pursuing unfamiliar behaviors. This
situation is widespread in many societies encountering new markets. This
process, which is currently poorly understood, is of particular importance
because social and wealth inequality emerge as a result of market access. Thus,
here we seek to learn, when novel opportunities are introduced, why are some
individuals and families better able to take advantage of the situation, while
others try and fail or continue to rely on traditional and conservative
lifeways? The negative impact of income inequality is of growing concern both in
both the popular press and academic literature because of its associations with
quality of life indicators, including patterns of health, education and aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer the question of how inequality emerges within a
group of people, and to address broader concerns regarding its negative impacts,
University of Utah researchers Drs. Karen L. Kramer and Ryan Schacht will work
with a group of rural Maya. This study population provides an ideal opportunity
to explore the emergence and consequences of inequality for two key reasons: 1)
the Maya have only recently had regular access to wage labor and economic
markets and are just beginning to show signs of inequality in wealth, health,
and education; 2) working with the Maya helps the researchers to account for
many of the confounding factors that confuse a clear interpretation of
associations between inequality and negative outcomes in the West. The
researchers will test the hypothesis that risk orientation is a key determinant
for the emergence of inequality. The central prediction is that preexisting
variation in kin and non-kin network size affects risk orientation and
subsequently facilitates the differential accumulation of wealth (land, consumer
goods, cash, education, health) by some more than others. The project integrates
a network and risk sensitivity approach to study decision-making under
diversifying socioeconomic conditions. Their research findings will offer
insight not only to the consequences looming for many small-scale societies
currently undergoing economic and wealth transitions, but also to industrialized
populations experiencing ever increasing levels of wealth inequality.