* 1632296
* Characterizing the Determinants of Goal-Driven Attentional Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrew Leber, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2020
* USD 509,888.00

Humans receive far more visual information in each moment than they can possibly
process. A major question is how people attend to the information that is most
relevant to their current goals and ignore distracting, irrelevant information.
One strategy is that people focus their attention on specific properties of
objects, such as their color, shape, or location. However, previous research has
shown that people do not always control their attention in an optimal way.
Additionally, little is known about the factors motivating how people choose to
control their attention. The current project will investigate the role of three
factors that may influence how attention is controlled: 1) performance
maximization (the drive to achieve a goal as quickly as possible); 2) effort
minimization (avoiding tasks that are cognitively taxing); and 3) novelty-
seeking (exploring new stimuli in the environment). Using a new method to
measure all three of these factors, the research team will establish each
individual's unique "Attention Control Profile." Providing a detailed analysis
of the strengths and weaknesses of an individual's attentional control
strategies may have important implications for screening and training employees
in professions that depend heavily on attentional control, such as drivers,
security agents, and air traffic controllers. The Attention Control Profile may
also be helpful for assessing attentional control deficits in special
populations, such as individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), schizophrenia, or damage to frontal or parietal brain regions. In
addition to the broader scientific contributions, this project will provide
training to undergraduate students, graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers at The Ohio State University, with an emphasis on including women
and members from groups underrepresented in science.

This project uses a combination of behavioral and eye-tracking measures to
develop an Attention Control Profile for each participating individual, using a
new visual search task that is designed to reproduce essential aspects of real-
world search. The task allows individuals to choose freely among multiple
different attentional control strategies, in order to find one of multiple
possible search targets. Additionally, the task features a search display that
varies continuously over time, which will prompt individuals to adjust their
control strategies dynamically. The investigators will explore how effectively
individuals choose search targets, adapt their control strategies to the
changing environment, and ignore irrelevant information. This will, in turn,
provide a metric for how much each individual's attentional control is
influenced by performance maximization, effort minimization and novelty-seeking.
The project also explores the underlying sources of individual variation in
attentional control, by examining whether an individual's strategy depends on
motivational state (e.g., when fast performance receives high rewards) or
specific personality traits (e.g., impulsivity or deliberateness). These methods
will enable the researchers to provide a tool for measuring individualized
attentional control profiles and will help unpack the motivations underlying the
use of different attentional control strategies.