* 1632238
* SBIR Phase II: Mobile Games Teaching Rational Number Operations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Dana Pagar, Teachley, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 749,999.00

This SBIR Phase II project offers a unique approach to teaching the difficult
content of operating with fractions through interactive, adaptive games.
Existing products are not effective at teaching fractions, and half of US eighth
graders cannot correctly order three fractions, a fourth grade standard. Current
research and the Common Core State Standards emphasize using a number line to
teach fractions, which is a more effective approach; however, leading curricula
are not fully aligned to this method. This project aims to improve 3rd-5th grade
students' understanding of fractions through engaging apps that encourage
estimation and problem-solving. Unlike other apps, which typically end with just
a score, this project will provide rich, actionable insight to help teachers
screen and monitor students' progress over time, thereby improving teachers'
instruction as well as student learning. Closely aligning with NSF's mission of
improving mathematics education for all children, this project fills an
essential need in the marketplace for engaging, effective software that aligns
with Common Core and provides data-driven intervention support. This software
will be specially designed for children who struggle in mathematics and will
meet the criteria for intervention software, further increasing its commercial
value for the school market and its potential to generate
income.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve children's use of
efficient strategies in estimating and solving fractions arithmetic by targeting
children?s metastrategic awareness and metacognitive abilities. This project
will include the development of a series of fractions apps and game-based data
reporting for teachers to help them tailor instruction and target interventions.
Extracting actionable insight from children?s gameplay rather than from
standardized tests is a novel innovation that has the potential to dramatically
change teaching and learning. The development process will include wireframing
novel gameplay and developing app components and features. The backend system
will identify learning patterns within clickstream data collected during play
and apply data-mining techniques to these patterns. Instead of assessing single
actions as correct or incorrect, the backend will identify series of actions and
associate them with a particular strategy. This data will be used to inform
instructors, test hypotheses, and provide evidence for learning. A dynamic
content generation engine will use the insights extracted from student data to
provide learners with highly targeted, fine-tuned activities. The project?s
research will include both informal design research and a randomized control
study with 3rd-5th grade students to determine the effects of using the software
on procedural and conceptual knowledge of fractions.