* 1632803
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Learning to Su
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Fei Sha, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2018
* USD 248,076.00

Today there is far more video being captured - by consumers, scientists, defense
analysts, and others - than can ever be watched. With this explosion of video
data comes a pressing need to develop automatic video summarization algorithms.
Video summarization takes a long video as input and produces a short video as
output, while preserving its information content as much as possible. As such,
summarization techniques have great potential to make large video collections
substantially more efficient to browse, search, disseminate, and facilitate
communication. Such increased efficiency will play a vital role in many
important application areas. For example, with reliable summarization systems, a
primatologist gathering long videos of her animal subjects could quickly browse
a week's worth of their activity before deciding where to inspect the data most
closely. A young student searching YouTube to learn about Yellowstone National
Park could see at a glance what content exists, much better than today's simple
thumbnail images can depict. An intelligence agent could rapidly sift through
reams of aerial video, reducing the resources required to analyze surveillance
data to identify suspicious activities.

This project develops new machine learning and computer vision algorithms for
video summarization. Unsupervised methods, which are the cornerstone of nearly
all existing approaches, have become increasingly limiting due to their reliance
on hand-crafted heuristics. By instead posing video summarization as a
supervised learning problem, this project investigates a markedly different
formulation of the task. The research team is investigating four key new ideas:
powerful probabilistic models for learning to select the optimal subset of video
frames for summarization, semi-supervised learning models and co-summarization
algorithms for leveraging the abundance of multiple related videos, algorithms
for exploiting photos on the Web to improve summarization, and evaluation
protocols that assess summaries in a way that aligns well with human
comprehension. The broader impact of the proposed research includes practical
tools for video summarization, scientific advances that appeal broadly to
several communities, publicly disseminated research results, inter-
disciplinarily trained graduate students, and outreach activities to engage
young students in STEM education and career paths.