* 1632019
* EAGER:  Exploiting carbon and nitrogen compounds for energy positive wastewater treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Veera Gnaneswar Gude, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 60,000.00

1632019 Gude

Wastewater treatment and nutrient removal schemes are energy-intensive. This
research provides an innovative solution to integrate new microbial systems to
develop energy-positive wastewater treatment and desalination. A key objective
of this research is to use microbes in an electrochemical cell to remove
nitrogen compounds at one electrode (the cathode) and to oxidize carbon
compounds at the other electrode (the anode). This EAGER project focuses on the
feasibility of using bacteria as a catalyst at the cathode. If successful, the
results of this project could guide the design of electrochemical cells that
would simultaneously remove pollutants from wastewater, desalinate brackish
water, and produce electrical energy.

A wide range of encouraging advancements of various bioelectrochemical systems
for water treatment have recently been reported. A major challenge is to
determine the rate limiting relationships between the bioelectrochemical
processes in the bioanode and biocathode biofilms. This EAGER project has the
following goals: 1) Discover and establish an energy-positive synergistic
relationship between bioanode and anerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox)
biocathode processes in microbial desalination cells; 2) Evaluate the
performance of anammox bacteria in a bioelectrochemical cell and study the
growth kinetics and nitrogen removal capabilities to correlate microbiological
parameters with environmental factors and process performance; and 3) Provide
research and education opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students from underrepresented groups and provide outreach to the broader
community. The transformative aspect of this project is integrating tertiary
wastewater treatment and desalination processes, coupled with concurrent
electricity production inspired by bioelectrochemical principles. To overcome
the major challenges for the most envisioned applications of microbial
desalination cells, this research capitalizes on anammox biocathode development
and integrates powerful high-throughput molecular sequencing, advanced process
characterization, and electrochemical impedance tools to develop energy-positive
integrated wastewater-desalination systems. This project has the potential for
wider applications in reclaiming high quality effluents from municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastewaters combined with desalination. This EAGER
project is enriched by interdisciplinary research activities among
electrochemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, environmental and chemical
engineering disciplines and positively impacts K-12 students, especially
motivating them toward STEM fields.