* 1632136
* SBIR Phase II:  Interference Mitigation for Broadband Wireless Backhaul Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Joshua Lala, Bascom Hunter Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 889,106.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable wireless
industry carriers and equipment providers with an affordable technology solution
to meet the continuing explosive societal/customer demands for data access. The
telecommunication market sector has been increasingly consolidating to Asia and
Europe where foreign governments are making strategic investments to encourage
work in their respective countries. In a long-term, the proposed interference
elimination technology can lead to increased investment in the telecom equipment
sector and efficient use of the finite radio frequency (RF) spectrum in the
United States. The expected technical and commercial outcome from the project is
an active interference mitigation capability with product features including a
significantly improved quality of service, simplified network equipment design
and installation, and reduced requirements for many components such as antenna
and filters. This in turn will reduce the overall cost per data link, as well as
reducing the size, weight, and power requirements of the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2
project addresses the critical need for disruptive RF interference mitigation
solutions. As networks are moving toward higher performance to accommodate
larger capacity than ever seen before, the network operators, industry
organizations, and equipment providers are looking into innovative technologies
for next generation 5G wireless networks. There are two advantages offered by
the proposed interference elimination technology. One advantage is extreme wide
instantaneous bandwidth and the other is flexible tunability over GHz of
operating frequency. These advantages help to consolidate and reduce front-end
hardware. The focus of this program will be first on developing an optical
system-on-chip version of the interference cancellation system with
monolithically photonic integrated circuits. With a complete and fully function
development board, the second focus will be on demonstrating the application in
in-band interference mitigation for wireless backhaul networks, and showing
improvement in 2x spectral efficiency and potential 1000x increase in capacity.