* 1632154
* PFI:BIC MAKERPAD: Cognitively Intuitive Shape-Modeling and Design Interface enabling a Distributed Personalized Fabrication Network.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Currently product design and manufacturing are accessible only to enterprises
and professionals such as engineers and designers. Everyone has ideas but only a
select few can bring them to fabrication. This is because of lack of intuitive
and easy-to-use design tools, detailed knowledge required to make prototypes,
help needed for users with difficulties, and access to fabrication facilities.
This gap could be seen as a waste of untapped human creative resources and
economic potential to the Nation. MAKERPAD will bridge the gaps between the need
for design tools for personalized production and the rapid growth of 3D
fabrication technologies by providing intuitive tools for designing and access
to remote fabrication resources. Using the cloud, MAKERPAD will enable
personalized fabrication technology easily accessible and available to makers
and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAKERPAD is enabled by (a) 3D mixed and
augmented reality, (b) cloud-powered algorithms (shape modeling, computer
vision, human computer interaction), and (c) service models supporting 3D
scanning, searching and printing. Using the affordances created by depth sensing
cameras that are being embedded into both mobile and intuitive fabrication
oriented design modeling, smart algorithms will be enabled to work real-time
over the cloud. MAKERPAD will develop and use the human-centric cognitively
intuitive design interfaces, digital modeling in the virtual cloud world, thus
enabling connectivity to a personalized fabrication network. Using a new robotic
toy platform as well as accessories as the use case, the service model design
will appropriately support consumers at various levels of capabilities. The
workflow at the user and system level will be designed in a seamless fashion for
the users to obtain laser cut and 3D printed models of their designs. If
successful, this system will support different levels of service, quality and
sophistication of digital designs and physical models depending on the user
requirements, usage context, budget and time constraints. The smart system will
dynamically configure the appropriate technologies, providers and approaches,
such as Do-It-Yourself (DIY) as well as concierge services, to deliver the
optimal level of solution to the user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration between Purdue University (Mechanical, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and Business School) and primary implementation partner gesture
interface technology ZeroUI (San Jose, CA, small business). Secondary partners
for test-beds include a museum (Imagination Station, Lafayette, IN, non-profit)
and gifted education research institute (GERI, Purdue University). Other
partners include augmented reality - Meta (Portola Valley, CA, medium business);
and depth sensing camera - Leap (San Francisco, CA, medium business).