* 1632725
* A Laboratory Study of the Problematic Relations between Olfactory Experiences and Language
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Morana Alac, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 206,486.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, an expert in science and
technology studies, will engage in long-term participant observation at two
laboratories of neuroscience and cognitive psychology that study olfaction (the
sense of smell). The focus of her study is a well-known argument that olfactory
experiences cannot be conveyed by language. She will shed new light on this
argument by using laboratory studies to document and communicate the language of
olfaction that is used in the context of scientific experimentation. The project
will contribute to graduate student training and to broadening participation;
the PI has plans to recruit a graduate student research assistant from an
underrepresented group. Her research results will be disseminated in a journal
article, a book chapter, and an edited volume. They will be used in a methods
class for graduate students, and they will be of interest to non-scientists due
to their relevance to eating disorders, obesity, and sensory
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will use the laboratory studies approach project to provide new insights into
one of the central conundrums involved in understanding human olfaction, its
relationship with language. It will provide an alternative perspective on the
sense of smell as a feature of practical work of science; in doing so, it will
turn what is often regarded as illusive and hidden into a material and social
feature of action and interaction in the laboratory. The project will draw from
ethnomethodology (the study of examines how individuals use everyday
conversation and gestures to construct a common-sense view of the world) to
engage the sensory aspects of scientific knowing. It will also use insights from
the arts, humanities, and other social science approaches to the senses. Its
goal is to go beyond the visual-auditory dominance, and treat the sensory as
part of the practical doings in the laboratory.