* 1632004
* I-Corps: Robotic 3D Tumor Technology for High Throughput Drug Screening
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Hossein Tavana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Cancer is currently the second leading cause of death in the United States.
Despite significant investments to develop new therapeutics, cancer treatment
has only marginally improved primarily due to the small number of new anti-
cancer drugs made available for chemotherapy treatment of patients. A major
reason behind this problem is the high rate of failure of candidate drugs in the
process of drug discovery. During this process, pharmaceutical industries use
two-dimensional (2D) cultures of cancer cells to evaluate efficacy and toxicity
of candidate drug compounds. However, cancer cells grown as a 2D layer poorly
represent human tumors that comprise of three dimensional (3D) mass of cancer
cells. This disparity causes major differences in biological properties of cells
and their responses to drugs. As a result, the same drug that is effective
against 2D culture of cancer cells fails to show efficacy in patients. To
overcome this major and long-standing problem, this Innovation Corps
(I-Corps)team has developed a new technology that will allow culture of cancer
cells in 3D and produce tumor-like tissues known as tumor spheroids.
Incorporation of this technology in the process of drug discovery will help
predict efficacy of candidate drug compounds and only move forward those
compounds that produce a desired effect against tumor spheroids. This will
substantially reduce ineffective compounds from further consideration, expedite
introducing new drugs to market, and significantly reduce associated costs.
Availability of a larger number of effective drugs at a lower cost will improve
chemotherapy of patients and reduce healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering the current unmet need of pharmaceutical
industries for a robotic, high throughput 3D cancer cell culture technology for
use in the process of drug discovery, the proposed tumor spheroid technology
fills this major gap by offering an enabling tool to screen libraries of
chemical compounds against realistic tumor models and expedite the discovery of
novel, effective oncology drugs. Considering the market size for oncology drug
discovery, this technology can be used on a contractual basis to offer screening
of libraries of compounds for pharmaceutical customers. Alternatively, the
technology can be licensed to such customers to facilitate their in-house drug
screening.