* 1632798
* Quantifying and Predicting the Attenuation of Downstream Fluxes Associated with Beaver Meadows
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 295,626.00

Predicted warming and drying across much of the U.S. will stress existing water
supplies for consumptive activities, as well as ecosystem health and resilience.
This is particularly true for the arid and semi-arid regions of the western
U.S., including headwater states such as Colorado. Given the predicted increased
potential for droughts and floods in the region, the ability to retain and
gradually release water from surface and subsurface retention zones within river
basins is important. This study will evaluate the potential for beaver meadows
which contain numerous dams, ponds, and multi-thread channels, to substantially
attenuate downstream fluxes of water, sediment, organic matter, and nitrate
relative to river segments without beaver activity. Results of this work will be
important for restoring river function, attenuating flood pulses and augmenting
low flow periods, as well as for mitigating potential effects of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study investigators will (1) quantify the
magnitude of downstream-flux attenuation as a function of size of the beaver
meadow relative to the contributing drainage area and activity/spatial
heterogeneity of the meadow, (2) evaluate how meadow position within a catchment
affects downstream attenuation, (3) assess the extent and magnitude of landscape
alteration in the region, and (4) estimate the potential influence of landscape
alteration on hydrologic dynamics across larger spatial extents. Quantitative
interdisciplinary methods from both hydrology and geomorphology will be
leveraged to quantify relationships between catchment morphology, storage, and
flux and to scale these dynamics to larger spatial extents. The research will
develop new insights into the buffering capacities offered by retention zones in
the form of beaver meadows and develop new conceptualizations and numerical
models on the manner in which reach-scale behavior influences catchment-scale
process.