* 1632490
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel cathode for long-cycling capacitive deionization
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* James Landon, PowerTech Water
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2019
* USD 897,395.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
the use of a new carbon-based water treatment process to condition and soften
hard water sources. Specifically, this treatment process uses functionalized
porous carbon sheets and small applied electrical voltages (<1.2 V) to target
(adsorb and desorb) salt molecules from hard water streams. In addition, this
process is reversible, resulting in a carbon-based filter that can soften water
streams without significant maintenance or upkeep and providing a water
softening solution that does not add to the "throw-away" culture that is common
to many water treatment devices. Importantly, no salt or chemical additives are
needed for this softening technique, further limiting its environmental impact
in comparison to conventional salt-based softeners, and the energy required for
this separation may best the most efficient techniques in use today.

The proposed process is called inverted capacitive deionization (i-CDI). In
i-CDI, salt molecules are naturally attracted to the carbon electrode surfaces
due to the creation of electrodes possessing significant surface charge in
aqueous environments. Electrodes are then regenerated using a small voltage,
matched to the surface chemistry of the functionalized carbon electrodes, and
salt is concentrated into a discharge stream. Through this Phase II project, the
i-CDI process will be demonstrated for water softening applications in both food
& beverage and industrial environments. Currently, water softening in these
industries is carried out through chemical treatments, ion exchange, or
selective membranes. In this project, surface charged carbon electrodes will be
used in "flow-through" cell modules to demonstrate preferential removal of
calcium, magnesium, carbonate, and other hardness-causing ions to soften
multiple hard water sources. Comparisons will be drawn between this new i-CDI
technology and incumbent water treatment techniques to outline benefits towards
equipment downtime, energy costs, and effectiveness of the separation. Liquid
sampling and lifetime studies will be conducted to further prove the benefits of
this membrane-free, salt-free system.