* 1632908
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: International Students and Talent Retention Strategies in the United States
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Roger Waldinger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,448.00

As American universities recruit more international students, businesses and
policymakers are paying more attention to the role that these students could
play in the US labor market. International students are particularly valuable to
science and technology industries, since they are more likely than domestic
students to study STEM subjects. The US does not have specific policies in place
to retain foreign-born graduates in the workforce. Canada, like most other
advanced industrial countries, has implemented talent retention strategies
(TRSs) that encourage foreign students to stay by giving them easier access to
work permits, permanent residency, and citizenship. Furthermore, talent
retention is a persistent theme in immigration policy debates there. This
project uses documentary evidence and interviews with policymakers and advocates
to explain why TRSs passed in Canada but not in the US. This is an important
issue for NSF funding because the structure of the scientific labor force
underlies all aspects of science and innovation policy. Some of the world's most
rigorous and most advanced science is done in American universities and research
institutes. Any change in immigration policy that affects skilled workers and
higher education will have an effect on American science and American
scientists. As such, it is in the NSF?s interest to support scientifically
rigorous, politically unbiased research on the immigration policymaking process.

The SciSIP grant funds semi-structured interviews with policymakers and
advocates in the Washington, DC area with interests in immigration and the STEM
workforce. In addition, the PI specifically targets actors in the academic
science and information technology industries, which have historically been
highly dependent on foreign-born skilled workers. These interviews include
advocates on all sides of the policy debate. Interviews in Canada have already
been supported by competitive grants from other funders. The PI transcribes the
interview transcripts from Ottawa and DC, combines them into a dataset with
legislative debates on this issue, and codes the entire dataset for themes using
qualitative data analysis software. Themes are derived both inductively from the
source material and deductively from the literature. This project contributes
empirical data about how immigration policy is made and who is involved in
making it. At the theoretical level, this project results in a revision of
theories of policymaking that are relevant to public policy researchers across
the social sciences. Existing theoretical frameworks can explain why some
countries have chosen to implement TRSs, but they fall short in explaining
negative cases like the US. Political economy approaches, for example, predict
that advanced democracies have a high level of openness towards the migration of
skilled workers, as the social and political costs are minimal but the economic
benefits are significant and highly concentrated in the hands of business
elites. Yet despite the fact that policy elites and business interests have
reached a consensus in favor of skilled migration, the US has not developed
policies to encourage international students to stay in the country. Bringing in
additional insights from sociology, economics, human geography, and political
science, this dissertation seeks to solve this puzzle.