* 1632938
* Qualitative Hydraulics and Transport from Strata and Dynamics of Sandy Bedforms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Brandon McElroy, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2020
* USD 260,649.00

Bed forms, ripples and dunes, are key indicators of water flow and sediment
transport in sandy rivers, and therefore they are vital to understanding river
management, coastal restoration, and surface water reservoir sedimentation.
Additionally, they leave deposits that are a record of the ancient river
conditions that create sedimentary rocks. These deposits can be used to
determine the conditions of formation of subsurface reservoirs for water and
hydrocarbons. To date, almost ubiquitously, models applied to bed form problems
have used constant geometries representing bed forms that migrate to move
sediment and create strata. This is in stark contrast to models of river
processes that capture the dynamic nature of Earth's surface environments.

This project will test a set of hypotheses derived by applying a dynamic model
of bed form behavior to problems in 1) sediment transport mechanics, 2) bed
material sediment flux, and 3) generation of fluvial stratigraphy. This will be
accomplished through a suite of laboratory experiments, and relationships
developed in these experiments will then be applied to interpreting ancient
fluvial strata. The results of this project will benefit modern river planning,
subsurface reservoir modeling, understanding of Earth's natural history, and the
applied problems associated with these topics.