* 1632498
* SBIR Phase II:  Cognitive Radio Small Cell for Pervasive Coverage and Sustained
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kamil Agi, K&A Wireless, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2019
* USD 908,893.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes: 1) Training of
graduate students on complex research &amp; development as well as enabling
student understanding of service and hardware business models, 2) A potential
economic impact that is between $0.9T and S1.7T (trillion) according to a
McKinsey study of IoT technology in smart city applications, 3) The improvement
of the stature of the countries in the world market where this advanced
technology solution will be offered, such as Ibero-America, 4) A significant
improvement of the ability to handle large number of devices on a network
without bogging down the overall network while enabling future bandwidth
intensive applications, and 5) The ability to provide low-cost Internet
connectivity for underserved populations through city-wide wireless network
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project seeks to complete the development of a Spectrum Intelligent IoT
Gateway initiated during Phase I. The key innovation of this system is a
proprietary Spectrum Intelligence capability used to identify spectrum occupancy
in the vicinity and modify transmission parameters in the network. The
Intellectual Merits of this project include: 1) Implementing and testing a novel
IoT Gateway with autonomous channel selection capability based on spectrum
occupancy information; 2) Transferring spectrum sensing algorithms into an FPGA
platform for its field deployment, and as the first step towards and spectrum
sensing ASIC design; 3) Obtaining a model-based design for an enterprise network
architecture of IoT Gateways; and 4) Implementing and testing new adaptive OFDM
approaches to optimize power and frequency usage is 4g/5G wireless
communications.