* 1632248
* SBIR Phase II:  Automatic Generation of As-Built BIM Models Using a Single Video Camera
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Habib Fathi, Pointivo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to transform commercial construction
through the democratization of scanning and automation of Building Information
Modeling (BIM). Constant design and change management is a unique challenge that
is costing the US construction industry billions of dollars annually. In order
to prevent such a huge economic loss, this industry is in the path for a digital
revolution. BIM is known as the first truly global digital technology that could
revolutionize the construction industry. However, BIM usage is currently limited
because it is only viable for large-scale projects. The primary reason is that
the process is too laborious and expensive. The proposed technology will
completely eliminate these barriers. Its ease-of-use, ubiquity of the capturing
device, and automated object detection democratizes as-built BIM modeling.
Enormous value could be generated due to streamlining and data management
capabilities that are offered by the technology in the form of accelerated
project schedules, reduced numbers of requests for information and change
orders, and timely identified design clashes. This will pave the way to increase
the competitiveness of the US construction industry, by enabling new products
and services that support automatic BIM modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project investigates the
technical and commercial feasibility of an automatic and inexpensive solution
for the Scan-to-BIM problem in the construction industry. Scan-to-BIM refers to
3D scanning of a physical structure and converting the captured raw spatial data
into an object-oriented, semantically-rich model. Although there are a few
technologies that aim to facilitate this process, the 3D modeling component
remains primarily a manual and time-consuming task. When using the proposed
technology, a non-technical worker videotapes the target structure. The video is
automatically sent to a server for processing. A unique videogrammetric 3D
reconstruction engine reconstructs the 3D geometry of the structure in the form
of a 3D point cloud. It then extracts object hypotheses from key video frames
and spatial data in the form of observations. Afterwards, it optimizes a novel
coherent joint probability distribution function and infers a 3D layout. The
outcome is an object-oriented 3D representation of the structure with embedded
geometrical attributes and property sets. The main novelty of this technology
lies in a hybrid approach that combines low-level segmentation with high-level
space modeling. This advances the state-of-the-art in robust intelligence,
particularly the interpretation of complex, unstructured data.