* 1632651
* Workshop: Societal Aspects of Mining and Other Extractive Processes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Roopali Phadke, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,695.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this workshop is to
bring together scholars whose work addresses technologies, practices, and forms
of knowledge related to the mining of minerals, groundwater and fossil fuels.
The workshop will be held in November 2016 at the Colorado School of Mines over
a three-day period. Its goal is to define a new subfield in Science, Technology,
and Society (STS) on subterranean extraction. The workshop will highlight the
theoretical and topical commonalities as well as disagreements and debates that
make the study of mining and extraction a vibrant, emerging subfield. Workshop
participants will include mining and extraction experts as discussants and field
trip leaders. Workshop organizers will develop a public website that includes
the workshop agenda, conference papers, an executive summary of the event, and a
video of the keynote address, which will be live streamed. The organizers have
plans to draw audience members from the dense network of industry practitioners
in the Front Range, which is home to many mining, oil and gas, and other energy
companies. They also plan to prepare an edited volume that includes new and
existing STS work on mining and subterranean extraction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
focus on societal aspects of extractive processes of mining and other forms of
natural resource development, which is a potentially rich new area for the field
of STS. The existing scholarship on extraction from anthropology, geography and
environmental studies provides important insights on the social and
environmental dimensions of natural resource production, especially the
consequences of this development for vulnerable communities. Yet these fields
remain largely distinct from STS and rarely engage practitioners, such as
scientists and engineers. STS scholars have studied recent technological
developments such as high-volume hydraulic fracturing to extract oil and gas
from shale, solar technologies that require rare earth metals, and even the
pursuit of minerals found in asteroids. However, subterranean extraction is not
yet an identifiable domain of research in STS. STS is well positioned to make an
impact in this domain, opening up crucial questions about the expertise,
knowledge, and power animating extractive practices. The mapping and extraction
of underground resources are technoscientific practices that engage multiple,
and sometimes competing, forms of expertise. An STS perspective on extraction
will examine the technoscientific aspects of how questions about extraction are
posed and deliberated, how extraction itself occurs, and how the consequences of
such extraction are addressed. Underlying each of these areas are issues of
knowledge, expertise and power that STS is uniquely positioned to explore, but
has not yet done so in a systematic way.