* 1632377
* Does learning a second language enhance inhibitory processes and executive function?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Mercedes Fernandez, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 167,298.00

Most people easily modify their attention and behavior to meet the changing
demands of their surroundings. For example, people easily shift from reading a
book to answering a telephone call without confusing the content of the book
with the content of the conversation. Similarly, people who are fluent in more
than one language can effortlessly shift from one language to another. Moreover,
when communicating with people who speak only one language, bilingual and
multilingual speakers rarely experience intrusions from the other languages they
speak, presumably because they are able to inhibit the language that is
inappropriate for the situation. The inhibitory processes that allow bilingual
or multilingual speakers to suppress a language may be the same processes that
allow people to shift attention appropriately. If that is the case, inhibitory
processes may be better developed in speakers of two or more languages and the
possibility exists that general inhibitory processes might be strengthened in
monolingual speakers as they learn and develop proficiency in a second language.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modifying behavior to meet the changing demands
of the environment requires inhibiting habitual behaviors, shifting attention,
and updating working memory. This crucially requires a process of inhibition, in
order to keep salient but distracting information from gaining control of
attention. An intriguing theory is that the inhibitory processes that allow
humans to adapt to a changing environment are the same ones that allow
bilinguals to suppress one language while speaking and to shift from one
language to the other. The speculation is that inhibition is better developed in
bilingual and multilingual speakers relative to speakers of only one language
because bilinguals engage inhibitory control processes to control language
output as well as to control attention. If correct, inhibitory processes may be
strengthened in monolinguals as they learn and develop proficiency in a second
language because they will engage this process to inhibit one language when
words or phrases are expressed in their other language. To test this hypothesis,
the investigator will directly measure event-related brain potentials
(electrical potentials generated by populations of neurons milliseconds after a
cognitive event) and behavioral responses in monolinguals who are developing
second-language proficiency while they perform non-linguistic, auditory, and
visual tasks of attention. The longitudinal design will allow an assessment of
whether efficiency of inhibitory control increases as second-language learning
progresses. In addition, the work will address the national under-representation
of minorities in the sciences by funding and mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students at a university with an extremely large minority student
population.