* 1632394
* SBIR Phase II:  Catalytic Conversion of Lignocellulosic Biomass into Furfural and Dissolving Pulp using Green Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* David Alonso, Glucan Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 729,464.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project provides a technology platform to convert non-food
biomass, such as wood and corn stalks, into biofuels, chemicals, and
bioproducts. Biomass utilization is a solution to increase global sustainability
and decrease petroleum-based greenhouse gas emissions. This project will use
wood biomass to simultaneously co-produce three high-end products, dissolving
pulp, furfural, and technical lignin, of which the dissolving pulp and furfural
are the focus of this project. Current methods of producing these products only
use one of the three primary biomass components. By co-producing two products,
revenues increase and unit production costs decrease as production costs are
spread over a larger product volume. The use of this solvent obtained from the
biomass is a unique approach in the biomass conversion industry and offers an
alternative to conventional enzyme or microbial processing. Benefits include
restoring furfural production in the United States, decreasing dissolving pulp
production costs, and increasing the commercial value of renewable biomass that
currently has low or no value. This sustainable and environmentally friendly
technology will increase global sustainability and revitalize rural economies by
stimulating investment and creating jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this Phase II research project are to demonstrate and advance to pilot scale
our technology to simultaneously co-produce dissolving pulp and furfural from
biomass using gamma valerolactone (GVL) as solvent. While other technologies
focus on the production of a single product from biomass, GVL?' ability to
fractionate lignocellulosic biomass into its three main components (cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin) at high concentration and purity, produce significant
cost and technical advantages. GVL fractionation produces solid cellulose at
high yield (&gt;90%) and purity (&gt;90%), without the need for pre-treatment or
further chemical refining. This cellulose can be converted into dissolving pulp
for high-end applications such as textiles (rayon), cellophane, or
microcrystalline cellulose. The hemicellulose fraction does not need to be
separated from the GVL and is readily converted into furfural within GVL at high
yields (&gt;75%) and high concentrations, minimizing separation costs.
Preliminary mass and energy balances and techno-economic modeling based on lab
data predict attractive financial returns. Tasks will focus on biomass
fractionation to produce dissolving pulp, furfural purification, and GVL
recovery at bench-scale. This experimental work will inform the engineering
development for an integrated, continuous process, pilot demonstration unit.