* 1632810
* RII Track-2 FEC: Sustainable socio-economic, ecological, and technological scenarios for achieving global climate stabilization through negative CO2 emission policies
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* David Swanson, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2022
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award is a collaboration
among three institutions in Montana, Wyoming, and South Dakota including Montana
State University (MSU), University of Wyoming (UW) and University of South
Dakota (USD). The project will focus on developing a framework of CO2 mitigation
scenarios that would not create conflicts with food security and production of
clean energy. The project will offer novel experimental insights, modeling
tools, and technological solutions for improving the resiliency of food security
and ecosystem services to global climate policies. The modeling activities and
extensive field research is expected to generate new data and findings that will
lead to new insights into how biogeochemical modeling, agricultural economics,
carbon-capture and sequestration, water and biodiversity research can be used
within an integrated framework. The project will leverage existing networks and
hubs to integrate new data-streams into the modeling exercises. Through
involvement with Tribal Colleges and networking with existing programs with
Native American student populations, the project will serve to enhance and
diversify the STEM workforce in the participating
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will evaluate the consequences of a bioenergy, and carbon capture and
sequestration (BECCS) economy in the Upper Missouri River Basin (UMRB). In
seeking to evaluate how negative CO2 emissions, and the security and economic
costs associated with changes to energy policy, the project will address four
research objectives: (1) Develop empirical and numerical models to explain
recent trends in land use and land-cover change; (2) Apply biogeochemical
ecosystem and crop models to evaluate a set of stakeholder-designed regions and
scenarios for bioenergy production potential, and use new and existing data and
observations to quantify trade-offs between biofuel expansion and food security
and other carbon, soil and bioclimate variables; (3) Evaluate the feasibility of
BECCS within the context of carbon capture and storage, existing political and
institutional constraints, and policy frameworks affecting farmers and Tribal
Nations; and (4) Produce a synthesis report addressing the economic feasibility
of BECCS and provide the basis for knowledge transfer to collaborators at
national and international organizations. The collaborations with several
government agencies, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector, in
addition to a scientific advisory panel, provide high potential that the project
and its findings will transfer to national and international stages.