* 1632146
* EAGER-SUSCHEM:  Rare Earth Elements Recovery from Geothermal Waters Using Novel Electrodialysis Metathesis Process
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Lucy Mar Camacho, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 70,018.00

1632146&lt;br/&gt;Camacho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare earth elements are composed
of the fifteen lanthanide elements plus scandium and yttrium. These elements are
considered energy-critical elements, whose shortage could significantly inhibit
large-scale deployment of energy-related technologies that have the potential of
transforming the production, transmission, storage, and conservation of energy,
such as photovoltaic solar cells, wind turbines, and hybrid automobiles.
Geothermal waters are potentially significant sources of rare earth elements;
however, utilization of geothermal fluids for electricity generation seldom
focuses on the recovery of rare earth elements. In this research project, a
novel electrochemical membrane process, electrodialysis metathesis, will be
investigated for the first time to separate and recover high purity rare earth
elements from geothermal waters with minimal consumption of
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this 18-month project is to advance
the fundamental knowledge of recovery of rare earth elements from geothermal
waters using electrodialysis metathesis process. The research objectives are to
determine: 1) the metathesis reactions and selectivity of rare earth elements in
the electrodialysis metathesis process, and, 2) the mass transport mechanisms
and kinetic of rare earth elements in the electrodialysis metathesis process.
Metathesis, or double decomposition, reaction of ions passing through
alternating ion-exchange membranes and applied current has been applied to
separate ions commonly found in brackish water (i.e. calcium, sodium, magnesium,
potassium, sulfate and chloride), but has not yet been applied to concentrate
and recover rare earth elements. The intellectual merit of this research project
is to study, for the first time, the possibility of applying electrodialysis
metathesis to concentrate and extract rare earth elements from geothermal
fluids, particularly from geothermal wells and power plant brines. This will
contribute to save rare earth elements resources which are considered energy-
critical elements and will also protect the environment. If successful, the
development of this process will provide an alternative source of rare earth
elements in the US. The long-term education goal is to train future generations
of Hispanic STEM researchers on cutting-edge technologies for rare earth
elements and minerals recovery and reuse. The educational objectives are to: 1)
provide STEM students advanced skills on membrane process, and, 2) promote STEM
knowledge and engineering literary enrichment about energy-strategic materials
on K-12 Hispanic students. The PI will create a membrane separation laboratory
research module on minerals and energy-critical elements for the undergraduate
and graduate Environmental Engineering laboratory classes. They will also create
an interactive tool on energy-critical elements for K-12 Hispanic students.