* 1632772
* Collaborative Research: Instabilities, Dynamics, and Energetics accompanying Atmospheric Layering (IDEAL)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 477,495.00

The vertical structure of the free atmosphere under stable conditions from very
low altitudes into the stratosphere and above is often characterized by thin,
strongly stable, non-turbulent "sheets" separated by thicker, more weakly
stratified, and often turbulent "layers". The occurrence and morphology of
"sheet-and-layer" (S&amp;L) structures in the free atmosphere are believed to be
governed by larger-scale wind shears, gravity waves (GWs) at various
frequencies, local S&amp;L instability dynamics, turbulence and mixing, and
their interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S&amp;L structures have been known for
several decades to play important roles in optical and radiowave propagation and
in transport and mixing of heat, momentum, and constituents. There is also
evidence that these small-scale flow features can have important implications
for larger-scale dynamics, including instabilities and momentum transport
accompanying GWs propagating to higher altitudes. However, little progress has
been made in understanding the underlying dynamics or addressing the roles of
instabilities and turbulence, the interactions among them, or the consequences
of these flows for transport and mixing. In particular, the sources,
morphologies, and statistics of intermittent turbulence events in stable
stratification, and their dependence on environmental conditions remain to be
defined observationally (e.g., instability character and statistics of S&amp;L
thicknesses, turbulence structure parameters and scales, and mechanical and
thermal energy dissipation rates).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our lack of
understanding of these dynamics to date can largely be attributed to
observational and computational challenges in capturing the relevant atmospheric
structures and dynamics with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. The
research program IDEAL, Instabilities, Dynamics, and Energetics accompanying
Atmospheric Layering will conduct ground-based and in-situ measurements and
associated modeling combined to quantify these processes and provide key
insights into S&amp;L dynamics and effects throughout the stratified atmosphere.
The IDEAL will perform measurements either at Dugway Proving Ground (DPG) in
Utah or at Camp Guernsey Joint Training Center (CG) in Wyoming, where restricted
airspace is already assured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;For the first time, the dynamics underlying ubiquitous S&amp;L
structures in the free troposphere will be observed with multiple, coordinated,
high-resolution, in-situ sensors together with the integrated sounding radar
profiler and radiosondes from ~50 m to 4 km. Guidance and interpretation of the
observations will be aided by high-resolution DNS, enabling identification of
key dynamics and evaluation of theories and models of stratified turbulence,
mixing, and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A more
quantitative understanding of S&amp;L dynamics in the stably stratified
atmosphere will contribute to parameterization of their implications for
transport and mixing and improve predictive capabilities of relevance to many
research communities. These include applications as diverse as pollution and
fugitive emission impacts, micro-climate forecasting, and aviation safety. The
project will train two graduate students in state-of-the-art studies in
atmospheric science, aerospace engineering, and computational fluid dynamics.
Measurement technologies and techniques developed in this work will benefit
future field research campaigns and regulatory compliance mandates.