* 1632655
* Collaborative Research: Responsible Innovation with Genetically Modified American Chestnut Trees
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Robin Kimmerer, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 28,000.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proposal
focuses on the Genetically Modified American Chestnut tree (GMAC). Unlike other
emerging biotechnologies, such as gene drives, the GMAC has already been
subjected to multiple years of field testing; it is on the verge of entering the
regulatory review process for full environmental release. Two research teams
will engage with four core stakeholder groups: biotechnologists, indigenous
communities, non-governmental organizations, and policy makers. The research
team at North Carolina State University will engage in interviews and laboratory
ethnographies with biotechnologists, and the team will conduct a workshop that
will include significant interaction and dialogue among university researchers,
non-governmental organizations, and associated scientists in the public and
private sectors. It will also conduct a narrative policy framework analysis to
reveal the ways in which non-governmental organizations and other political
actors use narratives to govern the development and deployment of the GMAC. The
stakeholder workshop will lay groundwork for a highly collaborative future
effort to engage the public on an emerging technology; it will focus on the ways
in which public audiences might be meaningfully engaged to decide if and how the
GMAC should be released into shared environments. The research team at the
collaborating institution, the State University of New York College of
Environmental Science and Forestry's Center for Native Peoples and the
Environment, will conduct linguistic analysis and host a workshop in
Haudenosaunee territory to understand the ways in which the GMAC might intersect
with the history and sovereignty of indigenous communities. The collaboration
will create multiple engagements between university researchers and
underrepresented communities often excluded from decision-making processes.
Project personnel will produce research reports for stakeholders, presentations
for interdisciplinary academic conferences, and at least eight manuscripts for
publication in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on a common set of themes across four core
stakeholder groups, the proposed research aims to advance scholarship on
expertise, anticipatory governance, responsible innovation, and environmental
justice. Interviews of tree biotechnologists explore the anticipations, which is
related to governance in the broadest sense, of innovative technologies and
their regulatory environments. The collaboration with the State University of
New York researchers will co-produce knowledge addressing a public that is often
excluded, to incorporate perceptions of genetically modified trees and provide
insight into relationships among responsible innovation, indigenous expertise,
and environmental justice. The narrative policy framework analysis promises more
nuanced understandings of the activities of non-governmental organizations
beyond their positive and negative stances concerning genetically modified
organisms. The stakeholder workshop confronts experts with social science
research to test how their own perceptions change and to what degree they re-
imagine their own roles in engaging with the public about genetically modified
trees and other biotechnologies.