* 1632674
* Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum at Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, CA, August 1st - 3rd, 2016
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Matty Mookerjee, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,517.00

This award will support the fourth biannual Structural Geology and Tectonics
Forum, which will be held in August 2016 at Sonoma State University. The forum
will bring together specialists in structural geology and tectonics for oral and
poster presentations, field trips, and short courses. The meeting will include
three days of presentations that will include technical sessions that will
include topics such as quantification of fault slip, lithospheric deformation
and rheology, faulting and fluid flow, development of tectonic microstructures,
and geoscience education. Each session will highlight an important area of
current research and/or education, will be anchored by a distinguished keynote
speaker, and will showcase relevance of work on the topic. Poster sessions with
abundant time for full participant interaction will accompany each session. The
forum will be organized to maximize the exchange of ideas between participants
in open discussions. Sessions will provide ample opportunity to ask questions of
individual presenters, assess the current state of our knowledge, and consider
productive areas for future research. In addition to the formal meeting, there
will be pre- and post-meeting field trips to examine the geology of selected
areas in the San Francisco and Sonoma areas of northern California, including
the San Andreas Fault and related fault systems, as well as other areas of
geologic interest in northern California. Short course topics will include
preparing graduate students for academic careers in the earth sciences,
preparation of samples for analysis by electron backscatter detection (EBSD)
methods, teaching structural geology and tectonics, quantitative and statistical
treatment of structural geology data, new methods of constructing balanced
geological cross sections, and analysis of geologic and tectonics structures
using finite element modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forum is designed to
facilitate community building and personal interaction within different segments
of the structural geology community. It will bring together faculty from
research universities, liberal arts colleges, community and two-year colleges,
and minority-serving institutions. Importantly, there will be group discussions
on critical developments in structural geology and tectonics, and what future
research priorities should be. This community building effort will help create a
stronger, more vibrant group of scientists and help introduce graduate students
and advanced undergraduates to the structural geology and tectonics disciplines.
The setting will be particularly useful for graduate students, who will be able
to use the venue and informal nature of the forum to find out what research is
taking place at other institutions, meet a wide range of faculty, and develop
useful contacts which will be of great value to their future careers. Students
will also be able to present their own work in a friendly environment where they
can obtain thoughtful and useful feedback, as well as providing opportunity to
build new scientific collaborations. Abstracts, field guides, and short course
notes will be disseminated through a dedicated website that will be publicly
accessible.