* 1632274
* SBIR Phase II:  Touch and Feel a Virtual Object with Life-like Realism
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Steven Domenikos, TACTAI
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,110,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to create a suite of
consumer hardware and software products that provide realistic tactile feedback
to users who are touching objects in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality
(AR). As evidenced by the current proliferation of low-cost head-mounted
displays and motion tracking systems, three-dimensional interaction technologies
are revolutionizing how people interact with computers, media, and each other.
Since they are currently limited to vision and audio, endowing consumer-level
human-computer interfaces with high-fidelity tactile feedback will vastly
increase user immersion, making games more fun, online interactions more
effective, and tools more efficient. Consequently, this project has the
potential to expand the commercial reach of the burgeoning VR/AR market, opening
up myriad opportunities for companies particularly in the gaming, entertainment,
and e-commerce sectors. The innovation of this project also promises to enhance
scientific and technological understanding of haptic human-computer interaction
by establishing a new paradigm that blends minimal wearable hardware with
sophisticated software algorithms. Finally, commercializing novel interactive
technology also has the potential to help inspire a diverse array of young
people to pursue a career in the critical areas of science, technology,
engineering, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project aims to advance knowledge of low-cost technology
that can provide realistic tactile feedback to a user touching objects in VR or
AR: the project?s intellectual merits center on testing a new approach that
combines minimal haptic hardware and sophisticated software algorithms. The
research objective is to create a fully functional industrial prototype of a
wearable fingertip thimble and custom software that embody the proposed
approach. When the user's finger moves to touch a virtual object, a platform
inside the thimble will initiate contact with the fingerpad and press with a
force that varies with penetration distance, to render surface softness. A
thermal actuator will convey the object?s thermal conductivity and temperature.
When the finger slides along a virtual object, the user will feel its texture
via carefully designed platform vibrations. Specific research tasks to be
addressed include exploring haptic actuator options, building a library of
haptic object properties (HOPs) that can be applied to virtual objects, and
creating a communication protocol for exchanging haptic signals among devices.
This project is expected to yield a fully functional industrial prototype and
developer kits for the wearable fingertip thimble.