* 1632546
* Conceptual Analysis of Quantum Theories:  Developing a Realistic Interpretation of the Wave Function
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Alyssa Thornton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 201,986.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to engage in a
philosophical conceptual analysis of the wave function in quantum theories. The
investigator proposes to develop a realistic interpretation in which the wave
function is understood as providing a straightforward, objective description of
the world. Erwin Schrodinger initially proposed such an interpretation in the
early days of quantum mechanics, but it was rejected soon thereafter. Physicists
and philosophers of physics have been divided since then on whether such an
interpretation is possible. Some argue that although quantum mechanics generates
predictions that are consistent with observed phenomena, it is wrongheaded to
interpret it as providing a straightforward, objective description of the
inhabited world. Others argue that it is not so much that quantum mechanics is
not the right kind of theory to provide an objective description, but that
quantum mechanics implies such bizarre things; it is impossible to truly grasp
and understand it. Still others have attempted to develop intelligible
interpretations; however, none of them have been widely embraced by the physics
community. No doubt, scientists are very skilled at using quantum mechanics and
other quantum theories, but providing an interpretation that facilitates
understanding is something else entirely. The investigator will address two
obstacles to providing a realistic interpretation of the wave function. Her
doing so will serve to promote understanding of what is often considered
incomprehensible. It would capture the imagination of the public, sparking
further interest and engagement with science. The project will involve the full
participation of the investigator, a woman, in the STEM field of physics,
thereby contributing to a diverse STEM workforce and providing a role model in a
discipline in which women are under-represented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interpretation to be developed in this
project, called wave function realism, was taken up again in the 1990s by the
philosopher of physics David Albert. It is now becoming more widely evaluated as
it becomes better understood. It has the potential to provide an intelligible,
even visualizable account of quantum reality. However, there are two glaring
problems with it. First, wave function realism has thus far been developed only
in the context of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, opening it up to objections
that it may not be viable as an interpretation of relativistic quantum field
theories. The second problem is that many find it difficult to see how the
picture of fundamental reality offered by this interpretation is capable of
capturing the existence of ordinary material objects in the way they seem to
exist to human observers. This project will respond to both of these concerns by
developing an extension of wave function realism apt for interpreting quantum
field theories, and by using conceptual frameworks developed in contemporary
metaphysics and philosophy of physics to provide a novel and persuasive account
of the relationship between the quantum wave function and observable macroscopic
objects. Satisfying these goals will constitute a substantial step in the
development of wave function realism and could help bring physicists that much
closer to determining whether wave function realism is the correct approach to
understanding quantum theories.