* 1632929
* 8th International Workshop on Science Gateways (IWSG 2016)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Sandra Gesing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 04/30/2018
* USD 24,863.00

Science gateways are key to the utilization of the science infrastructure and
instruments for wider audiences because they provide a customized and intuitive
user interface. Hence they are critical components in enabling NSF's science
mission. Essentially, science gateways are a community-specific set of tools,
applications, and data collections that are integrated together via a web portal
or a desktop application, providing access to resources and services for
distributed data, distributed computing and instruments, so that the complexity
of the underlying infrastructure can be completely hidden from the users. Since
the challenges for science gateways are many-fold and interdisciplinary, and
there is considerable international activity around gateways, it is crucial to
bring together users, science gateway developers and science gateway providers
from across the world to share learnings and best practices. IWSG 2016 is the
8th workshop of the successful annual workshop series IWSG (International
Workshop on Science Gateways), an interdisciplinary workshop series located in
Europe that brings together these three groups and addresses various scientific
domains, e.g. life sciences, biomedical research, chemistry, physics. It forms
an international platform for discussing problems and solutions in the area, to
identify new issues, to shape future directions for research, foster the
exchange of ideas, standards and common requirements and push towards the wider
adoption of science gateways in e-Science. Visionary keynote speakers have been
chosen for IWSG 2016 with the intention of exposing workshop participants to
science gateway achievements to present their fresh views and visions on the
evolution and future of science gateways. Besides the keynotes, IWSG 2016
features talks, lightning talks, and demonstration sessions selected from
submissions in a peer-review process. Submission of a full paper may result in a
talk, submission of an abstract may result in a lightning talk or a
demonstration. A key element of this workshop is that the resulting abstracts
and talks will be made publicly available on the website, open-access
proceedings will be published in an indexed online journal. Open-access indexed
articles will attract more participants and will reach a wider community.
Additionally, IWSG 2016 partners with the US and Australasian workshop series on
science gateways. Authors of selected papers will be invited to submit a
significantly extended paper to a special issue jointly organized by the three
workshops. The talks, discussions and publications will provide a thorough view
on science gateways and corresponding technologies while setting the stage for
more intercontinental collaborations.

New technologies, simulations and experimental methods such as next-gen
sequencing or the SKA (Square Kilometre Array) telescopes have enabled
researchers to create huge amounts of data in extremely short times. The demand
for compute power and storage is met with a rise in provision of distributed
computing infrastructures (DCIs), such as grid and cloud infrastructures.
Despite the increasing availability of resources, neither the broad uptake of
these facilities and infrastructures nor the seamless integration of instruments
creating data are following the same pace. The main reasons for this lie in the
complexity of the human interface to these infrastructures and instruments.
Science gateways tackle this problem and offer easy and intuitive access to
computing infrastructures and instruments irrespective of their location. Since
the challenges for science gateways are many-fold and interdisciplinary, and
there is considerable international activity around gateways, it is crucial to
bring together users, science gateway developers and science gateway providers
from across the world to share learning and best practices. The IWSG workshop
series taking place each year at a different European city has attracted between
30 and 65 participants in the last years. The workshop and the workshop series
in general make a significant contribution to the research in the area of
science gateways. The output and discussions at IWSG 2016 will reflect the
current international standard in the area of science gateways, enable research
groups attain novel capabilities in the area of scientific data management,
collaboration and computing and enabled research groups attain standard of
international excellence by using a peer-review system to select the best papers
and abstracts only. The workshop aids in the creation of resources in the form
of novel approaches for the delivery and use of science gateways that will
facilitate a wider uptake of distributed and parallel methods. The partnership
with the US and Australian workshop series and the joint special issue enlarges
the outreach further to intercontinental level.