* 1632048
* NSF/EAR-BSF - Extreme Floods in Arid/Semi-Arid Watersheds: Paired Studies in Israel and the US
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 295,967.00

Extreme floods have significant societal and environmental impacts in arid/semi-
arid regions. However, these extreme floods occur only rarely in these dry
areas. Because they are rare events, it is a challenge to understand the root
causes for these floods and to determine ways to prevent adverse impacts. In
this study, flood response in a different watersheds in the Southwestern US and
Israel will be examined and properties of extreme floods in the two study
regions will be compared. Examining different watersheds in two geographically
distinct settings will allow the investigators to better understand the physical
mechanisms controlling extreme floods in arid/semi-arid regions. Results
obtained from this research will be of significant interest to a wide range of
users, including emergency management offices, regional planning programs and
flood forecasting offices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upper tail of flood peaks
for the Southwestern United States and Israel will be examined through a
combination of empirical and numerical modeling studies and through development
and implementation of new stochastic methods for rainfall and flood frequency
analysis. The research activities will center on analyses of extreme floods from
approximately 50 watersheds in the two study regions. Central to the analyses
will be the application of high-resolution radar observations to examine
rainfall variability in time and space for convective rainfall in the
Southwestern US and Israel. The principal questions that will be addressed in
this study are: 1) How does extreme flood response in arid/semi-arid watersheds
depend on temporal and spatial variability of rainfall rate? 2) What are the
characteristic patterns of storm structure and evolution for extreme flood-
producing storms in arid/semi-arid regions? Do they vary with storm and
watershed type? 3) What are the characteristic features of arid/semi-arid
regions in terms of extreme rainfall and flood patterns? 4) Are extreme floods
in arid/semi-arid regions associated with distinctive "mixtures" of flood
generating mechanisms? 5) What is the "nature" of the upper tail of rainfall and
flood magnitudes in arid/semi-arid watersheds?