* 1632193
* PFI:BIC: CityWarn  -A Smart, Hyperlocal, Context-Aware Hazard Notification Service System.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* V. Chandrasekar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,037,624.00

This project proposes to develop next generation warning systems that will
improve how people make decisions about hazardous weather, such as
thunderstorms, tornados and floods. Over the past two decades, cities have
become a locus of population and economic activity. Currently, over 80% of the
US population is concentrated in cities; furthermore, 80% of the Gross Domestic
Product in the United States is produced in metropolitan areas. The
concentration of people and economic activity makes cities even more vulnerable
to extreme weather events. Given these trends, effective hazardous weather
warning systems are critical. Hazard warning systems are service systems that
aim to minimize deaths, injuries, property loss, infrastructure destruction, and
service or business disruption. They include the sensors, forecasts, networking
and communications, public safety personnel and decision-makers, warning
information, and those who receive and respond to the warnings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CityWarn addresses three important issues for hazard
notification service systems: 1) Coordination and sharing. Public safety
agencies, private sector firms and the general public, all have their own hazard
warning needs, and over the years, sector-specific, and even hazard-specific
warning systems have evolved that may not share important information in
efficient and useful ways. 2) Data Explosion. There's an explosion of data from
all sources, from fine scale meteorological observations and traffic data, to
humans reporting weather on social media. This is challenging for decision-
makers who must quickly make sense of all of this information; and 3) Smart
phone penetration. There is now a proliferation of smart phones, plus a trend
toward hyperlocal, user-selected information. Warning systems have the potential
to personalize weather warnings in a way that can make warning response more
effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CityWarn will deliver user-defined, dynamically
changing alerts through a next-generation communications and networking
platform. The platform is linked to a cutting edge radar system that provides
high-resolution weather information on an urban scale of streets and
neighborhoods. A mobile app delivers user-configured, weather information. Our
integrated research will focus on Computing &amp; Sensing, Behavioral Sciences,
Engineered Systems and Testbeds. The Computing &amp; Sensing thrust will develop
new scalability, security, and functional advances within the communication and
networking platform, and integrate high-resolution radar products and user-
generated observations from the field. Through cognitive task analysis,
usability studies, and live experiments, behavioral science researchers will
learn how fieldworkers, such as utility workers, police, firefighters,
stormwater personnel, use and share weather information in the context of their
tasks and organizational constructs. Our engineered systems work will focus on
aggregation and sharing of sensed information sources, automation of warning
processes to address data overload problems, and user alert customization. By
developing a common platform for use by industry and public sector players, we
hope to break down silos between existing warning systems and increase inter-
agency coordination and improve response time and quality. The main test bed
will be a living lab in the Dallas Fort Worth metroplex where weather data will
be disseminated to users during actual severe weather events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary partners: University of Massachusetts, Amherst
(lead): Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Resource
Economics; Colorado State University: Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering;
Oncor Electric Delivery Company (Large Business, Dallas, Texas); TruWeather
Solutions (Small Business, Reston, VA). Other broader context partners are the
City of Fort Worth (Government, Fort Worth, Texas);CommPower (Small Business,
Camarillo, CA); and IBM (Large Business, Armonk, New
York).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is partially supported by funds from the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS).