* 1632538
* 2016 IEEE Mobile Data Management (MDM 2016) Conference: Student Activities Support; Porto, Portugal; June 13-16, 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation of 20 graduate and undergraduate students
enrolled at universities in the U.S. in the 17th IEEE International Conference
on Mobile Data Management (MDM 2016), which will be held June 13-16, 2016 in
Porto, Portugal (http://mdmconferences.org/mdm2016/). MDM is a premier
conference co-sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society. It encompasses all aspects
of mobility. Given the broad scope of mobility, MDM brings together researchers
from databases, networking and ubiquitous and pervasive computing, to present
and discuss the progress of science in these areas of critical national needs.
The conference relies on the experience of senior members of the community, but
also aims to generate fresh ideas, foster new collaborations, and expose new
people to emerging research opportunities. Attendance at MDM is very beneficial
to students. The conference makes for an excellent forum for exchange of ideas
and future collaborations. Students also have opportunities to meet
distinguished researchers and be inspired and mentored by them to follow careers
in mobile data management research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of student-
oriented events are planned: workshops, demos, panels, seminars, PhD forum, and
a special industrial forum. The availability of the travel support will be well
publicized throughout the U.S. research community. Students from
underrepresented groups (women, minorities and disabled students) are especially
encouraged to apply. The project has established processes for selecting the
awardees that would both benefit from participating in MDM and contribute to the
MDM program, especially the student-oriented activities. The MDM Conference
Proceedings are published by IEEE.