* 1632477
* Function and Evolution of Cognitive Monitoring and Cognitive Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Robert Hampton, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 07/31/2021
* USD 662,034.00

Metacognition is the ability to think about one's own thought processes, which
is critical for sophisticated cognition. For example, understanding how well you
know a new vocabulary word allows you to decide when to stop studying words as
they are learned. Metacognition involves both monitoring one's own ongoing
cognitive processes and exerting cognitive control over them. The proposed
research is significant because it will identify the role of cognitive
monitoring and control in complex nonhuman primate cognition. This comparative
research will advance knowledge of the evolution of complex cognition and of
what makes humans unique. The investigators will promote public education about
cognitive science and primate cognition through visits to K-12 classrooms and
developing an interactive kiosk at the local zoo that allows visitors to
experience the same cognitive tests performed by the primates on exhibit.
Throughout the research project, undergraduate and graduate students will
receive training for careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence from
psychophysical and memory tests indicates that nonhuman primates introspectively
monitor some cognitive processes, for example showing selective avoidance of
difficult tests. This research will determine the role of cognitive monitoring
for cognitive control in primates by examining which cognitive systems are
accessible to cognitive monitoring and which are not. Cognitive systems
accessible to cognitive monitoring will be distinguished from those that are not
by testing for dissociations between accuracy and confidence in tasks involving
multiple memory systems contributing to accuracy, and by using psychophysical
tests that dissociate motor and perceptual processes. Specific studies address
these goals through consideration of 1) the extent to which primates regulate
the amount of information they acquire prior to taking tests; 2) what
information primates monitor when making metacognitive judgments; 3) the extent
to which primates strategically exercise cognitive control only when necessary
and adaptively allocate monitoring among competing tasks; and 4) the role of
language-like mental representations in cognitive monitoring and control. These
comparative studies will determine the extent to which there have been changes
in cognitive monitoring and cognitive control through primate evolution.