* 1632534
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Nano-Electro-Mechanical Scanning Probes for Failure Analysis of the 10-Nanometer Node and Beyond
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Kwame Amponsah, Xallent LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,102,593.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
commercialize a breakthrough suite of probes and probing platforms for the
imaging and probing of semiconductor devices and thin film materials at scales
below 100 nm, where conventional techniques are challenged. The resulting
products will allow customers to perform a rich range of tests at the nano-scale
at costs and times that are a small fraction of those required for conventional
platforms such as scanning electron microscopes (SEM), scanning probe
microscopes (SPM), and a range of automated test equipment (ATE) based on these
technologies. Miniaturization across a range of sectors is driving the
development of devices and materials at increasingly minute length scales.
Multiple large-scale trends including mobile devices and the internet-of-things
are driving an unprecedented volume of engineering at the nanoscale. Much of
this is now dependent on the single-tip SPM that has evolved into a broad array
of instruments for the analysis of physical, chemical and electrical properties,
and to detect and isolate flaws. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Multiple Integrated
Tips (MiT) technology that is the focus of this effort takes a radically
different approach to enable an even richer range of tests at length scales
below one micron, with a faster, simpler and much more cost-effective platform.
Given a large install-base of capital equipment, we are focused on probes
coupled with adapters that plug into the most popular SEMs and SPMs. These
probes significantly expand the functionality of existing systems, and do this
with low barriers to acceptance given modest price points and seamless
integration into standard industry platforms. A portfolio of probes will be
developed to address high-volume needs across the semiconductor and thin film
markets, starting with 4-tip devices for the electrical characterization of thin
films, and configurable or non-configurable 3-4-tip devices for probing
integrated circuits. These will be offered in a variety of sizes and geometries,
currently from hundreds of nm to 65 nm, and extending below 10 nanometers within
a year. In Phase II, probe functionality will be enhanced to enable coupled
imaging and probing with design to operate in AFM mode. The portfolio of
products will be continuously expanded to additional two- and three-dimensional
geometries via co-development with lighthouse customers.