* 1632881
* RII Track-2 FEC: The Creation of Next-Generation Tools for Neuroscience - Noninvasive Radioluminescence Approaches to Optogenetics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Stephen Foulger, Clemson University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) proposal is a
collaboration between four institutions in South Carolina, Alabama, and New
Mexico, namely Clemson University, the University of Alabama Birmingham, the
University of New Mexico, and the University of South Carolina. The aim of the
project is to extend the uses of the experimental method of optogenetics, which,
since its introduction in 2005, has had a transformative impact on neurobiology.
This method allows experimenters to activate individual neurons or groups of
neurons, with high levels of spatial and temporal control, by flashing light on
them. One of the main limitations of standard optogenetics is the inability of
visible light to penetrate deep within living tissues. In this project, a system
will be developed to allow the use of low-dosage X-rays, rather than visible
light, as the activating signal. The project includes multiple opportunities to
involve students, especially members of under-represented minority groups.
Agreements are in place to host students from Winthrop University and Northern
New Mexico College, which serve highly diverse student populations, in existing
summer research programs at the research-intensive universities. The project
also includes plans for mentoring junior faculty, especially in proposal
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This multi-
disciplinary project involves step-wise development of novel experimental
methods. First, radioluminescent nanoparticles (RLPs) will be produced that emit
light when exposed to X-rays. The RLPs will be chemically modified to allow
specific covalent attachment to a genetically engineered membrane-bound opsin
protein expressed in neurons, ensuring close proximity of the two components for
efficient transfer of the light stimulus. The system will be tested (for
efficacy and the absence of undesired side effects) in cultured cells, then
brain slice preparations, and finally in intact animals (rats and mice). RLPs
will be introduced into animals by injection into the cerebrospinal fluid,
through which the particles may diffuse into the brain. The effects of X-ray
exposure on the behavior of immobilized and freely moving animals will then be
tested to verify successful activation of neural cells in the motor and auditory
cortexes.