* 1632602
* Broadening Participation in Teaching and Research in GENI: A Regional Workshop in March 2016
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 02/28/2017
* USD 45,531.00

This project supports hosting a Global Environment for Network innovations
(GENI) Regional Workshop (GRW) on March 7, 2016 at Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona. The intent of this GRW is to continue to broaden the GENI user
community, introducing new educators and researchers in the southwestern US
geographic region to GENI. Four GRWs in total are being planned in 2016, one
held about every three months (i.e., March (this workshop), June, September, and
December), scattered geographically across the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed GRW will promote innovations in research (e.g., network science,
security, services, and applications) and education (e.g., the development of
new coursework assignments and projects using the GENI infrastructure). The
workshop will enable participants to engage in a range of activities designed to
improve their understanding of and expertise in:&lt;br/&gt;1) Resources
available for utilizing GENI in undergraduate and graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;2) Utilizing the GENI infrastructure in experimental
research, including state-of-the-art developments in wired, wireless, cloud
computing, software defined networking, and network function
virtualization.&lt;br/&gt;3) Working through a variety of "hands on" tutorials,
obtaining network and compute resources at locations around the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop serves as a venue for the exchange of
ideas, a discussion of challenges of experimentation in research and classroom
settings, and a showcase for technology experimentation on GENI.