* 1632439
* SBIR Phase II:  Automatic Control of Landfill Gas Collection
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Laderer, Loci Controls, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,250,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to improve
the commercial viability of technology that enables the real time measurement
and control of landfill gas extraction systems. It has the potential to improve
the economics of the Landfill Gas to Energy (LFG-E) market and reduce the
environmental impact of landfills. With industry-wide implementation, annual
revenues from existing LFG-E projects could be increased by over $450 million.
The additional energy produced would power over 350,000 homes. Methane is a
powerful greenhouse gas (GHG), and the EPA estimates that in 2011, emissions
from landfills accounted for nearly 17.5% of generation from all manmade sources
in the US. The associated reduction in GHG emissions from improved landfill gas
collection would be equivalent to the emissions of over 3.6 billion gallons of
gasoline or 76 million barrels of oil. Furthermore, because of the improved
economics, this Phase II project could encourage the development of new LFG-E
projects, further expanding the size and value of this market. According to EPA
estimates, currently undeveloped sites could account for an additional 850 MW of
power generation, enough to power over 508,000 homes.

The technical objectives of the project are 1) to reduce the cost of various
system components, and 2) to address new product requirements related to third
party safety and other certifications that are demanded by the market. The
approach to cost reduction is to replace several commercially available off-the-
shelf components (specifically, NDIR gas sensors and an electrically-actuated
control valve) with custom designed alternatives that can meet product
functional requirements at a 30% reduction in cost. In order to achieve the
certifications that are demanded by the market it will be necessary to define
the specific standards and protection concepts that are applicable, and then re-
engineer hardware in accordance with these standards. This will involve a
combination of component substitution and system re-design, depending on the
specific protection concept(s) and hazardous location classification that are
identified. The research will build upon the reliability and product
functionality improvements that were a key outcome of the Phase I project, and
successful completion of the research goals will enable more widespread adoption
of real time control technology in the landfill gas industry.