* 1632191
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2016 ACM Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM MobiCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Yan Wang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The ACM MobiCom conference is the leading international conference focusing on
systems issues in the emerging area of mobile computing and wireless
communications. The topics addressed by MobiCom 2016 are at the core of the
current wireless network evolution. The conference attracts research
contributions spanning multiple disciplines, including wireless networking,
vehicular communications, personal area networks, ad hoc networks, operating
systems, distributed algorithms, data processing, scheduling, sensors, and
signal processing. In addition to the main session, the conference also provides
good opportunities to students and researchers to participate in panels,
workshops and demos that bring in brilliant ideas and applications in mobile,
wireless and ad hoc networking and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
travel grant program will help increase representation and participation of
United States-based graduate and undergraduate students at this conference, and
enable sharing of information and preliminary research results among
participating students. Participation of top conferences like ACM MobiCom is an
extremely important part of the graduate school experience, providing students
with an opportunity to interact with more senior researchers, and exposing them
to leading edge research in the field. The award will enable graduate students
who would be otherwise unable, to attend the main MobiCom 2016 and the
associated workshops.