* 1632941
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Sulfur Networks in Methanogenic Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Yuchen Liu, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 06/30/2018
* USD 257,410.00

Sulfur is an essential element for all known organisms and is present in amino
acids, nucleotides and coenzymes. Because of its distinctive chemistry, it plays
central roles in many essential biochemical pathways that likely evolved early
in life's history, possibly around or before 3.5 Ga. At this time, the O2
concentrations were very low. Many sulfur-containing compounds in cells react
with O2, and aerobic organisms possess highly conserved pathways for their
biosynthesis that are compatible with an aerobic environment. The methanogenic
archaea are an ancient lineage of strict anaerobes that never developed the
ability to grow in the presence of O2. Their sulfur metabolism is also very
distinctive, suggesting that they may possess pathways common before O2 became
abundant in the biosphere. Unlike aerobes, most methanogenic archaea only use
sulfide and elemental sulfur as the sulfur sources, and sulfate and other
oxidized sulfur compounds are seldom utilized. Recent biochemical and genomics
studies have revealed unusual features of their sulfur assimilation, including a
unique tRNA-dependent cysteine biosynthesis pathway and the absence of canonical
enzymes for Fe-S cluster and methionine biosynthesis. Thus, how sulfur is
incorporated in methanogens remains unknown. Understanding the sulfur networks
in methanogens will (i) advance our knowledge of the physiology of methanogens
and how they are adapted to their unique ecological niche; (ii) discover novel
enzymes and pathways of sulfur metabolism that may be common in other anaerobes;
(iii) provide a more complete picture of sulfur chemistry in life and the
evolution of the sulfur cycle on the early, anaerobic Earth; and (iv) guide
engineering of methanogens for production of methane, a carbon neutral biofuel.
Integrated into these scientific goals will be interdisciplinary training of the
next generation of scientists, including high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, and a young investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Sulfur is essential for the growth of all known organisms and is present in a
wide variety of molecules with different physiological functions. Consistent
with their strictly anaerobic lifestyle, most methanogenic archaea only use
sulfide and elemental sulfur as sulfur sources, and sulfate and other oxidized
sulfur compounds are seldom utilized. Recent studies have revealed novel
features of sulfur assimilation in the methanogenic archaeon Methanococcus
maripaludis. These include: homologs of many sulfur metabolic genes common in
bacteria and eukaryotes are absent; cysteine is biosynthesized by a novel tRNA-
dependent pathway; cysteine is not an intermediate for Fe-S cluster, methionine
and 4-thiouridine biosynthesis; and the sulfur transfer motif of the
4-thiouridine synthetase is distinct from that found in bacteria. These
discoveries greatly broadened our view of physiological sulfur chemistry.
However, many aspects of the sulfur transfer processes in methanococci remain to
be elucidated. An important question is whether sulfide is directly used as the
sulfur donor in various pathways or unique sulfur carrier proteins are involved
in sulfur relay. This research specifically seeks to understand (i) the
physiological sulfur transfer mechanism of tRNA-dependent cysteine biosynthesis;
(ii) the sulfur relay system of the archaeal ubiquitin-like pathway for tRNA
2-thiouridine biosynthesis; (iii) the enzymes and carriers in a global sulfur
metabolic network; and (iv) the intracellular levels of sulfide available for
these biochemical systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research on sulfur networks
will advance our knowledge of the physiology of methanogens and how they are
adapted to their unique ecological niche. Since sulfate was limited on the
early, anoxic Earth while sulfide and elemental sulfur were presumably abundant,
methanogens that assimilate sulfide and elemental sulfur as sole sulfur sources
provide a living window into the primitive sulfur metabolism and shed light on
the evolutionary processes of early Earth. Furthermore, most of our knowledge on
sulfur assimilation is based upon aerobes and facultative anaerobes. As many of
the known sulfur transfer enzymes from bacteria and eukaryotes are missing in
methanogens, the elucidation of sulfur relay in methanogens may guide discovery
of novel sulfur metabolic pathways that may be common in other anaerobes; this
will contribute to a more complete understanding of sulfur chemistry in life.
The broader impacts of this work include the following. (i) Unraveling S
metabolism in methanogens will assist modeling of their metabolism and
bioengineering the production of methane, a carbon neutral biofuel. (ii) It will
provide new insights into mechanisms to control emissions of methane, a potent
greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming. (iii) This study will develop
a new genome-wide screening method, which will be of great value for systematic
discoveries of novel pathways in an archaeal model organism. (iv) This project
will provide interdisciplinary training to the next generation of scientists,
including high school, undergraduate and graduate students, in microbial
physiology, biochemistry and genetics. It will encourage students to view the
entirety of the organism as it exists within a specific ecological context. (v)
It will establish a path to independence for the CoPI Dr. Liu, a young
investigator.