* 1632399
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated Design Methods of Antibodies Directed to Protein and Carbohydrate Antigens
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Monica Berrondo, Macromoltek
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,193,494.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop an online, fully automated
platform for designing high-affinity antibodies for use as potential drug
candidates. The success of antibody-based drugs has generated interest in faster
and more efficient methods to discover and optimize antibodies. The goal of this
project will be to develop and implement a computational method for producing
protein sequences of humanized antibodies. This will be achieved by providing
software that allows scientists to move some of their initial experiments into
the cloud, and achieve results much more quickly by using computational methods
saving time and cost for new drug development. In addition, it is anticipated
that this will improve the features of antibody-based drug candidates, enhance
the success rate of clinical studies, and accelerate the commercialization of
new drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop and
implement computational tools for designing antibodies that are more effective,
have fewer side effects, and have fewer problems in manufacturing. Current
computational design methods rely almost entirely on the expertise of scientists
iterating between experimental and bioinformatics approaches. An automated,
systematic approach will help researchers design better antibodies with desired
features in a shorter amount of time. The final platform will allow researchers
to incorporate experimental and structural information to develop better drugs
by determining which experiments will be necessary, assessing the viability of a
potential candidate, and identifying structural features responsible for the
molecule?s stability, immune response, and binding properties. The typical
antibody design process takes many months and tens of thousands of dollars. With
the aid of a computational process, this time can be cut back to the click of a
button.