* 1632963
* RUI: Reducing Permeability in Sands Using Biofilm-Forming Bacteria and Quorum Sensing Inhibitors to Create Uniform Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Mary Roth, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 242,073.00

The movement of water through soil (seepage) can cause dams and levees to fail,
which may be expensive to repair, cause extensive damage to infrastructure, and
possibly the loss of life. Traditional methods to reduce seepage can be cost-
prohibitive and create environmental concerns. Preliminary work has shown the
feasibility of using biofilm-forming bacteria to reduce seepage. Biofilm-forming
bacteria secrete a sticky material that connects the bacteria together, attaches
the bacteria to solid surfaces, and blocks the flow of water through the soil.
However, the reduction in seepage only occurred close to the bacteria's nutrient
source and seepage further from the source (more than five centimeters) was not
significantly reduced. Uniform reduction of seepage across a distance of at
least one meter will be needed if using bacteria to form biofilms is to be a
feasible method to reduce seepage and the likelihood of the types of failures
listed above. This project will determine whether a quorum sensing inhibitor (a
chemical that prevents bacteria from forming a biofilm) can be used to control
the location and timing of biofilm formation so that the biofilm develops
uniformly across the length of a one-meter column of sand. If successful,
further research would look at the application of this methodology to field
applications. In addition, this grant will support a partnership between
Lafayette College (LC) and one of the National Science Foundation's Engineering
Research Centers (ERCs)--the new Center for Bio-mediated &amp; Bio-inspired
Geotechnics (CBBG). The research partnership between faculty at LC (the project
PIs) and the CBBG will create an exchange of information that will allow the PIs
to develop their research programs in cooperation with the CBBG, and will
introduce a minimum of six undergraduate students to this new interdisciplinary
field of research. Because of high percentages of women students at LC, this
grant is anticipated to broaden research participation with respect to this
underrepresented group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop methods
to create a uniform growth of bacterial biofilm in sand by using quorum sensing
inhibitors and the manipulation of flow rates and nutrients. Initially,
Pseudomonas fluorescens, a known biofilm former, will be introduced to columns
containing sterile sand. The manipulation of the concentration and timing of
water containing nutrients and a quorum sensing inhibitor, Furanone 56--a
halogenated compound known to inhibit biofilm formation, will be used to create
a uniform distribution of bacterial biofilm in these soils. Once a protocol is
established for the development of a uniform biofilm distribution under these
conditions, columns will be constructed using non-sterile sand. Similar
manipulation of the nutrient and quorum sensing inhibitor will be used to
investigate whether the approach developed can stimulate native biofilm-forming
bacteria to create a uniform distribution of biofilm. A final testing setup will
confirm that native bacterial biofilm can be uniformly distributed along a one-
meter soil column. Through a partnership between LC and the CBBG, this grant
will also support innovative research by an interdisciplinary team of faculty at
a strictly undergraduate institution and provide robust mentoring and research
experiences for undergraduate students. The research partnership between faculty
at LC and the CBBG will create an exchange of information that will allow the
faculty at LC to develop their research in cooperation with the CBBG and will
introduce a minimum of six undergraduate students to this newly developing
interdisciplinary field of research.