* 1632368
* Incorporation Of Ethnic Minorities In Colonial Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Adela Amaral, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 40,784.00

Dr. Adela Amaral, of the University of California, Berkeley, along with an
international team of American graduate students and Mexican researchers, will
conduct research in the state of Oaxaca to investigate 1) colonial black runaway
slavery, or marronage 2) the process through which new ethnicities are created
in a colonial context, and 3) the disparity between how places were constructed
in colonial texts and how they were experienced by colonized people. These
questions will be investigated in Amapa, a town founded by black slaves escaping
plantation slavery during Mexico's late colonial in 1769. In the Americas,
including the United States, maroon communities have been characterized as
existing in obscured and marginal places such as swamps or mountains. This
research, however, focuses on a town that was not consigned to geographic
backwoods, but that was legally founded by black runaway slaves, or maroons,
with the approval of colonial officials. Despite their legal and spatial
relocation, however, the Amapa settlers were nonetheless perceived as maroons by
others and depicted in a hostile light. The process of incorporating the
maroonsinto colonial society rested on the assumption that they were capable of
becoming docile colonial subjects. Towns, in effect, were the cornerstones of
colonial civility. Paradoxically, the Amapa maroons continued to be portrayed as
savages" unworthy, and perhaps incapable, of "civilization". What has not been
examined is how the process of colonial incorporation was realized in the
everyday experiences of Amapa residents. This research is of broader relevance
because it provides a context and comparative case for understanding problems of
perception of minorities and their incorporation into a multi-ethinc societies
such as that which exist in the United States today. Similar processes are also
occurring currently in many other regions of the world.

This issue will be explored through a combination of archaeological
investigations, artifact analysis, and archaeometric work. Excavated materials
from Amapa will be compared to information recorded in colonial documents about
the maroons' social and material practices both prior to and after their
resettlement. Specifically, this project will focus on four categories of
evidence: a) settlement space, b) food acquisition, preparation, and
consumption, c) artifact use, and d) circulations of regional ceramics through
archaeometric analysis. The latter will examine the chemical content of selected
materials to track the provenance and movement of pottery. In addition to
contributing original, scientific data to maroon studies and Mexican colonial
history, the proposed project will involve the present-day Amapa community in
all steps of the research design, fieldwork, and interpretation. Training
American graduate students and local residents in archaeological thinking and
methodology is also a main objective.