* 1632676
* Collaborative Research: Improving Interdisciplinary Design Teamwork and Communication Using Boundary Negotiating Artifacts
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Kacey Beddoes, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 271,769.00

The importance of interdisciplinary teamwork skills for engineering graduates is
widely recognized, and increased interdisciplinary collaboration is needed to
solve the grand challenges facing society today. Although research from other
fields has demonstrated the value of examining the artifacts generated during
research and design, there are as yet no ethnographic studies of the day-to-day
practices of interdisciplinary teams in engineering education settings and the
objects they create and use in those practices. Therefore, this study is
significant because it fundamentally advances knowledge of interdisciplinary
teamwork by developing a typology of boundary negotiating artifacts (BNAs) in
interdisciplinary engineering teams. BNAs are artifacts and practices
surrounding them that coordinate perspectives, create alignment between team
members from different disciplines, facilitate transmission of information, and
allow team members to learn from other disciplines during research and design.
The project addresses a significant gap in knowledge about the actual practices
and artifacts generated during the course of interdisciplinary design projects.
By focusing on the daily, micro-level practices of engineers, a fuller, more
accurate description of communication processes emerges than those based on
interviews and normative descriptions of engineering work. Characterizing the
artifacts that facilitate or hinder collaboration ultimately contributes to
engineers' abilities to work with stakeholders from other backgrounds as
successful boundary-spanners. This study's contribution is significant because
it provides the first research-based educational materials that are designed to
improve interdisciplinary design teamwork and communication through the use of
an artifacts typology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: 1)
to characterize the ways in which use and non-use of artifacts facilitates and
hinders interdisciplinary teamwork and communication, 2) to develop a typology
of models of artifacts created and utilized in interdisciplinary teams, and 3)
to design, implement, and assess explicit incorporation of BNAs into
interdisciplinary engineering courses at Washington State University and Oregon
State University. Understanding the roles and uses of artifacts in
interdisciplinary communication requires collecting data through long term,
ethnographically-informed methods. Participant observers are collecting
ethnographic data from several interdisciplinary design projects. Ethnographic
data include observations and interviews with students and faculty members.
Based on results from the ethnographic data, a typology of BNAs and their uses
is being developed. Organizing the data in this manner allows other researchers
and instructors access into the project's findings. Utilizing results of the
research, BNAs are being strategically incorporated into engineering curricula
to optimize their use and effectiveness. Together, these outcomes build a vital
and solid foundation for future research on interdisciplinary communication
processes and associated improvement of interdisciplinary design courses.