* 1632596
* A Study of the Social, Ethical, and Policy Implications of Neuropsychological Research on Implicit Bias
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Oliver Rollins, University of Pennsylvania
* Fellowship Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 174,947.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A post-doctoral research fellow
will examine the social, ethical, and policy implications of neuropsychological
research on implicit bias. He will use a multi-sited qualitative methodology to
empirically trace and elucidate the material consequences and social
implications of implicit bias research. This project seeks to understand how
neuroscience research on implicit bias is produced and organized in the lab, and
to understand how social dynamics are conceptualized and operationalized in
neuropsychological research on implicit bias, with specific emphasis on the
promises and challenges of operationalizing race and racism at the
neurobiological level. These determinations will then be used by the research
fellow to elucidate the current and future interventions and policy
opportunities for neuropsychological research on implicit bias. The results from
this project will help better appraise ethical issues raised by the use of
neuroscience research in society, which will aid in development and
implementation of institutional and social policies on inequality and
discrimination. The project serves enhance the number of underrepresented
minority researchers focused on ethical, legal, and social impacts of science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one of the first empirical science
projects to examine how race is used and invoked in neuroscience research. It
will contribute substantially to the well established Science, Technology, and
Society (STS) research on genomics and race by providing insight into the ways
these new neuro-understandings of cognition and behavior impact experiences with
and practices of race. The study will address the growing use of bio-social
models of research by focusing on the way social dynamics are measured and
utilized in implicit bias research. The study will take the materiality and
social realities of the brain seriously; in so doing, it will describe how the
"social" is defined, operationalized, and transformed (or re-imagined) through
neuro-research. In addition, the project will help illuminate the ethical
challenges for neuroscience research and elucidate the advantages and limits of
interdisciplinary STS scholarship that is focused on the intersections between
the brain and sociality.