* 1632572
* The Co-Production of Water Pollution Control Policies and Socio-Technical Systems at the Urban-Agricultural Interface
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Ann Drevno, Drevno                  Ann            G
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2017
* USD 133,538.00

The proposed research will examine the linkages between water pollution, policy
implementation, societal conditions and technological developments in
California's urban-agricultural interface. The goal of the proposed research is
to inform the development of future water quality policy and to forge new
stakeholder collaborations. It will study water pollution control policies and
technologies designed for agricultural and urban landscapes. The proposed
research will explore the cultural and political contexts under which they
operate. It will study communities' value and use of these technologies. The
proposed research will provide information to policy makers about how agencies
that regulate agricultural and urban water are preparing adaptation pollution
control strategies. In addition, it will inform policy makers, citizens,
farmers, scientists and government officials concerning decisions related to
maintaining and improving clean water in urban-agricultural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address how the
regulatory structures for urban and agriculture landscapes have co-produced
different and uneven water quality systems. It will use historical and mixed
social scientific methods, including interviews, document review, participant
observation and a survey, to investigate issues of equity, governance, power,
scale, and technology relating to water pollution in California's urban-
agricultural interface. By employing a conceptual waterscape framework, The
proposed research will historically analyze the split trajectories of urban and
agricultural water pollution policies, social and technological systems, and the
spaces within which each developed. It will assess the distributional impacts
and uneven power relations between and within urban and agricultural socio-
technical systems. In addition, the proposed research will survey a range of
adaptation projects currently implemented in California's urban-agricultural
interface with the goal of characterizing emerging common property resource
governance regimes and their associated socio-technical systems.