* 1632604
* Standard Grant: Genetic Counselors and the Ethics of Translating Genomic Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Susan Markens, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 271,808.00

This proposed research will explore how genetic counselors are bridging the
world of science and the clinic in their role of providing information to the
public on genetic science. By asking what genetic counselors consider to be the
nuances and goals of their professional responsibilities, this proposed study
will identify the tensions of genetic counseling and ethical aspects of
translating genetic science to users. Findings of this proposed study will be of
interest to researchers, policymakers, genetic counselors, medical community,
and the general public. It will further scientific and public understandings of
what counts as legitimate expertise and knowledge. It will identify processes to
improve the public's uptake of science. In addition, it will contribute to
understanding how to ground abstract bioethical principles in everyday
encounters and to prepare professionals to respond to the ethical dilemmas of
translating genetic knowledge and technologies.

Utilizing a multi-sited qualitative research approach, this proposed research
draws on data from in-depth interviews, observations, and textual documents. It
will bridge and blend existing science studies scholarship on scientists'
research practices in the lab with analysis of practitioners' everyday decision-
making in the clinic. In so doing, the proposed study uses concepts of ethical
work, boundary making, and knowledge production to exam medical care in the
clinic. By focusing on genetic counselors whose specific role is to provide
information in order to facilitate individual decisions and expectations, this
proposed study will analyze genetic counselors' assessment of their role in
translating genetic knowledge and its consequences. It will develop a framework
through which to analyze other meso-level professions engaged in translational
medicine.