* 1632164
* I-Corps Teams: Chromanostics: Minimal-equipment synthetic biology diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Mark Styczynski, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Vitamin and mineral deficiencies in humans are the cause of millions of deaths
annually, primarily in developing nations with limited access to expensive
equipment (and in many cases, electricity). Governments and non-government
agencies that look to provide aid to address this malnutrition need effective
ways to measure which vitamin or mineral deficiencies affect different regions,
and which groups of people are most in need of their aid. Currently, measurement
of nutrient levels in blood samples is prohibitively expensive for these
organizations. In this project, the I-Corps team will confirm the commercial
viability of a novel diagnostic test that can measure certain vitamin or mineral
levels in human blood, and that can be economically deployed on site in
environments with little access to scientific equipment or electricity. The
proposed system will provide healthcare workers with information needed to
improve and maintain human health.

This project will involve customer discovery, market analysis, and the
development of a business model related to the proposed innovation. This team
intends to interview at least 100 potential customers to better assess the
desired characteristics and capabilities of our assay system, and to better
define customer segments as well as the characteristics of the desired customer.
The team will also strive to better define the market and our competitive
advantages, including the unique value proposition. Based on the findings of
this research, the team may elect to modify the characteristics of our assay
system, to better define target markets, and perhaps more accurately define the
proposed project's value proposition and its competitive advantages. The
proposed venture, should it be viable, would have a significant impact on
nutritional epidemiology work done globally. The proposed technology offers the
potential for an order of magnitude reduction in cost, as well as on-site
measurement of nutrient levels. Results will be available within a few hours or
overnight, compared to the current state of the art which entails refrigerated
shipping of samples with a week or more between sampling and receipt of results.
The lower cost of this approach places it squarely within the reach of
organizations performing nutritional epidemiology work, meaning that populations
can be sampled on a meaningful enough scale to allow informed decisions on
nutritional interventions. Moreover, this team expects this product to open a
new market for nutritional monitoring after interventions; since current
measurement costs are so high, tracking the success of a nutritional
intervention is not economically viable. The proposed approach could enable
tracking that would then allow for scientists and doctors to better understand
which of their interventions are working and where, ultimately saving both lives
and dollars in the developing world and beyond.