* 1632158
* PFI:BIC: RouteMe2 -A Cloud-Integrated Sensor Infrastructure for Assisted Public Transportation Services
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ethan Miller, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,042,146.00

This project will create a smart service system (RouteMe2) that will help
passengers with special needs use public transit safely and confidently. This
research addresses the needs of a large community of people who rely on public
transportation for independent mobility, and yet face difficulties using it. For
someone with poor vision or blindness, some level of cognitive impairment, or
for a senior citizen, taking a bus on an unfamiliar route can become a challenge
and a source of anxiety. The problem is often one of scarce access to relevant
information such as which bus to catch, which platform to wait on for a train,
when to exit the vehicle and how to negotiate a transfer. The smart service
system will facilitate and promote use of mass transit systems as passengers, or
their assistants, will be able to pre-register a trip, possibly involving
multiple legs and different means of transportation from multiple agencies. It
is envisioned that during the trip, passengers will receive context-aware
information that will help ensure that they are waiting for a bus or a train in
the right location; they are entering the desired bus vehicle or train car, and
that they exit the vehicle at the correct stop or station. Importantly,
authorized users (family members, friends, or assistants) will be able to
monitor the user's trip remotely, and receive warnings when an unexpected
situation occurs (e.g., when a user is waiting for a train in the wrong
platform, enters the wrong bus, or is stuck at a certain location). Anonymized
data about travelers can be relayed to the transit agency for enhanced service;
for example, a bus driver can be informed that a blind passenger is waiting for
the bus at a certain stop. RouteMe2 will promote increased travel independence,
and thus increased opportunities for education, employment, socialization,
participation, and leisure. It is expected that designing this type of human-
centered technology with a clear societal benefit, and interacting with the
participants in the user studies will be an inspirational and rewarding
experience for the students involved in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology will rely on
interconnected sensors that can track a passenger during a trip, and on services
that can provide just-in-time information to passengers on smartphones. This
project will develop and experiment with a sensor and information infrastructure
specifically designed to assist individuals with special needs while taking
public transportation. The RouteMe2 system will rely essentially on cloud
services, complemented with location data from an infrastructure of economical,
miniaturized sensors (iBeacons), as well as data from the smartphone carried by
the user, such as data generated by its GPS and inertial sensors. Individuals
from different communities of potential users of this system (senior citizens
and people with visual or cognitive impairments) will contribute to system
design by means of initial focus groups, and will test it with a series of
carefully designed user studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
partnership between the University of California, Santa Cruz (lead institution)
with faculty and students from its departments of Computer Engineering, Computer
Science, Computational Media and Environmental Studies with IBM Research as
primary industrial partner (Almaden, CA; large business) participating with its
Cloud, IoT &amp; Systems Lifecycle Analytics Group. Other broader context
partners are Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (San Jose, CA; special
purpose district) and the Vista Center the Blind and Visually Impaired (Palo
Alto, CA; non-profit organization).