* 1632965
* NRT-IGE: Mixed Reality Integrated Teaching Training for STEM Graduate Teaching Assistants
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Xin Yuan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,994.00

The training of current and future college and university instructors is
critical to any adoption of teaching or curriculum reforms. Yet graduate
students who are both trained for and pushed toward academic jobs remain
unprepared for a key responsibility of these jobs: teaching. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) Track to Florida State University will study the design
model and effects of a mixed reality integrated training program to provide
teaching practice to STEM graduate teaching assistants (GTAs). Integrating 3D
virtual reality and body sensory technology, this training program for STEM GTAs
will extend the research and development of current STEM GTA training by
enabling STEM GTAs to practice, observe, and reflect on teaching in a variety of
instructional settings, and it will provide them with a deep understanding of
teaching strategies through active experimentation and problem solving. The
resulting STEM GTA teaching training model is anticipated to improve teaching in
introductory STEM courses, to improve the persistence of underrepresented groups
in STEM disciplines by broadening the teaching practices used in introductory
STEM courses, and to address specific challenges and needs associated with the
variety of STEM graduate students. The project will employ an iterative
evaluation process to improve the model over the course of the award, and the
results will inform understanding of the effectiveness of technology-integrated
professional development for student instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will design and develop a mixed-reality integrated teaching
training program for STEM GTAs comprised of three components: (1) Environment, a
3D mixed-reality platform, called MILE (Mixed reality Integrated Learning
Environment), that enables the simulation and immersive practice of teaching in
a variety of contexts; (2) Activity, a semi-structured, MILE-based training
program that integrates formal group training sessions with informal self-
regulated teaching rehearsal; and (3) Simulated scenarios for skills
development, a collection of problem-based teaching scenarios for STEM GTAs to
experience in MILE, which will contextualize targeted STEM teaching skills.
Adopting a design-based research approach, this project will encompass iterative
design processes to refine the mixed-reality integrated teaching training
program, and examine its impact on the development of teaching self-efficacy and
competence in an interdisciplinary group of STEM GTAs. Data will be collected
via both qualitative and quantitative methods to build up a body of evidence on
the design generalizations and effectiveness of the mixed-reality integrated
teaching training program for STEM GTAs. The project team includes faculty from
diverse disciplines including educational psychology and learning systems,
computer science, chemistry, and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated
solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is supported, in part, by the Division of Undergraduate Education.