* 1632061
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Human-Environmental Interaction In a Lowland Tropic Setting
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 156,157.00

The aim of this interdisciplinary study, conducted by researchers at the
University of New Mexico (UNM) and Pennsylvania State University (PSU), is to
study human-climate-environmental dynamics among the earliest inhabitants of the
American tropics. The work is designed to investigate the hypothesis that major
behavioral changes in subsistence economies and technology were partially
mediated by demographic transitions, climate variability, and anthropogenic
environmental change on multiple timescales. The study of human adaptive
capacity in the face of rapid environmental change has become more urgent given
predictions of future warming and rapid population growth globally. This study
is centrally relevant to this societal challenge. It will promote teaching,
training, and learning, providing opportunities for collecting original data for
graduate and undergraduate student projects at the University of New Mexico,
Pennsylvania State University, and other institutions.

The team will conduct a range of archaeological, bioarchaeological, and
geochemical analyses on artifacts, skeletal materials (human and non-human), and
plant remains from two rockshelter sites in the Maya Mountains of southern
Belize with demonstrated occupations ranging between 13,000 and 3,500 years ago.
Researchers will also develop a parallel paleoclimate record from nearby cave
deposits with incremental geochemical analyses of stalagmites known to span this
interval. During this time, humans successfully adapted to tropical habitats,
responded to important changes in climate and ecosystem organization, coalesced
into the first sedentary communities, and developed agriculture. Precision
accelerator mass spectrometry radiocarbon dating of animal and human bone along
with stable isotope measurements will be conducted at the PSU Accelerator Mass
Spectrometry Facility and UNM Center for Stable isotopes. At PSU, variation in
internal bone structure in the lower and upper limbs will be measured using 3D
microCT scans to provide insights into human mobility and adaptation to changing
lifeways through time. At UNM, and in collaboration with climate science
collaborators, the team will develop a high-resolution paleoclimate record from
cave stalagmites in the region that will be anchored precisely in time with
uranium series dates. The climate backdrop will be used to interpret both
cultural and biological change.