* 1632236
* WORKSHOP: The Pioneers Workshop at the 2016 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 33,552.00

This is funding to support a Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 31 graduate students (16 of whom are from the United States and
therefore eligible for funding) from diverse research communities (e.g.,
computer science and engineering, psychology, cognitive science, robotics, human
factors, human-computer interaction design, and communications), along with
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place on March 7, 2016,
immediately preceding the 11th International Conference on Human Robot
Interaction (HRI 2016), to be held March 8-10 in Christchurch, New Zealand, and
which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is a single-track, highly
selective annual international conference that seeks to showcase the very best
inter- and multi-disciplinary research in human-robot interaction with roots in
diverse fields including social psychology, cognitive science, HCI, human
factors, artificial intelligence, robotics, organizational behavior,
anthropology and many more, and to this end the conference invites broad
participation. The theme of HRI 2016 is "Natural Interaction" which seeks
contributions from a broad set of perspectives, including technical, design,
methodological, behavioral, and theoretical, that advance fundamental and
applied knowledge and methods in human-robot interaction, with the goal of
enabling human-robot interaction through new technical advances, novel robot
designs, new guidelines for design, and advanced methods for understanding and
evaluating interaction. More information about the conference is available
online at http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2016/. This workshop will afford a
unique opportunity for the best of the next generation of researchers in human-
robot interaction to be exposed to and discuss current and relevant topics as
they are being studied in several different research communities (including but
not limited to computer science and engineering, psychology, robotics, human
factors and ergonomics, and HCI). This is important for the field, because it
has been recognized that transformative advances in research in this fledgling
area can only come through the melding of cross-disciplinary knowledge and
multinational perspectives. Participants will be encouraged to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development, to form collaborative relationships, and to
generate new research questions to be addressed during the coming years.
Participants will also gain leadership and service experience, as the workshop
is largely student organized and student led. The PI has expressed her strong
commitment to recruiting women and members from under-represented groups. To
further ensure diversity the event organizers will consider an applicant's
potential to offer a fresh perspective and point of view with respect to HRI,
will recruit students who are just beginning their graduate degree programs in
addition to students who are further along in their degrees, and will strive to
limit the number of participants accepted from a particular institution to at
most two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement
the conference, by providing a forum for students and recent graduates in the
field of HRI to share their current research with their peers and a panel of
senior researchers in a setting that is less formal and more interactive than
the main conference. During the workshop, participants will talk about the
important upcoming research themes in the field, encouraging the formation of
collaborative relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries. To
these ends, the workshop format will encompass a variety of activities including
three keynotes, a distinguished panel session, and breakout sessions. To start
the day, all workshop attendees will briefly introduce themselves and their
interests. Following the opening keynote, approximately half of the participants
will present 3-minute overviews of their work, leading into an interactive
poster session. This will enable all participants to share their research and
receive feedback from students and senior researchers in an informal setting.
The workshop organizers will facilitate the post-presentation discussion and
will encourage participants to ask questions of their peers during the
interactive break and poster session. After lunch, the remaining workshop
participants will give their 3-minute overviews, followed by presentation of
their posters during a second interactive poster session. Senior researchers (in
addition to those on the panel) will be invited to attend the student
presentations and poster sessions in order to provide feedback to participants,
and workshop participants will be invited to present their posters during the
main poster session of the HRI conference as well. The conversations between the
panel and participants will continue over lunch and during dinner.