* 1632659
* Workshop:  Collaborative Research:   The Great Plains: An Environmental History
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Kathleen Brosnan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2017
* USD 13,000.00

The proposed four-day interdisciplinary workshop on "The Great Plains: An
Environmental History" will be hosted by the University of Oklahoma in May 2017.
This interdisciplinary workshop will explore the environmental history of the
North American Great Plains from western Texas to southern Canada. This workshop
will enhance interdisciplinary dialogue in environmental studies. It will expand
academic knowledge of the Great Plains. The workshop will be free and open to
the public. It will be podcast and tweeted live. The published book will inform
contemporary policy debates on the environment. It will explain why certain
technologies succeed and others fail in regards to human habitation and resource
management. It will provide an opportunity to members of the public to consider
the Great Plains as a complex ecosystem that includes human interactions from a
historical perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed interdisciplinary
workshop will offer a scholars the opportunity to re-conceptualize the Great
Plains from the perspective of technological adaptations rather than only
ecological disasters. By exploring the elemental and persistent themes of water,
grasses, animals, and energy, the workshop will discuss the complex ways in
which shifting technologies sustained human life, advanced diverse societies,
and altered human relations with the region's myriad ecologies. The workshop
will integrate the perspectives and research methodologies of different fields
to forge an analysis of the Great Plains at the intersection of environment,
culture, and technology. The workshop will involve scholars from environmental
history, energy history, anthropology, geography, sociology, Native American
studies, and environmental science, policy and management.