* 1632740
* EAGER: Social Impact Modeling for Engineered Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eric Dahlin, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,991.00

Every manufactured product has three areas of impact: economic, environmental,
and social impact. Positive impact in all three of these areas leads to
sustainable engineering, such that the needs of the present are met, without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
Unfortunately, the social elements of engineering decisions -- meaning how they
affect the day-to-day quality of life of persons -- have not yet been the focus
of significant engineering design research. As a result, models to help
engineers evaluate the social impact of engineering decisions do not yet exist.
This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports an
interdisciplinary study (engineering and sociology) to explore how social impact
models can be created for engineered products, how the uncertainty associated
with social issues can be included in those models, and how the quality of those
models can be judged in a product development setting. Successfully completing
the goals of this research will bring US engineers one step closer to
sustainable design and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of social
impact is broad, unwieldy, and currently undefined as it relates to engineered
products. This research will begin to define the boundaries of social impact as
it is influenced by engineering decisions. The research team will perform a
number of tasks aimed at accomplishing this, including: (i) identifying social
impacts and social influences (i.e., ways social issues can affect the adoption
and impact of a product) in the literature and through interactions with
industrial partners and their existing products; (ii) integrating and
classifying these social impacts and influencers into broad dimensions or issue-
areas that are relevant for engineering design; (iii) identifying ethnographic
instruments or administrative data for measuring each social impact; and (iv)
executing empirical studies to understand modeling formalisms for evaluating the
social impact of products. The intellectual merit of the research is to
understand the most unknown, uncharacterized, branch of sustainable design --
the social dimension. This research is motivated by the reality that until the
social impact of engineered products can be modeled, fully sustainable design is
out of reach for the engineering community. Additionally, as engineers become
more capable of modeling the social impact of products, the complex tradeoffs
between economic, environmental, and social sustainability will begin to
dominate the discussion. Successful research by the team will enable product-
specific tradeoffs between economic, environmental, and social sustainability to
be explored numerically using traditional trade-space exploration methods.