* 1632211
* EarthCube RCN IS-GEO: Intelligent Systems Research to Support Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Suzanne Pierce, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 341,398.00

This project will foster collaborations between computer scientists and
geoscientists that will advance research in both areas. Geoscience problems are
complex and often involve data that changes across space and time. Frequently
geoscience knowledge and understanding provides valuable information and insight
for problems related to energy, water, climate, agriculture, mineral resources,
and our understanding of how the Earth evolves through time. Simultaneously,
many grand challenges in the geosciences cannot be addressed without the aid of
computational support and innovations. Intelligent and Information Systems (IS)
research in computer science includes a broad range of topics and computational
methods such as knowledge representation, information integration, machine
learning, robotics, adaptive sensors, and intelligent interfaces. IS research
has an important role to play in accelerating the speed of scientific discovery
in geosciences and thus in solving challenges that cannot be addressed by other
means. Similarly, many aspects of Geosciences (GEO) research pose novel large-
scale problems for IS researchers to improve and validate their methods.
Intelligent Systems for Geosciences (IS-GEO) represent an emerging community of
interdisciplinary researchers producing fundamental new capabilities for
understanding Earth systems and how the application of IS technologies can
cultivate key new developments in both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EarthCube Research Coordination Network for Intelligent Systems for Geosciences
(IS-GEO RCN) will catalyze collaborations to enable advances in our
understanding of Earth systems through innovative applications of intelligent
and information systems to fundamental geosciences problems. The goal of the IS-
GEO RCN is to leverage expertise and generate interactions between both the
geosciences and computing sciences communities to provide advanced scientific
capabilities. To enable the network, the IS-GEO RCN will host meetings and other
activities that: (1) foster an active and broad-based community across GEO and
IIS areas; (2) identify barriers to research, such as terminology differences
among the disciplines involved and highlight knowledge gaps that hinder
collaboration across the disciplines; (3) establish and enhance communication
channels between GEO and IS researchers; (4) defining grand challenges in
geosciences that are well suited to IS techniques; and (5) encourage robust,
long-term collaborations. Furthermore, the educational component aims to
identify new approaches to teaching students in this new interdisciplinary area,
seeking to raise a new generation of scientists that are better able to apply IS
methods and tools to geoscience challenges of the future. By providing avenues
for IS and GEO researchers to work together the IS-GEO RCN will serve as both a
point of contact, as well as an avenue for educational outreach across the
disciplines for the nascent community of research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The initial efforts are focused on connecting the communities in ways
that help researchers understand opportunities and challenges that can benefit
from IS-GEO collaborations. The uncertain, heterogeneous and disparate nature of
geoscience data paired with recent IS advances and increases in observational
data offer unique opportunities for new approaches and discoveries through joint
efforts. The IS-GEO RCN will jumpstart interdisciplinary research collaborations
in this emerging new area so that progress across both disciplines can be
accelerated.