* 1632711
* SBIR Phase II:  Sustainable Rare Earth Element Recycling from Neodymium Magnets
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Casey McNeil, Rare Resource Recycling
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2019
* USD 898,538.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will implement a
proprietary rare earth extraction process on recycled NdFeB magnets at pilot
scale to prove commercial production feasibility. By recovering rare earth
elements (REEs) readily available in waste streams, this effort will help create
a secondary source of these critical elements, thereby reducing U.S. dependence
on an unstable, limited supply from China. This will, in turn, lay the
groundwork necessary for the production of cutting-edge technologies reliant
upon these materials to return to the U.S. The Nd and Dy elements which are
recovered from this process are the critical components that increase the
efficiency of electric motors by up to 30%. The availability of these resources
will also significantly improve the vertical integration of manufacturing for
national security technologies that depend heavily upon REEs, such as guided
missile actuators and jet-fighter control panels. This project will also impact
the electronics recycling sector by creating a new, reliable revenue stream for
electronics recycling companies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The process to reclaim
REEs from NdFeB magnets is simple and energy-efficient, with a minimal
environmental footprint. The Phase I SBIR project demonstrated the feasibility
of developing the process beyond laboratory scale to pilot scale, improved the
purity of the end product and reduced the amount of waste from processing. The
Phase II project will focus on the following objectives: 1) designing a scale up
strategy and building a pilot scale production plant; 2) optimizing the pilot
scale production process; 3) maximizing product recovery at pilot scale; 4)
designing a wastewater treatment and reuse strategy; and 5) minimizing residual
contamination in the final products. To achieve these Phase II objectives, we
will develop process parameters for maximum yield, maximum purity, and minimum
processing times at pilot scale. The first stage will be to successfully obtain
production yields of 90+% and purity levels of 99+% in pilot scale batches. For
the second stage, we will focus on scaling production to prove commercial-scale
feasibility, with ideal product yields and purities of 95+% and 99+%
respectively. Throughout all stages, we will focus on understanding and treating
the accompanying waste products, including wastewater and residual metal
impurities.