* 1632424
* SBIR Phase II:  Automatic Vascular Flow Reconstruction with Adaptive Three-Dimensional Doppler Ultrasound
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Xin Kang, Sonavex, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,399,940.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project includes the reduction in severe patient
morbidity and elimination of hundreds of millions of dollars of expenditures by
the U.S. healthcare system each year on revision surgeries and unnecessary
procedures associated with late detection of post-surgical blood clots. Surgeons
have the ability to prevent these catastrophic events, but only if the onset of
the clot can be detected in a timely manner. Currently, of the patients who form
clots after the targeted surgeries, half will suffer from a surgical failure due
to the shortcomings of current modalities. This technology gives clinicians the
ability to non-invasively track changes in blood flow within critical vessels to
enable intervention prior to any compromise in health and prevent a majority of
these catastrophic incidents. Beyond significant decreases in patient suffering
and morbidity, such interventions will have an enormous positive economic impact
on the health care system. This technology can also substantially improve
clinical understanding of the clotting process and possibly enable non-invasive
therapeutic treatments for these patients who otherwise would receive
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project offers significant
intellectual and scientific merit associated with new methods of ultrasound flow
analysis. The objective of this work is to develop a system that is able to
collect a 3D volume of ultrasound data and automatically extract the blood flow
data in the region of interest by detecting an implantable component. This novel
approach to measuring vascular flow will be the first to enable detection of
localized post-operative clot formation rather than detecting clot-related
issues via delayed and indirect methods that leave patients at risk for surgical
failures. This technique can allow for intervention earlier than all other
available methods, thus improving patient outcomes and reducing hospital costs.
Furthermore, this method enables automatic detection of critical changes in
blood flow, eliminating the risk of human error. Lastly, dissemination of the
technology developed in this proposal represents an important milestone towards
the creation of simpler, more automated ultrasound systems that can place this
non-invasive, non-ionizing modality in the hands of non-expert clinicians for
use in a broader spectrum of medical applications.