* 1632410
* SBIR Phase II:  Data-Driven Decision Support Services for Emergency Department Operations
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Kenneth Lopiano, Roundtable Analytics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,409,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is very significant. Suboptimal operational
decision-making in emergency departments and hospitals leads to inefficiencies
that result in excessive patient wait-times, the diversion of ambulances to
other emergency departments, wasted resources and patients who either leave
before being treated or against medical advice. By connecting modern analytical
approaches, including statistical modeling and systems engineering methods, to
real-time data routinely collected by hospitals, the proposed project promises
to result in a tremendously valuable analytics platform that will assist
administrators in making dozens of operational and staffing decisions each day.
This informed decision-making will not only improve hospital efficiency, it will
lead to both healthier and more satisfied patients and simultaneous dramatic
increases in revenue and profit. The technology proposed will have the potential
to add significant value to the approximately 5,000 hospitals in the U.S., often
on the order of millions of dollars annually. Hospitals and health systems now
realize the value of effective analytics, and the analytics platform proposed
here will be an obvious investment for any emergency department or hospital
whose goal is to provide the best care to its patients at lower costs.

The proposed project promises to yield a set of decision-support applications
upon which emergency departments and hospitals will base their decisions each
day. Substantial investments by hospitals and health systems on information
technology, and in particular, electronic health records, have set the stage for
evidence-based, data-driven decisions. These decisions will effectively leverage
real-time data along with analytical methods such as statistical forecasting and
event-simulation modeling. In particular, this proposed project will develop
software applications, based on these analytical methods and linking to real-
time data sources, tailored to emergency departments and hospitals. This project
will involve 1) addressing the real-time needs of hospital operational decision-
makers, 2) further developing a statistical and simulation modeling platform to
inform these real-time needs, specifically reflecting emergency departments and
whole hospitals, and 3) ultimately ensuring that actionable insights are
delivered in a timely and intuitive manner to key stakeholders. These actionable
insights that derive from the data and sophisticated methods must be delivered
to the right decision-maker at the right time and in the right format, but will
then have the capacity to substantially improve both the quality and efficiency
of care-delivery throughout the hospital.