* 1632199
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Advanced Composite Materials for Athletic Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Philip Taynton, Mallinda, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,408,623.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is for the
development of scaled processes for the industrial manufacture of end-user
moldable advanced composite materials for use in protective athletic equipment.
Currently, protective athletic equipment and accessories must be produced using
industrial manufacturing techniques that have high tooling costs. As a result,
manufacturers produce a small range of predetermined sizes and shapes, which do
not provide a custom fit for end users. In the case of athletic gear, there is a
growing market for hard-shell protective equipment which can be custom molded
for a better fit. Polyimine polymers and advanced composites offer a compelling
blend of strength and malleability in order to create more user-friendly
lightweight and durable advanced composites that may be shaped by the end-user.
In addition to creating greater user customization, both the virgin polyimine
polymer, and advanced composites that incorporate polyimines, are intrinsically
recyclable in a closed-loop, low-energy, solution-based system. The total U.S.
composite materials market is $25 billion, representing 36% of the global
composites sector. Polyimine polymers and advanced composite derivatives will
reduce environmental waste and increase manufacturing efficiencies across a
broad range of vertical markets in the composites sector including personal
protective equipment, aerospace, automotive, and infrastructural
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project derives
from the development of the unique chemistry of polyimine polymers. Polymers can
be broadly grouped into two categories, thermosets and thermoplastics.
Thermosets are strong due to the chemical characteristics of the plastic.
However, once cured, thermosets cannot be reshaped. As a result, thermosets are
neither repairable, nor are they efficiently recyclable. In contrast,
thermoplastics, which are weaker than thermosets, may be molded and remolded.
However, remolding requires very high temperatures. Polyimine polymers represent
a new class of moldable and remoldable thermoset materials. Importantly, these
polymers combine high rigidity and tough mechanical properties with mild molding
temperatures. This Phase II research project will include scaled processes for
the industrial manufacture of end user moldable composite materials that are a
maximum of one-quarter inch in thickness and meet industry standards for limb
joint protective equipment. The Phase II effort will also include a variety of
types of material and mechanical testing, both in-house and at certified
laboratories, in addition to extensive efforts at proving out manufacturability,
as well as pilot production.