* 1632480
* Genetic Technology Development and International Security Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Noah Tamarkin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 279,821.00

Genomics has become increasingly important for law and policing, as evidenced by
the proliferation of national criminal DNA databases throughout the world. New
national criminal DNA databases, once limited to high-income countries, are
becoming widespread in middle-income countries and they are also beginning to be
established in low-income countries. But DNA databases require infrastructural
resources and expertise to implement and maintain. How are places that are
marked by capacity challenges and conditions of scarcity establishing and
running DNA databases under these conditions, and how might their strategies
inform the global future of this phenomenon? How does DNA become transformed
into something that is reliable and useful in national legal contexts and in
international security efforts, and what are the consequences for how science
and citizenship are lived and experienced? This research project will address
these questions by investigating the intersection between genomics and law,
related infrastructural investments, and the networks of people who must work
together to transform genetic data into legally legible
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Noah Tamarkin of the Ohio State University,
explores how the use of genetic technologies in criminal law might change
experiences and forms of citizenship as well as social and cultural
understandings of science and what constitutes reliable evidence. The research
will investigate global criminal forensic genetics as an emerging citizenship
formation with interconnected local, national, and transnational influences and
implications. The research will take place in South Africa, a middle-income
country that has just begun to implement a new law that creates an expansive
national criminal DNA database for which the national police force will have
primary responsibility. The project will use ethnographic methodologies to
consider how a cross-section of people from diverse social and political
backgrounds who have different forms of expertise and different ideas about the
meaning of science and justice are brought together through their roles in
enacting South Africa's investment in forensic genetics. The project will
include police, forensic laboratories, courtrooms, and NGOs and private
companies that contribute to forensic genetics training and advocacy. South
Africa is an ideal case study because their national investment in genomics for
law enforcement is new and actively taking place throughout the research period.
South Africa's current investments raise important questions about the global
scope and scale, and the local specificity and variation, of intersections
between genomics and law. This research therefore offers an actively emerging
view into how DNA comes to matter in new ways as it moves out of research
laboratories and into a broader public sphere.