* 1632174
* Understanding Confidence: Eyewitness Testimony as a Model Case
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Chad Dodson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2019
* USD 240,759.00

Everyday situations require individuals to understand another person's level of
confidence in his/her memory. For example, when a spouse says, "I'm pretty sure
I locked the door" do you interpret that statement as indicating that you should
double check the lock or not. Interpretation of such expressions of confidence
present important cognitive challenges and can be influenced by a number of
different factors. The cognitive biases that can influence these interpretations
of confidence and the approaches to expressing confidence that might limit the
impact of these biases are important areas of research with wide-ranging
applications. The current project examines these factors in the context of
eyewitness identification. When an eyewitness identifies someone from a lineup
and states, "I'm pretty sure it's him," how do we know that police, jurors and
others will interpret this expression of confidence in the way that it was
intended? While a large literature exists on eyewitness confidence and (a) its
relationship with identification accuracy, (b) its influence on jurors, and (c)
its vulnerability to influence from post-identification feedback, very little is
known about how other people understand the verbal expressions of eyewitness
confidence. The outcomes of this project in terms of a more thorough
understanding of the cognitive factors that influence interpretations of
confidence are anticipated to have broad implications for settings, such as
judicial proceedings, that involve the interpretation of another person's
confidence.

This project investigates how people understand an eyewitness's verbal
expression of confidence in the accuracy of his/her identification from a lineup
of faces. There are three goals: first, the project examines how the particular
content of an eyewitness's justification for his/her level of confidence (e.g.,
"I'm pretty certain it's him because I remember his chin") influences how people
understand the eyewitness's confidence-statement. Second, there are a variety of
cognitive biases that cause individuals to misinterpret the verbal expressions
of certainty. For example, mounting research on the 'outcome-severity bias'
shows that the identical verbal probability phrase (e.g., "it is somewhat
likely") is interpreted as denoting a higher numerical likelihood when that
phrase refers to more severe events rather than less severe events. The project
considers whether eyewitness expressions of confidence are vulnerable to
misunderstandings that are caused by the same kinds of cognitive biases. Third,
the proposed experiments investigate whether the harmful influence of these
cognitive biases can be mitigated by expressing confidence numerically instead
of verbally. Overall, the project will fill a profound lack of knowledge about
how people understand eyewitness confidence in a lineup identification.
Moreover, the knowledge that verbal expressions of certainty are vulnerable to
misinterpretations may: (a) guide police to obtain a numerical estimate of
certainty from eyewitnesses; and (b) alert police, lawyers, judges and jurors to
potential pitfalls about interpreting verbal expressions of certainty.