* 1632420
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel, Accurate and Reproducible Platform for the Developability Assessment of Protein Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Belinda Pastrana, Protein Dynamic Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,425,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address ALL of the factors attributing to
protein aggregation by determining the: size, identity, extent, mechanism of
aggregation and stability, thus addressing Biopharma industry needs. This
information is critical to the development of drug pipeline contributing to a
$190 BN biologic's market where $87BN in first generation biologics face patent
expiration before 2020. A successful technical approach for its implementation
will provide essential information for decision making towards which candidates
will enter the market, thus increasing the Biopharma valuation and ensuring
supply of drugs to patients. In the end, improving the quality of life of
patients with chronic diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
address the need for a multivariate high-throughput technology to address the
risk of protein aggregation, that when adopted in R&amp;D, will increase
pipeline approvals, reduce late stage withdrawals and total costs of drug
development. Average R&amp;D development costs for the mere 1% of candidates
reaching FDA approval have risen to $2.6 BN per product. Protein therapeutic
development needs to be guided by a full understanding of protein stability and
aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;Research objectives are to: develop our innovative
First-in-Class high throughput platform for screening protein therapeutics;
develop original software capable of deciphering protein aggregation mechanism,
size, identity and extent of aggregated protein and product stability;
commercialize the innovative technology platform. Fully automated evaluation of
protein candidates during early R&amp;D phase will be conducted. Best-in-class
image acquisition technology will be employed towards this end, using a label
free chemical mapping technology, dedicated software using auto recognition
algorithms, and correlations to decipher protein aggregation. We through the use
of its breakthrough technology will determine: the aggregate free candidate
under various stressor conditions, optimum formulation conditions for the
protein therapeutic, the most stable candidate, and electronic data reporting
that establishes accuracy, reproducibility, critical quality attributes of the
protein product.