* 1632761
* Graduate Research at Michigan State University to Push the Intensity Frontier and Support Accelerator Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven Lund, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 201,000.00

This project will push the frontier in intensity of ion beams produced by
superconducting ion accelerators. High accelerator performance requires a
bright, continuous source of ions, and for that ion accelerators typically use
sources of high-charge-state ions which can be efficiently accelerated. Such
sources, called Electron Cyclotron Resonance or ECR sources, are complex with
rich physics to be explored. In this project, factors leading to unreliable ECR
source operation will be studied. Diagnostics will systematically gather
information to better understand, mitigate, and control reliability issues. This
research will be carried out at Michigan State University, where it will help to
improve performance of existing ion sources. This project will train one PhD
graduate student in accelerator physics technology.

To maintain a stable and compact beam phase-space for reliable machine operation
of continuous wave superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) linacs, ECR sources
must continuously inject ion beams with low drifts and stable output. In this
project, ECR sources at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL)
and the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) will be instrumented to measure
correlations of temperature in key system components with the current output. A
data logging system will be developed, drift correlations identified, and
mitigations will be tested. Fast plasma instabilities are also observed in high
intensity ECR operation and can lead to ~25% or more oscillations in beam
current with potential machine damage. These instabilities will be studied with
the FRIB and NSCL sources using higher-charge-state ions, where understanding of
the instability will be improved through analytical studies, development of
simple parametric models, and synergetic collaboration with other research
groups. The timeline of the project will cover three years and is consistent
with early commissioning activities on the FRIB front-end and leverages FRIB
hardware.