* 1632854
* RII Track-2 FEC: Assembling Successful Structures: Lignin Beads for Sustainability of Food, Energy, and Water Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Bert Lynn, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 10/31/2021
* USD 3,999,625.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award is a collaboration
among three institutions in LA and KY -- Louisiana State University Agricultural
Center, Louisiana State University A&amp;M College, and the University of
Kentucky. The research is focused on lignin chemistry - lignin is a class of
complex organic polymers found in plants, particularly wood. The project will
prepare synthetic lignin and deconstruct synthetic and native lignin into value-
added products and functional materials. This fundamental research will provide
the foundation for future technologies that would enable sustainable food,
energy, and water systems. This multidisciplinary project supports sixteen
faculty at early, middle, and advanced career levels, thirty graduate and 16
undergraduate students at all three participating institutions. Participants
will develop curricular modules for rural high schools on sustainability science
topics and implement through the involvement of vocational agriculture teachers
and 4-H curricula. Project activities include public outreach to promote
awareness of the connection between agriculture and science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
synthesize model lignin compounds via biomimetic polymerization, deconstruct
both the synthetic and native lignin by thermo or biochemical breakdown, and
study the interfacial chemistry of lignin products using advanced experimental
techniques and molecular simulations. Research tasks include: (1) Development of
solid-phase lignin synthesis chemistry to build synthetic models composed of
specific monolignol sequences; (2) Deconstruction of model lignin oligomers in
ionic liquids with the end goal of developing a novel biocatalysis route for
effective fractionation and deconstruction of natural lignin in ionic liquid
medium; (3) Deconstruction of model lignin using ultrafast cooling of lignin
products obtained by flash pyrolysis and low temperature matrix isolation
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance techniques; and (4) Manipulation of the
interfacial surface properties using thin film technology, nanoparticles, and
molecular simulation to gain insight into interactions, properties, and
applications of lignin derivatives at advanced materials interfaces. This
interdisciplinary project will provide graduate student training, and
undergraduate research experience and leverage and expand ongoing LA, KY EPSCoR
initiatives in technology transfer to industry. The research and educational
collaborations will lead to long-lasting impacts in both LA and KY. The
project's workforce development plan includes modular curriculum development for
rural high school students implemented through vocational agriculture teachers
and 4-H curricula.