* 1632891
* RII Track-2 FEC: Probing and Understanding the Brain: Micro and Macro Dynamics of Seizure and Memory Networks
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Cooperative Agreement
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Twelve researchers across three institutions
in three states (Louisiana, Arkansas, and Alabama) will collaborate on this
brain research, and develop a foundation for the region as a hub for
interdisciplinary, collaborative research activity in the neurosciences. This
work will focus on understanding the initiation of epileptic brain seizures and
longer-term impacts on brain function such as memory. Epileptic seizures
directly impact roughly 1% of humans, and have indirect impacts on loved ones
and caregivers as well as economic impacts on society. Epilepsy has been called
a ?window to brain function? because the condition impairs different brain
functions depending on the location of the seizure in the brain and the impacted
network of neurons, and because it provides a unique opportunity to study an
impaired brain?s function over time and space. The project will develop
minimally invasive implantable sensors that can be used for monitoring before,
during, and for several months following seizure events. Researchers will relate
changes occurring during seizure events with those observed in the intervals
between events. The project includes hiring four new faculty, design and
purchase of equipment, development of new undergraduate and graduate courses,
recruitment and training of a diverse student population to better reflect the
regional community, and new student research and workforce opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The activities of the
team across three institutions (Louisiana Tech University, the University of
Arkansas, and the University of Alabama) are organized under four thrust areas
that focus on recording and analysis of electrical activity, magnetic activity,
neurochemical and optical signals, and memory function of the brain. A series of
coordinated and synergistic investigations will be conducted using innovative
methods and tools designed to probe brain function at the molecular, cellular,
and macro levels in epileptic rats and human subjects. Patients with focal
epilepsy, during their presurgical evaluation, will undergo implantation of
intracranial electroencephalographic (iEEG) electrodes for subsequent long-term
(days) recording and monitoring of their spontaneous seizures. Non-invasive
magnetoencephalographic (MEG) imaging is also used to provide important
complementary information on the electromagnetic activity of the brain. This
collaboration will advance research and also result in the creation of unique
databases of human and animal data from the participating institutions.