* 1632892
* RII Track-2 FEC: Improving Water Management, Treatment and Recovery in Oil and Gas Production
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Stephen Randtke, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,898,637.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct research to
develop improved approaches for the management, treatment, and recovery of water
used in unconventional oil and gas production for energy use. It will include
ten researchers from universities in Kansas and West Virginia with expertise in
energy and water treatment technologies, natural resources management, and
aquatic ecology. Unconventional oil and gas has become an increasingly
significant industry in the United States, including in Kansas and West
Virginia, motivating efforts to minimize the associated environmental impacts.
This provides an opportunity for cross-regional collaborations with the
potential for broader national impacts. The project?s work will focus on
minimizing freshwater use and wastewater production in oil and gas recovery, the
treatment of produced water for beneficial reuse and safe disposal, and
understanding the impacts of oil and gas exploration on aquatic ecosystems. The
research focus aligns with national priorities to develop more sustainable
energy and water systems. The project will also support the recruitments and
development of diverse early-career faculty and will develop career-focused
curriculum in water and energy systems at the participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The research
team will conduct several studies related to the use of water in unconventional
oil and gas production. Polyelectrolyte-stabilized carbon dioxide foams will be
examined as alternative hydraulic fracturing fluids that will reduce the demand
for freshwater resources in oil and gas production. An improved approach for
reservoir pressure management will be examined that balances deep-aquifer
produced water injection with brine withdrawals, with the goal of reducing
induced seismicity. New methods will be investigated to effectively treat
produced water for reuse and/or safe disposal. Treatments methods to be studied
include polyelectrolyte complexes to remove scale-forming cations,
biodegradation of organic contaminants using fluidized aerobic granules, and
removal of organics using microbial desalination cells. Finally, the impacts of
oil and gas production on aquatic ecosystems will be studied to understand the
capacity of these ecosystems to sustain development.