* 1632847
* Creating a National Higher Education Rating System for STEM Equality Achievement (SEA): The SEA Change Workshop
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Shirley Malcom, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 44,614.00

The STEM Equity Achievement (SEA Change) workshop project will bring together
teams from six to eight public and private higher education institutions to
develop and launch a pilot program to recognize U.S. institutions higher
education that have demonstrated commitments to promoting an equitable
environment for underrepresented groups in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics). The American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) is a partner on this pilot project with the institutions of
higher education. The model to be developed will be informed by the successful
Athena SWAN model developed in the United Kingdom (UK). Athena SWAN evolved from
work between the Athena Project and the Scientific Women's Academic Network
(SWAN) which were earlier efforts to advance the representation of women in
science, technology, engineering, medicine and mathematics in the UK.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEA Change workshop supported with this grant is
expected to result in a rating model that the participating institutions will
implement and test as a pilot. This pilot work will develop and refine a process
and structure for a rating system that may be effective in the United States.
Based on the success in the UK, this type of rating system could result in
institutions of higher education voluntarily seeking ratings from the system.