* 1632255
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Bioprocess for Lipid Production from Industrial Byproducts
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Thomas Jeffries, Xylome Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II Project is to produce economically the next generation of
sustainable, renewable, clean burning, high energy density, transportation
biofuels. The proposed technology once successfully developed will enable
existing biofuel producers to reduce their costs while increasing the value and
diversity of their byproducts. It will convert their industrial waste products
into tailored fatty acids suitable for biodiesel. The technology will be
compatible with and complementary to cellulosic ethanol producers, and it could
potentially double the amount of biodiesel produced in the U.S. today. The 227
domestic ethanol plants range in size from less than 50 to more than 150 million
gallons, and they have a total annual capacity of 15 billion gallons. Every
gallon of ethanol also yields 1.9 pounds of soluble organics that must be
evaporated or disposed. Xylome?s technology has the potential to convert half of
this stream into biodiesel and to expand biodiesel production further with
cellulosic feedstocks. By converting a larger fraction of the soluble cellulosic
and hemicellulosic sugars along with fermentation byproducts, Xylome will
increase the efficiency of existing ethanol plants and increase biofuel
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research are to
increase the rates of production, modification and release of fatty acids from
non-conventional lipogenic yeast. Fatty acids have much higher energy density
than ethanol, but similar specific energy yields. Fermentation of organics to
lipids can potentially occur with efficiencies equivalent to ethanol production.
Lipids normally accumulate under nitrogen limiting conditions after replication
has stopped. They are not excreted from the cells so recovery does not require
distillation. In Phase I, Xylome scientists identified and over expressed genes
that increase lipid accumulation by 1.2- to 2-fold under high nitrogen
conditions. In Phase II, they will use mating, selection, screening and
evolutionary adaptation to combine the best of these modifications. Xylome
scientists have also targeted additional genes to modify and release fatty acids
from the cell. Xylome plans to optimize lipid production both from a cellular
level with metabolic engineering and from an engineering perspective through
bioprocess design and cultivation conditions. Xylome will also engineer cells to
use rapidly the complex mixture of soluble oligosaccharides, hemicellulosic
sugars and fermentation byproducts. By applying advanced molecular techniques
and synthetic biology, Xylome will open up new opportunities for sustainable
biofuel production.