* 1632202
* Comparing Regional with Global Models in Atmospheric Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Elisabeth Lloyd, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 221,640.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator on
this project will collaborate with climate scientists at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research to develop a framework to advance understanding and resolve
conflict over the meanings of the concept, "value added," when comparing
regional climate models to global models. The core questions are whether and, if
so, how regional models add value to our understanding of climate with regards
to global models. Regional models are some of the primary means available for
modeling socially significant climate events such as floods, droughts, and
fires, among other events; so, it is very important to understand their value.
The investigator will situate herself in the climate science community, and use
philosophical conceptual analysis, in collaboration with leading climate
modelers, to develop an advanced framework. The proposed framework will refine
and develop an existing framework based on a preliminary study that she
conducted. She will then use the advanced framework to analyze ongoing debates
in detail, and in doing so to define and develop the various meanings of "value
added." She will publish articles in both climate science and philosophical
journals with these new frameworks and analyses, clarifying where there is now
mostly confusion. She will also apply this knowledge towards the publication of
one or more articles for the general public, urging clarity about climate issues
and their impact on our daily lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has the capacity to advance
philosophical knowledge concerning the concept of "value added," of which there
is presently none, despite its cutting edge role in climate modeling. Knowledge
in climate science concerning this concept will be amplified through the
introduction of an advanced analytical framework and its application to a
variety of debates on the topic of "value added." The climate community
currently uses that term in conflicting ways in heated discussions, with little
awareness of its ambiguities. The PI's aim is to cool down these conflicts by
analyzing the various meanings of the term involved in the various debates she
will examine, clarifying the mismatch of usage of the terms, and through the use
of the advanced framework developed through this project, urging more uniformity
of meaning and deeper understanding of the various issues engaged in "value
added." The investigator's collaboration with her climate scientist co-authors
will reach a wide variety of climate modelers, nearly all of who are involved in
modeling impacts of climate change on society. Her clarification and analysis of
the concept of "value added," central as it is to the value of regional climate
models and the funding and support thereof, should have a serious impact on
those who inform us about droughts, floods, forest fires, and other climate
consequences.