* 1632560
* SBIR Phase II:  Inline plasmonic mercury monitors for natural gas processing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jay James, Picoyune LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 886,514.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
robust, in-line plasmonic sensor for the detection of mercury in natural gas.
Mercury naturally contaminates natural gas at the parts per million levels and
can corrode critical aluminum components in processing facilities. Heat
exchangers at Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) plants have failed catastrophically due
to mercury corrosion, costing hundreds of millions of dollars of damage and
injuring workers. Current monitoring methods cannot operate at the high
pressures found in the process gas lines, leading to inaccurate measurements and
unreliable instruments. LNG is a growing share of global energy as natural gas
replaces more carbon intensive fossil fuels. By 2020, 30 LNG plants will be
operating world wide, for a total mercury monitoring market of $136 million.
Mercury monitoring at petrochemical facilities broadly is a $216 million per
year market. Mercury itself is a neurotoxin and a global pollutant; our sensor
has the potential to aid in efforts to detect and remove mercury before it can
impact human health. Beyond mercury, plasmonic sensing is a novel technology
with applications for a variety of chemical and biological species.

The intellectual merit of this project derives from the utilization of a novel
sensing platform based on the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of a
gold nanoparticle film. It will build upon the success of the Phase I project,
which demonstrated the suitability of LSPR sensors for the detection of
elemental mercury vapor. This Phase II project will proceed along two
objectives. The first objective will be to adapt the sensor for operations at
high pressure; included in this objective is the redesign of key components of
the system and the construction of a high-pressure test bench. The second
objective is testing the LSPR sensor in a natural gas matrix; preliminary
results indicate that LSPR mercury sensors response well in methane, but the
full range of response and lifetime performance will be investigated in this
project. Upon completion of these two objectives, field trials will commence.
The full system will be certified for use in a gas plant and demonstrated at a
suitable natural gas plant. A commercial prototype LSPR based natural gas
mercury monitor will be realized upon completion of this project.