* 1632267
* SBIR Phase II:  Additive Manufacturing in Construction
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Boyd, Branch Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,399,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is in support of Branch
Technology's novel Additive Manufacturing (AM) process that combines 3D printing
technology and conventional construction materials to enable a new way to create
buildings. The construction market in the US is approximately 8% of GDP. Any
portion of the market that could be enhanced would have a large impact in the US
economy. To that end, Branch is creating a process similar to building found in
the natural world. In the formation of natural systems, material is the most
expensive commodity; a structure is derived by the efficient use of material,
but shape is free to be created in almost any form. Branch can approach this
efficiency with additive manufacturing, where form is created and material is
deposited only when needed and little waste is created. At the core of Branch's
method of AM-based construction are three key developments: a three-dimensional
freeform structure (the cellular matrix or lattice) which serves as a scaffold
for other materials, a robotically- controlled extrusion mechanism by which the
cellular matrix is produced, and the algorithms necessary to control the robot
for successful production. The proof of concept for this process and more have
already been demonstrated by Branch in Phase I of this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives for Phase II focus on
improving the procedures and technology already created. The focus areas for
this phase are algorithm development, hardware improvements, the application of
finishing materials, code compliance testing, and material science experiments.
Algorithm development consists of refining and creating the software necessary
to extrude the printed matrix and support a client base. Hardware improvements
are necessary to improve the speed and efficiency of the process to create a
commercially viable workflow. This research will necessitate the purchase of
extra hardware for experimentation. American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) testing for load bearing capacity is necessary to enter the market and
provide code compliant construction. Experimentation in the application of
finished materials to the 3D printed lattice such as spray foam and concrete are
vital to the realization of complete buildings.