* 1632522
* Collaborative Research:   Investigating the Linkage Among Environment, Subsistence, and Work Allocation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Brian Codding, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 60,050.00

Explaining how humans adapt to climate change and population growth remain
central research questions in anthropology and are relevant to contemporary
issues. About fourteen thousand years ago, ancestral Native Americans first
entered the Great Basin of North America, where they encountered a landscape
dominated by large inland lakes and marshes. Although the climate was generally
cooler and wetter than today, it was highly variable and experienced dramatic
shifts associated with the transition from the Pleistocene to Holocene epochs.
Nonetheless, early Native Americans developed a stable adaptation, characterized
by a flexible technology and subsistence base, and high mobility that persevered
over the ensuing six millennia, but dramatically reorganized with the onset of
extreme aridity about 8,000 years ago. Understanding how these first Americans
made a living, interacted with one another, and adapted to climatic change is
critical to explaining the colonization of the Americas, and how humans adapt to
changing environments more generally. The researchers believe that a cooperative
organization of labor by gender was the central feature of this adaptation. This
work will develop and validate a general model of human adaptation and a
predictive model of archaeological site location useful in other academic
research and public lands cultural resource management. It will also garner
primary data on past climatic and vegetation change that will contribute broadly
to understanding of environmental variability in the western United States. In
addition to supporting undergraduate and graduate student education, this
project will disseminate research findings to the public through coverage from
public broadcasting and major events at regional museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is challenging to recover and interpret archaeological
evidence of human responses to past climate change from ancient contexts
significantly different from modern environments. Gathering the necessary data
requires well-grounded theoretical expectations both about where people likely
lived and where evidence of their activities has survived. This project adopts
such a research strategy by coupling behavioral and geomorphological models to
identify and recover evidence of past human habitation along these ancient lake
and marsh habitats. This project combines theoretical predictions from
behavioral ecology about women?s and men?s subsistence strategies, with
sophisticated geomorphological models to predict where they are likely to be
preserved in datable buried deposits. Focused on explaining the pre-9,000 year
old archaeology of Grass Valley, Nevada, this project entails targeted
archaeological field investigations, generating paleoenvironmental
reconstructions from pollen profiles and packrat middens, and conducting
geochemical explorations of local fine-grained volcanic toolstone quarries.
Combined, these data will allow systematic investigation of how early Native
Americans adapted to the Pleistocene Great Basin through a period of changing
climate. The central theoretical and methodological models developed and tested
in the project are generalizable to other contexts, providing a framework to
explain processes of human colonization and adaptation around the world.