* 1632849
* RII Track-2 FEC: Neural networks underlying the integration of knowledge and perception
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jared Medina, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 08/31/2022
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) proposal is a
collaboration between three institutions in Delaware, Nevada, and Nebraska,
namely the University of Delaware, the University of Nevada, Reno, and the
University of Nebraska, Lincoln. The project will focus on better understanding
the complex relationship between existing knowledge and information obtained
through sensory perception, a central question in cognitive neuroscience. To
help coordinate the research and provide training for participants, the project
will set up three distributed ?methods cores?. Members of each methods core will
be available for day-to-day consultations on their respective methodologies, and
also conduct training workshops to achieve transfer of expertise across
institutions and thus develop human infrastructure in each jurisdiction. These
cores will provide support and establish standards in the implementation,
analysis, and interpretation of all experiments. Another goal of the project is
to promote the entry of undergraduates into graduate programs in neuroscience.
To this end, the project will host summer ?brain camps? in cognitive
neuroscience. Special efforts will be made to attract undergraduate and graduate
students from groups traditionally under-represented in neuroscience by
providing full financial support to such students and recruiting at a variety of
appropriate venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The
research efforts will address the interplay between knowledge and perception in
a complementary manner. The first research module will investigate the formation
of new knowledge via Statistical Learning, the learning of associations among
sensory stimuli that tend to co-occur in temporal or spatial patterns. The
second module will investigate the interactions between spatial representations
of perceived objects, prior knowledge of object use, and body position, as well
as the effects of these inputs into perception. The third module will examine
the impact of knowledge on attention and working memory. Orthogonal to the
organization of the research modules, the project will set up three ?methods
cores?, focused on Neuroimaging, Neuropsychology, and Neurostimulation, that
will provide support, training, and advice to members of all research modules:.
The cores will host three week-long, intensive summer workshops, open to faculty
and trainees from all three sites. The resources of the methods cores will also
be available to new faculty at each institution, as part of planned recruitment
of neuroscience faculty.