* 1632258
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Macromolecular Corrosion Inhibitors Based on Renewable Resources for Biolubricants and Lubricants
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Ashok Cholli, Polnox Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2018
* USD 753,584.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to help protect the environment by replacing
existing toxic and environmentally-hazardous corrosion inhibitors used as
lubricant additives with more eco-friendly alternatives. Release of lubricants
(for example from loss during use, improper disposal of waste lubricants,
accidental spillage, or off-shore drilling) has the potential to cause damage to
the environment. Awareness of the toxic nature of current lubricant additives is
a driver to develop new technologies for more environmentally friendly products.
This project addresses the development of novel, environmentally friendly
corrosion inhibitor lubricant additives. Besides the environmental benefits of
the new technology, the lubricant industry may also benefit by expansion into
environmentally sensitive market sectors (for example, marine lubricants used on
ships) through the use of safer and less toxic additives. The new products also
utilize non-petroleum based raw materials from renewable and sustainable
resources, thus reducing dependence on petroleum. Apart from being non-toxic and
environmentally friendly, the proposed products are also expected to be more
effective inhibitors as compared to the products currently used in the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research project
are to design and develop environmentally friendly corrosion inhibitors
providing high performance while meeting the eco-toxicological requirements of
environmentally acceptable lubricants (EAL), including bio-lubricants. The use
of corrosion inhibitors in lubricants is essential to protect metal surfaces.
Unfortunately, many commercial corrosion inhibitors present issues with aquatic
toxicity, persistence in the environment, and/or bioaccumulation that render
them unacceptable for use in EAL or bio-lubricants. Awareness of the eco-
toxicological problems of current inhibitors and the implementation of new
regulations mandating the use of EAL in certain applications (e.g. marine
lubricants) has created an urgent need in the market to replace existing
products and the opportunity to develop new technologies for corrosion
inhibition. This proposal addresses the key steps involved in the product
development of corrosion inhibitors for biolubricants; namely (a) molecular
design optimization, (b) cost-effective process scale up, (c) preparation of
pound scale of lead products in the laboratory set-up; as identified in Phase I,
(c) assessment of eco-toxicological properties using industry standard OECD/ASTM
test methods and structure activity relationship (SAR) calculations, and (d)
product storage stability testing.