* 1632145
* SBE-RCUK: The Effects of Non-peripheralization of Affordable Urban Housing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Douglas Armstrong, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 382,007.00

The research supported by this award will enlarge scientific understanding of
the social effects of centrally-located affordable urban housing, by testing
hypotheses about the impact of housing on economic, political and social life.
One recent development to place new housing in centrally-located urban
neighborhoods rather than more peripheral ones as often was the case in the
past. The new approach encompasses an array of models, including state-planned
projects, self-managed state-subsidized cooperatives, state-subsidized rentals,
and informal take-overs of repurposed buildings. This research will take
advantage of a single city center where all of these approaches are being tried,
which provides a natural experiment to investigate a range of social science
questions about the relationships between the built environment, social
organization, and social mobility. For example, how do differently-modelled
affordable housing projects affect employment and economic mobility? How do
different projects affect kinshhip, gender relations, and neighborhood
sociality? How do they affect civic engagement and urban paricipation?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer such questions, an interdisciplinary and
international team comprised of anthropologist Dr. John S. Burdick (Syracuse
University), geographer Dr. Jeff Garmany (King's College London),
anthropologists Dr. Rolf Ribeiro de Souza and Dr. Michelle Lima Domingues
(Fluminense Federal University, Brazil), and urban planner Dr. Luciana Correa do
Lago (Rio de Janeiro Federal University, Brazil) will undertake research in the
downtown port district of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. This site is appropriate for
the research because it is home to five clearly distinct models of new
affordable housing, all located in close proximity to each other. These include
a cooperative administered by a housing organization that practices
participatory governance; a cooperative administered by a housing organization
that does not practice participatory governance; a building run by the federal
housing authority; rent-controlled apartments; and an invader settlement in
which families have established an independent organization. The researchers
will employ a range of social science methods to collect data: intensive
participant observation in the everyday functioning of the different housing
projects; in-depth interviews with project residents, repeated at intervals to
record change; interviews with urban planners and officials; information
sessions with a local expert in urban planning and architecture; and text
analysis of housing-related documents and media. Because housing projects and
central urban districts are similar throughout the world, answers to these
questions will be generalizable and of interest not only to scholars interested
in the social effects of housing organization and the built environment, but
also to policymakers and urban planners everywhere. The project also will
provide training for graduate students and for a postdoctoral scholar. This
award is made under the SBE-RCUK Lead Agency Agreement.