* 1632387
* SBIR Phase II:  IC Integration Technologies for Flexible Hybrid Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Yuriy Atanasov, Uniqarta, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,413,603.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to address one of the primary barriers to
the emergence of flexible electronics -the inability to assembly and
interconnect thinned integrated circuits (ICs) onto flexible substrates in a
reliable, cost-effective, high volume manner. Flexible electronics has been the
subject of many industry journals, trade shows, technical conferences and market
research reports. All describe a new age of ubiquitous electronics with devices
embedded in the structures and items around us. Flexible electronic devices,
unlike today's devices that are rigid and boxy, can conform to natural, curved
shapes that exist in the real world. However, flexible electronics have yet to
have their predicted economic and social impact. A major reason is because the
electronics industry has not yet found a reliable, low-cost method for
assembling thin, flexible ICs onto flexible circuit boards. Today's 'pick-and-
place' assembly technology cannot handle ICs thin enough to be flexible. Until a
new method is developed and adopted, the potential of flexible electronics will
likely not be realized.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
integrated circuit (IC) aspects of a flexible hybrid electronics technology to a
level at which these devices can be produced reliably and in volumes in a
production-relevant environment. While most of the components of flexible hybrid
electronics technology relating to printed electronics methods have been
adequately researched and developed, little has been done on the integration of
solid-state semiconductor devices onto highly flexible, organic substrates.
Partial results have been reported in the literature, however, no attempt has
been made to provide a comprehensive, wafer-to-end product approach suitable for
commercial applications. This project will address this gap by focusing on all
the steps for IC integration, including the preparation for assembly of ultra-
thin, flexible semiconductor dies, their attachment onto a flexible circuit
board using laser-enabled assembly technology, and their reliable electrical
interconnection. The anticipated end results will be a complete flexible hybrid
electronics integration technology developed to a level of pilot production
readiness.