* 1632913
* RAPID: The Mechanisms Driving Extreme Precipitation in Atmospheric Rivers with an Integrated Stable Isotope and Aerosol Chemistry Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Hari Mix, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2022
* USD 109,982.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is for the collection of
precipitation data in California during the 2015-16 strong El Nino event.
Researchers will study atmospheric rivers, which are plumes of moisture from the
tropics that enhance storms and bring substantial precipitation to the west
coast of the United States. This project will complement an ongoing study of
these events by adding additional measurement locations for stable isotopes of
precipitation data. Isotopic analysis of rainfall can provide insight into the
source and the phase change history of water, which gives scientists a better
idea of how and why heavy rainfall events are initiated. A better understanding
of the precipitation during atmospheric river events should help improve weather
and climate models. The work will also help to train the next generation of
scientists by including a diverse group of undergraduate students in the
collection and analysis of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to
quantitatively evaluate the origin and rainout of moisture with the stable
isotopes of water and water vapor, and address three main scientific questions:
1) What are the relationships between aerosols and precipitation amount,
efficiency and phase? 2) What are the stable isotope signatures of extreme
precipitation events and which macro-and micro-scale dynamics are responsible
for producing them? and 3) What are the moisture sources of extreme
precipitation events and how do these sources change within storms? This RAPID
project will complement an existing observational effort related to the
CALWATER-2 field program by including additional measurement sites and an
instrument to measure real-time stable isotopes of water vapor. After the
campaign the PI team will analyze around 1500 water samples while collaborators
will analyze ice and cloud condensation nuclei chemistry. Synoptic scale and
backtrajectory analysis will also be performed with the WRF model.