* 1632754
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the Controversy of REE Diffusion in Olivine
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Daniele Cherniak, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2018
* USD 16,200.00

This Early Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) award is designed to resolve a
current controversy regarding the rate of diffusion of rare earth element (REE)
in the mineral olivine that is the most common phase in the Earth's upper
mantle. Diffusivities of REE derived from two past studies differ by 3~4 orders
of magnitude, which has profound implications for the interpretation of
questions such as how fast basaltic magmas ascend from depths in the Earth and
planetary interiors and if chemical variations observed in olivine-hosted melt
inclusions are reliable records of mantle source heterogeneity. If REE diffusion
in olivine is indeed very fast, conclusions derived from recent studies must be
re-evaluated. For that reason, the petrology and geochemistry community is
interested in clarifying the issue quickly. This EaGER will provide support for
the training of a post-doctoral fellow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
integrate theoretical, analytical and experimental approaches to evaluate and
determine the source of discrepancy in the two data sets. The team hypothesizes
that there is a possibility that two time scales for REE diffusion in olivine
may operate under specific conditions. In order to test this hypothesis, the
team will conduct a series of laboratory diffusion experiments to evaluate if
the presence of major element concentration gradients, differing REE
concentrations, and substitutional mechanisms are at the source of the
discrepant results from different studies. The experiments will be accompanied
by closure temperatures determinations of REE and Ca-Fe-Mg in olivine from
natural samples using a new REE-in-olivine-clinopyroxene thermometer, enabling a
better comparison of relative diffusion rates between the trivalent and divalent
cations in olivine from mafic and ultramafic rocks that experienced different
cooling rates. To better understand diffusion measurements from the two
laboratories and their connection to observations in natural samples, the team
also plans to undertake a theoretical study examining the effects of major
element concentration gradient and chemical strain energy on REE diffusion in
olivine. The ultimate goal of this EaGER study is not only to resolve the
controversy surrounding REE diffusion in olivine, but also to develop a
framework for understanding the time scales of diffusion for the trace elements
and major elements during multicomponent diffusion in other rock-forming
minerals.