* 1632224
* I-Corps: Developing the Value Proposition for the Rapid Detection and Classification of Designer Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Roger West, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The I-Corps team presents a portable electrochemical detection device that can
rapidly detect narcotics. Law enforcement agencies and medical treatment
facilities use low-cost reagent tests to rapidly detect suspected narcotics in
the field. However, these tests lack molecular specificity and are prone to
false positives. Additionally, the reagent tests can only detect a limited class
of narcotics and are not adequate for the routine detection of designer and
prescription drugs. Therefore, the motivation behind the portable
electrochemical detection device was to create an inexpensive chemical sensor
for law enforcement agencies to reproducibly and accurately detect multiple
classes of drugs. Electrochemical techniques have been used for decades in
laboratories to detect chemicals and biological agents. The conventional and
portable instrumentation used for electrochemical detection is expensive,
cumbersome and require special skills. The portable electrochemical detection
device presented by this I-Corps team addresses the above challenges by using
inexpensive sensors in a compact and portable container that is easy to use.
This device is expected to impact many fields including quality control
monitoring of agriculture produce and fine chemical products and intermediates.

The electrochemical device presented here utilizes a paper-based electrode with
carefully engineered channels to allow separation of the suspected drug from the
matrix. The drug migrates along laminar flow in the channels based on their
physical properties until it reaches the detection area of the electrode. The
detection area has three conductive-ink/paste-based electrodes that are used for
the amperometric measurement of the drug. The I-Corp team intends to perform a
product-market analysis for the commercialization potential of the portable
electrochemical detection device. Direct conversations with prospective
customers will allow for greater understanding of each industrial sector?s pain
points for routine chemical analysis outside of the laboratory. Participation
will also help the I-Corp team clarify the direction the technology can take
going forward such as product development issues to meet identified specific
market needs.