* 1632434
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Approach to Developing a Heat-stable Rotavirus Vaccine
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Kathryn Kosuda, Vaxess Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to increase global access to vaccines
and reduce mortality associated with infectious diseases. As an example,
Rotavirus is a major cause of severe gastroenteritis among young children and
lack of vaccination results in 450,000 deaths annually. A thermostable rotavirus
vaccine would create cost-savings for vaccine manufacturers, national
governments, and non-profit vaccine buyers and enable market access in areas of
the world that lack sufficient cold-chain capacity. Successful development of a
stable rotavirus vaccine would not only have significant positive impact on
global rotavirus immunization efforts, but may also revolutionize the general
approach to vaccine delivery and distribution. This Phase II project will
advance towards commercialization a novel platform technology that both
stabilizes vaccines and enables novel delivery formats. This technology has
significant commercial potential in that it can be broadly applied to numerous
emerging and existing vaccines in the $24 Billion global market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to leverage the unique
properties of silk to meet the global need for robust, thermostable vaccines.
Thermal instability is a long-standing problem in vaccine development. Despite
efforts to improve stability, current formulation approaches do not allow
product storage under ambient conditions. Temperature excursions during shipment
and storage are common and result in wastage or administration of suboptimal
vaccines. The use of silk fibroin, a low-cost biomaterial, represents a novel
approach to vaccine stabilization. The goal of the proposed research is to
advance the silk-stabilization platform towards commercialization of vaccines
that do not require cold storage. Building upon successful Phase I results,
advanced formulation optimization studies will define a final product
formulation for rotavirus that is compatible with scaled manufacturing and
achieves all storage and in vivo attributes necessary for a commercial product.
Through process optimization studies, fabrication of a dissolvable thin strip
for oral delivery of rotavirus will be translated into a scalable manufacturing
process that provides an attractive alternative to traditional drying methods.
Evaluation of stabilized rotavirus vaccine films in an improved animal model
will enable validation of in vivo immunogenicity and offer insight into vaccine
stabilization and oral film delivery more broadly.