* 1632435
* Hardy/BMO spaces and Fourier Multipliers in the Noncommutative Setting
* MPS,DMS
* 08/13/2015,07/31/2017
* Tao Mei, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,355.00

The project aims to develop an abstract theory of Hardy/BMO spaces and Fourier
multipliers, particularly within a noncommutative framework. Semigroups of
operators will be used crucially to make up for the lack of geometric/metric
structure and the lack of a commutative product in the abstract setting. The new
insights gained from this work should also reflect back on noncommutative
geometry, operator space theory, and classical harmonic analysis. The study of
noncommutative objects offers a new point of view on many topics in mathematics
that reflect daily life, and it also arguably represents the "right" language
for quantum mechanics. In real life, the order in which certain operations are
executed can make a big difference. For example, first boiling water and
afterwards adding oil is very different from first boiling oil and then adding
water. Noncommutative analysis is about functions and their properties in the
realm of noncommuting variables. The most important example is matrix-valued
functions. The theory of Fourier analysis or harmonic analysis has a lot to say
about functions, and as this project intends to show, also about matrix-valued
functions. The project will also make valuable contributions to control theory
and signal and image processing, where matrix-valued functions are natural
occurences.