* 1632329
* RAPID: The fate of methane during the Southern California Gas leak: Characterization of microbial consumption in soil, atmospheric transport, and ecosystem-level impacts.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Victoria Orphan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2018
* USD 185,923.00

NSF RAPID funding is provided to study the microbial consumption of methane in
soil during and following the 2015-2016 Southern California Natural Gas Leak.
The gas leak was the largest such event in US history. Methane is flammable gas.
Increasing concentrations of methane in the atmosphere can have a potent
"greenhouse" effect. This NSF RAPID award will support the characterization,
identity and activity of methane-consuming microorganisms in the soil in
response to the gas leak, to better understand ecosystem-level impacts of the
disaster. Atmospheric measurements of leaking methane will be compared to
measurements of soil microorganisms near the site of the gas leak, as well as
tracing the flow of methane-derived carbon through the soil ecosystem over time.
The data collected in this time course study will assist with future modeling of
the contribution of soil-associated microorganisms to global methane cycling.
Understanding the fate of methane released from this extreme event has benefits
to both the scientific research community and to public
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil carbon derived from methane is hypothesized to
measurably increase as a result of the gas leak. The known microorganisms that
consume methane for energy and carbon occur within distinct phylogenetic
lineages, and the soil microbial community (as well as overall carbon flow) is
expected to measurably shift as a result of this leak. Specific components of
the research to measure such changes include: (1) Detailed monitoring of methane
and ethane emissions including air and soil concentrations, during and following
the leak. Methods employed to monitor methane levels will include surface
instrumentation, spectrometry measurements from air in collaboration with the
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory and California Institute of Technology faculty,
satellite observations, and field measurements. (2) Regular and frequent
targeted sampling of soils during and following the period of active natural gas
emission. (3) Identification and characterization of the soil microbial response
to methane enrichment. (4) Assessment of changes in the soil microbial community
and microeukaryotes associated with input of methane-derived carbon. Laboratory
methods for these latter components include microbial community profiling with
high throughput sequencing, RNA-based activity assays; DNA-based stable isotope
probing with 13CH4 to trace methane derived carbon into the local microbial
community, and rate measurements of methane metabolism in laboratory-based
chamber incubations of collected soils. Sites surrounding the leak event and
background areas will be sampled over a regular time course to track population
dynamics during and following the gas leak. Results will be shared among
collaborating scientists and rapidly disseminated through scheduled public
talks, conference proceedings, and publications. In addition to the research
goals, the project will include training opportunities for an undergraduate and
a graduate student.