* 1632778
* Accurate Electron Spin Optical Polarimetry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 565,000.00

This award funds work that will help improve the accuracy of electron spin
measurements done at large electron accelerators both in the United States and
internationally. Spin is an intrinsic property of the electron that determines
much of its behavior. Until the middle of the 20th century, scientists believed
that nature would work in exactly the same way in both a laboratory and a
perfect mirror image of that laboratory. In other words, by doing any physics
experiment that one could imagine, one wouldn't be able to tell whether he or
she was in one laboratory or its "looking glass" equivalent. This idea was shown
to be incorrect by experiments that "violated parity," producing only electrons
that were 'left-handed' with their velocities and spins pointing in opposite
directions. Today, these experiments have become increasingly sophisticated,
such that the average spin of the electrons, analogous to the spin of toy tops,
must be determined with exquisite sensitivity, both at low energy, when they are
produced, and at high energy after they have been accelerated to speeds very
close to that of light. The goal of this work is to measure the spins at low
energy in a new way, using the method of Accurate Electron Spin Optical
Polarimetry (AESOP). The AESOP method has been proven to accuracies of about
1.5%, and will now be refined to provide accuracies better that 0.5%. As such,
it will greatly increase the quality of the information being provided by a new
generation of parity violation experiments. This in turn will yield an even
better understanding of the electroweak force, one of the three fundamental
forces of nature.

The AESOP technique, based on the measurement of light polarization following
the fluorescence of atoms excited by the electrons whose average spin is to be
determined, was invented and developed by this research team in previous work
funded by the NSF. It provides an absolute measurement of electron spin
polarization that does not require theoretical calculations of dynamic processes
for calibration. It does, however, have potential systematic errors, especially
if the electron beam being studied has a broad energy spread with a polarization
that varies across this width. This technique has previously been used to
measure electron beam polarization with an accuracy of between 1% and 1.5%. The
research team now proposes to design and build, as a proof of concept, an AESOP
system that will allow for a detailed study of the method's potential systematic
errors and show how to eliminate or minimize such errors. The research team
expects to demonstrate repeated and reliable electron optical polarimetric
measurements with better than 0.5% accuracy, which is needed to calibrate Mott
polarimeters used at accelerator injectors to an accuracy of 0.5%. Such Mott
accuracy will be required for the next generation of electro-weak parity
violation experiments. As part of this project, a protocol will be developed
with the injector groups at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(JLab) and the Mainzer Mikrotron (MAMI) for installing an AESOP facility at one
or both accelerators.