* 1632453
* Workshop: The International Linguistics Olympiad
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

Attracting and training new students in linguistics is essential to meeting the
nation's needs for research in language and communication. This award will
provide travel support for two teams of American high school students to
participate in the 14th International Linguistics Olympiad, which will take
place in Mysore, India, from July 25th through July 29th, 2016. More than 100 of
the world's brightest and most motivated high school students will gather for
the Linguistics Olympiad. The American teams, each comprised of four students,
were top finishers in the 2016 North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad
(NACLO). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Linguistics Olympiad provides
students with a hands-on experience of the scientific approach to linguistics
and the documentation and analysis of language. Unlike math and science
Olympiads, which focus on material that students have already mastered,
linguistics Olympiads introduce new material through logic puzzles in languages
unfamiliar to the students. In the course of solving a puzzle, the students can
discover something about the grammar or sounds of a language, its conceptual
system, its associated culture, or its historical relationship to other
languages. In addition to fostering insight into human linguistic and cultural
diversity, this competition fosters meta-linguistic reasoning that is essential
for computer science, language technologies, and indeed any career involving
analytical problem-solving skills and the ability to present a logical argument
supported by data.