* 1632977
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the Influence of Deforestation on River Incision and Landscape Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* David Montgomery, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,913.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the impact of
deforestation on sediment storage in streams. Deforestation activities reduce
the presence of large woody debris in river systems, which results in increased
mobility of water and decreased formation of vital biological refuges and
floodplains. This project will provide new insights into the process-based
understanding of river dynamics and the impacts of human-related geomorphic
changes on river erosion rates. By providing a better understanding of the
landscape impacts of modified geomorphological patterns, this research has the
potential for identifying bedrock (strath) terraces as a physiographic
demarcator of the current geologic epoch, which has been called the Anthropocene
by many scientists. Project findings will inform water transportation engineers
and floodplain restoration agencies seeking to institute better management and
restoration strategies for river systems. The doctoral student will work with
local schools and student organizations to develop educational materials
directed at furthering STEM education programs at those institutions. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent career.

Removal of large woody debris from river systems reduces their sediment load and
can lead to rapid river incision, thus slowing floodplain formation, changing
ecosystem water supply, and affecting flood inundation patterns. This research
project will address the spatial and temporal impact of human-related woody
debris removal by examining the formation of bedrock terraces in the rivers of
the Pacific Northwest. The doctoral student will use radiocarbon dating of
charcoal and a novel method of lead-210 dating of floodplain sediment to
determine the onset and rate of river incision. A comparative analysis will be
performed with long-term incision rates derived during previous studies to
assess the current river response to human-related activities. The student will
couple archival research with a numerical model in order to assess the long-term
topographic impact of deforestation on river valleys. The integration of these
methodologies across various spatio-temporal scales will determine if a
topographic signature of the Anthropocene is emerging as a result of large-scale
forestry practices.