* 1632974
* RAPID: Assessing microbiological quality across point-of-use filters deployed in Flint, Michigan
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

1632974&lt;br/&gt;Love&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major issues facing the
water and wastewater industry is aging infrastructure, some estimate that this
is a one trillion dollar issue to be solved in the coming years. Flint, MI, is
currently suffering from a "perfect storm" attributable to out-of-control
corrosion of its potable water distribution system. In addition to concerns
about lead, there are excessive disinfection by-products in the water, and, the
poor bacterial quality associated with drinking water is also of concern. As one
measure of protection to consumers, faucet-mounted point-of-use filters are
being deployed for long-term use in the city at a scale not previously seen in
the US. This project will investigate point-of-use filters for Flint water, with
particular attention to the potential for changes as the water and
infrastructure warm in the summer months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Well maintained
point-of-use devices will certainly remove some of the chemical water
contaminants; however, the opposite is typically true for microbiological
contaminants. Previously, the PIs have shown in multiple and repeated tests that
point-of-use filters increase the abundance and alter the composition of
microbial communities in drinking water, even when filters are used in
accordance with manufacturer guidelines. The PIs work has also shown that trace
levels of a surrogate unregulated disinfection by-product altered the
composition of the microbial community in the effluent of a point-of-use filter,
suggesting that contaminants in the drinking water coupled with use of a point-
of-use device alters the microbial risk a consumer is exposed to. In the case of
Flint, it is not known how recovery of the distribution system and premise
plumbing from the corrosion period will impact the microbial water quality
applied to the point-of-use filters, and how influent changes will, in turn,
influence the microbial quality of the water produced by the filter.
Furthermore, it is unreasonable to think that a single point-of-use device on a
faucet is sufficient, given that it does not achieve the conventional drinking
water treatment paradigm that is to use multiple treatment barriers to protect
public health from multiple contaminants. The PIs have extensive experience
interrogating point-of-use filters like those used in Flint for changes in water
quality, microbial abundance and composition using a range of current methods
and can mobilize quickly. The PIs propose to complete a sampling campaign of
faucet mounted point-of-use filters in Flint, Michigan over the spring, summer
and fall 2016 to evaluate changes in the microbiological quality of point-of-
use-treated water. The analyses will include culture-based and culture-
independent methods to determine microbial community composition, specific
species and/or genes that can impact public health. It is hypothesized that
there will be higher levels of microbial growth across the system during the
summertime. Previous studies showed significantly elevated levels of
Mycobacterium, a family of bacteria known to include opportunistic pathogens, in
the filter housing and moderate yet significant increases in the filter
effluent. The importance of point-of-use filters in mitigating the chemical
contaminants of concern is acknowledged, but a balance is needed to achieve
acceptable microbiological water quality. Given the unknown consequences of the
corrosion damage of Flints drinking water pipes on the microbial quality and
disinfectant residuals in the distributed water, it is important to evaluate the
microbiological quality of point-of-use filters in order to establish good
monitoring and filter maintenance practices to assist in setting a point-of-use
filter maintenance strategy for Flint, which is a major outcome of our proposed
effort. This is particularly important to engage in immediately and through the
rest of this year since the use of filters is expected to continue for several
months.