* 1632270
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Device for monitoring brain hemorrhage using radio waves.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Joseph Korfhagen, Sense Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,247,951.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is the reduction of deaths and long-term disabilities
in people suffering from bleeding in the brain caused by intracerebral
hemorrhage (ICH) or traumatic brain injury. Currently, physicians detect
worsening bleeding through a clinical exam where a patient shows outward signs
of deterioration in their neurological status. By the time these signs of
additional bleeding appear, much of the damage to the brain has already
occurred. About a third of people who suffer a severe traumatic brain injury
either die or are left disabled. For hemorrhagic stroke, 60% die and 70% of
survivors are left with significant disabilities. A device which transmits and
receives very low power radiofrequency signals has been created that can be put
on a patients head. The presence of blood outside of the brain's vessels and
arteries creates a characteristic change in the radio signal used by the device.
Using radio waves to non-invasively detect brain bleeds will allow treatment to
start sooner, which will save lives, reduce disabilities and lower the cost of
treating severe brain injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project tests
(i) the ability of the device to detect and characterize small changes in ICH
size and location over time and (ii) the ability to display changes in the bleed
in a meaningful way to physicians. An algorithm for determining the size and
location of the hemorrhage will be tested using both a phantom model that mimics
the human brain and an IACUC-approved pig ICH model. Multiple hemorrhage volumes
and locations will be used to test the algorithm's ability to detect hemorrhage
volume changes within 1 mL, location within 1 cm, and distinguish changes due to
the hemorrhage from physiological changes in a living pig's brain. Signal
measurements taken before, during, and after infusion of blood will be captured
at each time point to test the accuracy of the algorithm. Software will be
developed to display the information from the algorithm in three-dimensions
while giving doctors and nurses control over thresholds for triggering an alarm
and how often the device scans. To test the software, the data collected during
the pig experiments will be used to determine how accurate the display matches
the location and size of the hemorrhage from CT images collected during testing.