* 1632825
* RII Track-2 FEC: Emergent Polymer Sensing Technologies for Gulf Coast Water Quality Monitoring
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 4,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten researchers across six
institutions in two states (MS, AL) will collaborate to develop advanced
polymer-based, selective sensing technologies for detecting and analyzing
pollutants in Gulf Coast aquatic ecosystems which represent a critical nexus of
water-energy-food for the region and the nation, hosting important fisheries,
aquaculture, trading ports, and off-shore oil exploration and production
industries. The effort combines approaches from chemistry, biochemistry,
geochemistry, marine science, computational science, polymer science, and
engineering to develop portable, rapidly deployable polymer-based sensing
technologies for detection of pollutants. Professional development and education
efforts, including proposal writing workshops, seed funding opportunities, and
team management strategies, will support and promote junior faculty. The project
includes summer research programs for undergraduate and high school students to
broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design new sensing
technologies for deployment in the marine environment to detect pollutants (CO2,
nitrates, phosphates, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)). New modular
receptor-analyte interactions for CO2, nitrates, phosphates, and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) capable of specifically transducing an analyte-
binding event into a useable signal will be designed and evaluated.
Computational and experimental approaches will be combined to gain understanding
of the molecular parameters controlling the strength and stability of analyte-
receptor interactions of designed systems in complex aqueous environments.
Promising receptors will be incorporated into polymeric systems, where the
influence of polymer structure on sensitivity of the sensors will be studied and
used to develop predictive models. Selected receptors will be integrated into
prototype organic field effect transistor (OFET) devices and colorimetric
detection technologies.