* 1632660
* Scholars Award: The Co-production of Knowledge by Reproductive Justice Advocates and Molecular Biologists
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Deboleena Roy, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 179,400.00

This project will examine how molecular biologists and social justice advocates
are responding to the recent NIH policy that would ensure sex-balanced research
at the preclinical level. Both molecular biologists and reproductive justice
advocates are stakeholders in the production of scientific knowledge regarding
female reproductive physiology. The project aims to demonstrate that scientific
practices and social justice practices can be brought together to produce new
understandings of female reproductive biology and health. This interdisciplinary
approach and diversification of ideas will be of benefit to our understanding of
reproductive health. It will have a significant impact on the participation of
women and other minorities in STEM fields. The main products that will result
from this research include a book project and a web-based interactive narrative.
The book will benefit readers who are interested in STS, molecular biology, and
neuroscience. The web-based interactive narrative will record the views of
reproductive justice advocates and molecular biologists on the issue of
preclinical sex-balanced research and may be used as a teaching tool to
distribute the findings of this project to a wider audience. This project will
directly contribute to the education and interdisciplinary training of two
graduate students, one from the biomedical and molecular sciences, and one from
gender studies.

As there is a growing interest on the part of STS scholars to develop joint
vocabularies between diverse communities of knowers, this project aims to
develop opportunities for shared inquiry between molecular biologists and
reproductive justice advocates. The theoretical and methodological approaches of
this project are grounded in practice-oriented STS approaches. The project
utilizes two key analytical frameworks including an awareness of the co-
construction of science and society, and the application of social justice
perspectives. These perspectives recognize that certain bodies, such as people
of color, reproductive bodies, disabled bodies, and animals, have in the past
been subjected to unfair treatment in the name of scientific and technological
progress. Ethnographic studies will be conducted on two molecular biology labs
working on epigenetics and sex differences research, and two reproductive
justice organizations. The scientific questions that will be posed will closely
examine and contextualize responses to the new NIH policy. Participants will be
asked to consider central questions such as who is producing knowledge in this
area, and for whom is this knowledge being produced? At what cost is this
knowledge being produced and who and what are the material agents contributing
to this research? Interviews and oral histories of molecular biologists and
reproductive justice advocates, combined with participant and materials
observation of laboratories and offices spaces, will provide a reflective space
to consider the co-production of biologies, social justice movements, and
scientific experimentation.