* 1632227
* PFI:BIC: Self-Correcting Energy-Efficient Water Reclamation Systems for Tailored Water Reuse at Decentralized Facilities
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ryan Holloway, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 959,945.00

Many small communities own and operate small, decentralized wastewater treatment
facilities, many of which are old and not flexible enough to adjust for
treatment of variable water quality. Many of these communities do not have the
resources to improve the treatment system or comply with new discharge
regulations. While most wastewater treatment plants are fully automated,
including small plants, their susceptibility to failure are high and their
ability to quickly recover and resume operation are low. In this project the
research team will be developing an innovative smart monitoring and control
system to provide early detection of wastewater treatment system failure at
small facilities and low-cost, remote monitoring and control systems for small,
decentralized wastewater treatment systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
reclamation and reuse is not new, but discussions about new paradigms in water
reuse, such as direct potable reuse, are accelerating across the country. Thus,
when the source of water is explicitly impaired and it is destined to become
drinking water, or even water for other beneficial applications, monitoring of
water quality, early warning of treatment system failure, responsive operation,
and an informed public are all critical to securing future water resources and
protecting the public and the environment. A smart sensor network supported by
smart data acquisition/processing and system-learning programs will ensure that
next generation wastewater treatment systems can operate sustainably and
continuously without negative impact on people and the environment. More than
ever, plant operators and the public are highly informed and must have better
tools to understand water quality and economics of domestic water reuse, and the
negative impacts of water contamination. The human-centered system that will be
developed through this project will provide these tools and stimulate energy
efficiency system behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique testbed will be used
to conduct this research. It consists of an advance sequencing batch membrane
bioreactor (SB-MBR) hybrid system treating &gt;7,000 gal/day of real domestic
wastewater. The research team will use this platform to integrate existing and
new wireless sensor networks to monitor water quality and for process monitoring
and control, to facilitate and test the development of a smart data
acquisition/processing and self-learning control system. The smart service
system will enable early warning of wastewater treatment plant failure, thus
preventing long-term recovery and negative impact on community services. The
testbed has five distinctive components: a demo-scale, advanced water
reclamation system, a novel sensor network incorporating cutting edge analytical
probes and instruments, a novel data processing and self-learning control
system, energy management optimization module, and a public interaction center.
It will also enable treatment of water to different end quality to produce water
for different reuse applications (i.e., tailored water reuse). This new
generation, smart system for tailored water reuse will have flexible and
adaptable control systems that utilize new, smart sensor technologies, which
interact with each other, learn from past performance, and can predict future
performance and adapt the system to achieve preset objectives. After testing the
new monitoring and control system at a demonstration scale, the team will work
with their industrial partners to deploy, incorporate, and test the novel system
at existing, decentralized treatment plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is led by the Colorado School of Mines (Department of Civil &amp; Environmental
Engineering and Department of Electrical Engineering &amp; Computer Science) and
Baylor University (Department of Applied Mathematic and Statistics). Aqua-
Aerobic Systems (AAS), Inc. (Rockford IL; small business) and Kennedy/Jenks
Consulting (San Francisco, CA; small business) are the primary industrial
partners. Additional broader context partners include GE Power &amp; Water
(Boulder, CO), Ramey Environmental (Firestone, CO), and Southern Nevada Water
Authority (Las Vegas, NV).