* 1632571
* SBIR Phase II:  Zero Thermal Expansion Alloys For Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* James Monroe, Thermal Expansion Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,044,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop new
alloys whose thermal expansion properties can be tailored for laser
applications. The tailored thermal expansion alloys will prevent shifts in laser
output frequencies, i.e. laser color, by preventing the natural temperature-
induced thermal expansion and contraction that occurs in laser housings. This
temperature stability is extremely important for fiber-optic systems that are
the backbone of the telecommunications industry. According to Strategies
Unlimited, the telecommunications laser market was $3.515 billion in 2014, and
it is expected to increase with the increasing number of mobile devices and
growing demand for high-speed internet. While oil and gas telecommunications
systems were identified as the beachhead market, the alloys developed through
this project will also have potential to add value to the wider
telecommunications market and a number of other industrial and electronics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies
in a new method to exhibit unprecedented control over thermal expansion
properties in metal alloys. The discovery that mechanical deformation tailors or
"programs" the thermal expansion of a bulk metal to match that of other common
materials (metals, polymers, and ceramics) will change the way scientists and
engineers design for thermal compensation. These alloys can also be tailored not
to expand or contract with temperature changes and even be made to shrink when
heated. This wide range of tailored alloy responses is achieved without chemical
changes or composite fabrication methods upon which competing technologies rely.
This Phase II project will reduce the risks associated with implementing the
tailored thermal expansion alloy technology in laser applications by developing
high thermal conductivity alloys and testing prototypes. Alloys will be
purchased, engineered to have a desired coefficient of thermal expansion, and
tested for laser performance. The expected outcome of this work is the
realization of tailored thermal expansion alloys in laser prototypes.