* 1632888
* RII Track-2 FEC: Sensing and Educating the Nexus to Sustain Ecosystems (SENSE). A Kentucky-West Virginia Partnership
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* David White, Murray State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,837,645.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand and enhance the
surface-water sensing capabilities across Kentucky and West Virginia, providing
a foundation for understanding the impacts of agricultural and hydropower
production on water quality, particularly as it relates to harmful algal blooms.
It will bring together experts in engineering and aquatic ecology, involving
five research groups from three universities in the two states, jointly
motivated to develop more sustainable water, food, and energy systems. Using a
surface water-quality sensing network and supporting data visualization and
modeling capabilities, the project will address three research questions: 1)
What are the interconnections among water quality issues relative to increasing
agricultural production, changing land-use patterns, climate change, energy
production, and ecosystem dynamics across Kentucky and West Virginia?s aquatic
environments? 2) What are the environmental, physical, and biogeochemical
features leading to water-quality changes and how might advanced technologies be
applied to better understand and monitor those changes? and 3) How might
modeling and management scenarios of land use, nutrient loading, and water-
control systems operate in concert to reduce degradation of systems at local and
basin scales? Along with its research focus, the project will work to enhance
and diversify the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
workforce in Kentucky and West Virginia and support the professional development
of early-career faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;The research team will focus on the environmental drivers associated
with the formation and propagation of cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms.
Extensive in situ sensing infrastructure will be installed at two hydropower-
producing water bodies and along two watersheds in regions with heavy
agricultural land use. Thirty-three new instruments will be acquired and
deployed to monitor nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), inorganic carbon,
dissolved oxygen, pH, temperature, turbidity, conductivity, algal pigment and
cell numbers, water flow parameters, and meteorology. Cyberinfrastructure
upgrades will be included to allow near real-time data collection and
visualization. Analyses will focus on identifying the presence, extent, and
timing of the harmful algal blooms as they relate to the measured parameters.