* 1632476
* STTR Phase II:  Low Temperature Cofired Multilayer Ceramic Power Transformers Incorporating Base Metallization Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Clive Randall, Solid State Ceramics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2019
* USD 764,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to a wide range of
electronics in the areas of communications, Internet, portable electronics, and
power electronics. Although magnetic based transformers have been the industry
standard for over a century they have many negatives including miniaturization
difficulties, electromagnetic interference issues, and issues with larger
voltage step-up applications. The main goal of the research is to develop a
ceramic replacement for magnetic transformers that is both conducive to
miniaturization, provides higher power densities, provides a large increase in
safe operating temperatures, and that is cost competitive with standard magnetic
devices. This technology will provide important advantages for many
applications; the ability to produce at low cost also opens up large new markets
that are not easily reached using conventional
magnetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase 2 project aims to develop new low temperature sintering processes and
transformer structures that enable the use of base metal electrodes to replace
very expensive platinum. This drastically reduces costs of ceramic transformers
and substantially improves performance due to the fact that a poor
electrical/thermal conductor, Platinum, is now replaced with base metal (Copper)
that is a high performance electrical/thermal conductor. This translates into
both higher power throughput in devices that are lighter weight and lower
profile and also a new ability to now match the high temperature range of wide
bandgap power devices. The success of this program immediately leads to a
revolutionary next step of being able to insert power management/conversion
electronics directly within integrated circuits such as in application specific
integrated circuits (ASIC) and field programmable gate arrays (FPGA).