* 1632116
* PFI:BIC- A Smart Service System for Traffic Incident Management Enabled by Large-data Innovations (TIMELI)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anuj Sharma, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Federal Highway Administration estimates that a quarter of the congestion on
U.S. roads is due to traffic incidents such as a crash, an overturned truck, or
stalled vehicles. Congestion costs the commercial trucking industry $9.2 billion
annually, and incidents have been shown to increase the risk of secondary
crashes by 2.8 percent with every minute of congestion. To address these
economic and safety issues, traffic incident management (TIM) centers, typically
operated by state departments of transportation (DOT), monitor roadways for
traffic incidents, coordinate incident response, and provide traffic management
and control to minimize the impacts of traffic incidents. This research will
develop a new TIM system, called TIMELI (Traffic Incident Management Enabled by
Large-data Innovations), that has greatly enhanced capabilities for incident
risk assessment and response over current products. Software-based intelligent
transportation systems (ITS) that are currently available are limited to very
basic controls and do not provide comprehensive or dynamic decision support.
These systems display streams of traffic data on a map and rely on technicians
to input a control action. To address these limitations, this smart system aims
to be a more effective data-driven TIM that provides user-centric information
visualization and improved analytics and machine learning. Use of the system by
state DOTs can reduce the duration and impacts of incidents and improve the
safety of motorists, crash victims, and emergency responders. Use will also
reduce the TIM technician fatigue and reduce their turnover rates.

The goal and outcome of TIMELI is to use emerging large-scale data analytics to
reduce the number of road incidents through proactive traffic control and to
minimize the impact of individual incidents that do occur through early
detection, response, and traffic management and control. This will be achieved
using end-to-end machine learning for situational awareness, the design and
rapid solution of geo-temporally aware traffic models using partial differential
equations, stochastic model predictive control, and user-centric advanced
visualization techniques for decision assistance. Current technology gaps in
data handling and archiving, analysis for decision support, and the design of
output formats will be addressed using big data technologies. Multiple large
data streams will be ingested and data analytics will be performed for quality
assurance and anomaly detection. New algorithmic approaches, machine learning,
and a stochastic framework will be used to detect anomalous outliers and
implement context-sensitive traffic models. An advanced human machine interface
will provide information visualization and decisions recommendations in an
intuitive format to minimize any cognitive bottlenecks. The objectives are to
develop TIMELI and to integrate it into an existing TIM system. These will be
accomplished by the following methods: (1) defining TIM user requirements and
identifying bottlenecks in technician tasks using human factors research; (2)
developing a prototype that includes a big-data-enabled back-end solution, an
analytics engine, and a front-end interface; and (3) conducting testing,
evaluation, and integration within Iowa DOT's existing TIM environment. TIMELI's
multiple innovations will transform current TIM systems by creating a smart and
reliable decision assist system used to monitor traffic conditions in real time,
proactively control risk using advisory control, quickly detect traffic
incidents, identify the location and potential cause of these incidents, suggest
traffic control alternatives, and minimize cognitive bottlenecks for TIM
operators. The test bed will be the Center for Transportation Research and
Education's fully functional traffic operations lab that is connected to the
Iowa DOT's data streams.

This research will contribute to education by involving undergraduate and
graduate researchers in Civil Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering and Human Factors Engineering, and will generate real-
world data sets that will be used in developing educational material.

The partners in this project are Iowa State University (lead academic
institutions), TransCore (a commercial provider of intelligent transportation
systems, Des Moines, IA), and Iowa Department of Transportation-DOT (government
agency, Ames, IA).