* 1632069
* PFI:BIC - A Smart, Flexible, Large-Scale Sensing and Response Service System (LASSaRESS) for Monitoring and Management of Ground, Air and Waterborne Contaminants
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jeffrey Glass, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,106,363.00

Oil leakage from underground cable systems leads to environmental damage and
economic loss. World-wide, the impact is estimated at $2 billion in direct
economic losses. When environmental and productivity costs are considered, the
total harm from underground oil leakage is estimated to be much higher. The goal
of this project is to develop a cost-effective, scalable, smart underground oil
leak location system that can be modified to serve a host of applications in
leak detection and pollution measurement including applications in gas leak
detection, water leak detection, and pollution monitoring. The techniques
developed through this project have the potential to improve future generations
of distributed networked sensors through application of cloud computing
technologies. This new smart system, when implemented to detect underground
leaks, and more generally, pollutants is expected to make significant, positive
environmental impacts. Given the team's past successful work in underground oil
leak detection and mitigation, an immediate impact in scaling oil leak detection
is expected. At the same time, the mini-mass spectrometers can in the future be
configured to monitor many contaminants, thereby addressing a variety of
environmental challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives are: 1) build
the core smart system components, 2) develop core algorithms and build the smart
system test bed, and 3) validate the test bed functionality in the field. First,
mini-mass spectrometers will be fabricated, and a dynamically configurable cloud
computing network will be developed with the goal of connecting multiple mini-
mass spectrometers into an analytical system to collect leak source data.
Collected data will be analyzed and leakage locations will be identified based
on distributed sensor readings using an algorithm developed to dynamically
optimize sensor positioning and identify leak location. Finally, the smart
system will be implemented in the field to monitor a controlled, low-level,
perfluorocarbon tracer leak. The expected outcome of this program is a low cost,
self-configurable, highly flexible, mobile system that can locate leaks and
contaminants with minimal human intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
consists of faculty at Duke University (Pratt School of Engineering, Nicholas
School of the Environment, and Psychology and Neurosciences), and staff at UNC's
Renaissance Computing Institute (Chapel Hill, NC) as well as industry partners,
PFT Technology, LLC (Bellmore, NY; small business). Duke's team combines
material science, computer engineering, mass spectrometry, behavioral science
and commercialization expertise. RENCI brings expertise in the latest cyber
tools and technologies. Our industry collaborator, PFT Technology, LLC is
recognized internationally as the leader in the field of perfluorocarbon-based
leak detection, demonstrating successful leak detection programs for utilities
in both the U.S. and the U.K.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will impact
multiple levels of students. Two PhD students (Duke) will be employed by the
project. Professional Masters and PhD students in the Nicholas Environmental
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Certificate Program (Duke) will, through their
coursework, actively follow the progress of this research program to learn
important aspects of translational research activities. Undergraduate students
in Duke's Pratt School of Engineering Pratt Fellows and Grand Challenge Scholars
programs will be offered opportunities to work on the project through these
programs. This project will also engage students and faculty at Jordan High
School by offering engagement opportunities such as independent study or science
fair projects.