* 1632878
* How Migration, Resources, and Ethnicity Shaped Female Fertility
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Kermyt Anderson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 203,065.00

Worldwide, millions of people are currently displaced by adverse conditions such
as civil war, economic strife, religious persecution, and natural disasters. How
the United States responds to such crises is both a major humanitarian concern
and a policy concern for the 21st century. Migration under duress has multiple,
often interacting, consequences. Some, such as economic and cultural disruption
are evident; others, such as long-term biological effects, unfold more subtly
over time. The overarching research goal of this project is to understand one of
those long-term effects, the impact of migration on female fertility. Moving to
a new region might impact fertility directly given the physiological costs of
long distance movement, but also indirectly, as the costs and benefits of
reproduction change. This is an understudied question that is of interest to
policy makers concerned with migrant welfare; scholars who seek to understand
the connections between human experience and human biology; and the migrants
themselves as they seek to establish new lives under difficult conditions. The
research will be conducted by Dr. Mary Towner (Oklahoma State University) and
Dr. Kermyt Anderson (University of Oklahoma). The problem requires longitudinal
data, so they will use historical demographic data that are available for
American Indians in Oklahoma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between 1828 and 1887, tens
of thousands of American Indians with diverse cultural histories migrated to
Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma) under United States government removal
policies. It is well-known that they incurred significant economic and social
costs, including loss of resources and high morbidity and mortality. Little is
known, though, about how female fertility was affected. The overarching research
goal of this project is to understand the impact of migration, access to
resources, and ethnicity on fertility variation across American Indian women in
historical Oklahoma. Ethnicity captures diverse cultural traditions, social
norms, and population history. Fertility contrasts between ethnic groups may be
particularly acute when migration brings people of different ethnicities
together and as ethnic groups experience differential access to resources. To
meet the project goal, the researchers will use a three-leveled methodological
approach: 1) a cross-sectional sample of Oklahoma women drawn from the 1910
United States Federal Census, 2) a longitudinal database of women, reconstructed
from historical records, and 3) cross-cultural ethnographies to assemble
information on Oklahoma tribes. Together, these complementary levels of data and
analysis will be brought to bear on predictions stemming from three specific
research questions. Research Question 1: What was the extent of fertility
variation in early Oklahoma and how was it patterned across women? Research
Question 2: What was the long-term impact of migration and relocation on
fertility? Research Question 3: How did cultural history shape fertility at the
population level? The findings of this project will be informative to both
scholars and policy-makers working on questions of fertility, migration, and
ethnicity, as well as those with a particular interest in American Indian
populations. The project will also benefit society by supporting graduate
student training and providing undergraduates--including American Indian
students--an opportunity to engage in STEM research.