* 1632569
* STTR Phase II:  Scalable Detector for Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Communication Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Chung Him Yuen, Black Lattice Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2019
* USD 909,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its ability to
implement multiple-input&lt;br/&gt;multiple-output (MIMO) detectors of any size.
This, in turn, impacts the broad needs of wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications
industry that is always in search of more efficient use of the scarce spectral
resources.&lt;br/&gt;Since its invention 15 years ago, MIMO has been included in
all wireless standards, e.g. WiFi,&lt;br/&gt;WiMAX, and LTE. As of today, MIMO
products of sizes up to 4x4 (i.e. 4 transmit and 4 receive&lt;br/&gt;antennas)
have appeared in the market, while the most recent standards, such as IEEE
802.11ac WiFi&lt;br/&gt;and LTE-Advanced cellular, have specified MIMO sizes as
large as 8x8. For WiFi this can mean more&lt;br/&gt;effective hot-spots in
public and workplace settings. For cellular this can mean improved
connectivity&lt;br/&gt;in rural areas with fewer base-station towers, having a
positive economic impact. Industry activities&lt;br/&gt;that attempt to build
larger MIMO systems such as 16x16 are occurring. Massive MIMO networks
with&lt;br/&gt;more than 100 antennas at the base stations have recently been
proposed for 5G cellular and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;These trends indicate a large
market opportunity for the scalable MIMO technology that this
project&lt;br/&gt;builds upon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase 2 project plans to develop
and&lt;br/&gt;commercialize a set of intellectual property (IP) software-
codes/IP-cores related to multiple-input&lt;br/&gt;multiple-output (MIMO)
communications. These cores address the needs of wireless
chipset&lt;br/&gt;manufacturers. The main hurdle in the design and
implementation of MIMO systems is their&lt;br/&gt;complexity which drives cost
and power consumption. The complexity of an optimal MIMO
detector&lt;br/&gt;grows exponentially with the number of transmit antennas. The
same is true for most of the near&lt;br/&gt;optimal MIMO detectors that have
been suggested in the literature and adopted by industry.
This&lt;br/&gt;limitation has been the main impediment in developing commercial
MIMO systems that support larger&lt;br/&gt;array sizes with increased range and
data rate. This project adopts a novel technology that achieves
near&lt;br/&gt;optimal performance having complexity that only grows linearly
with the number of transmit antennas.&lt;br/&gt;It thus can be used to implement
MIMO systems of any size, at an affordable complexity.