* 1632408
* SBIR Phase II:  Ecosystem for Learning and Team Design
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Baldur Steingrimsson, Imagars LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2020
* USD 899,999.00

This Phase II project impacts the way engineering design is taught in design
courses and contributes to the training of a strong workforce in areas related
to science, technology and engineering. The Ecosystem is a software tool that
automatically verifies designs against the requirements, to uncover oversights
early in the process, but also fosters engineering judgement and creativity,
allows for assessment of designs with less subjectivity, and facilitates smooth
communication among team members. This results in productivity enhancements,
higher quality designs and shorter time-to-market, but also in societal benefits
(safer products, less risk of catastrophic accidents and more competitive design
organizations). The target market consists of (1) educational institutions
teaching engineering design, and (2) design companies striving to ensure
compliance with the design specifications. The core innovation is three-fold.
First, it consists of an e-design assessment engine that is being developed to a
high degree of sophistication. Second, design repositories are investigated and
developed for integration. Third, holistic (big data) analysis of design content
and metadata is implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop
an innovative design decision (learning) support system addressing problems
related to the high cost of design oversights. Such oversights can result in
catastrophic failures, product recalls, or simply in budget or schedule over-
runs (due to rework). The Ecosystem offers a flexible, yet systematic and
generic, framework, for guiding designers through the design process, and for
automatically assessing design activities, from each stage in the design
process, against the product design specification (PDS). At the center of the
Ecosystem is the e-design assessment engine, which decomposes the PDS,
correlates the design activities against individual requirements, and provides
real-time advisories in case of design oversights. The assessment engine
automatically configures popular development tools for engineering design,
determines relevant analyses, and interprets the outputs. The Ecosystem
interfaces with these development tools, but does not replace. The Ecosystem can
translate qualitative customer requirements into solid engineering requirements,
and verify the relevance of the design content provided through seamless
interfaces with industry databases. The Ecosystem improves designers'
productivity through automation of many administrative tasks (e.g., generation
of project reports). Despite the automation, the learning experience is not
diminished. The Ecosystem prompts for, captures, and preserves the rationale for
relevant engineering decisions. It also supports accredited, generic learning
objectives for engineering design.