* 1632494
* NSF/EAR-BSF: Assessing controls on hydrologic connectivity, plant water availability and degradation risk in drylands with isotope tracers and Lagrangian modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Sally Thompson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 282,543.00

Due to the lack of vegetation associated with many dryland ecosystems, rainfall
generates significant overland flow so that runoff/runon processes become
important for providing flows to vegetated sites where water can infiltrate,
leading to complex patterns of water resources available to plants. Predicting
these flow patterns from easily observable features such as vegetation and
topographic patterns, would be instrumental in evaluating landscape
vulnerability to desertification. In addition, it would provide design
strategies for restoration activities by optimizing vegetation selection,
hillslope contouring and planting design. This research aims to develop improved
techniques to enable such predictions through models that test runon-runoff
process against the experimental behavior of isotopic tracers and through the
development of new techniques that improve the realism of modeled vegetation and
topographic surfaces. The research will support two doctoral research students
(one in Israel and one in the US), and research exchange between research sites
at UC Berkeley and Ben Gurion University of the Negev. It will enable outreach
activities that use the research findings to inform land restoration planning
and guidelines, in conjunction with partners at the UC Berkeley College of
Environmental Design and the Keren Kayemeth LeIsrael-Jewish National Fund in
Israel.

The project will advance predictions of dryland vulnerability to disruption of
runon-runoff processes based on the spatial organization of vegetation,
hillslope topography and storm characteristics. The aim of such predictions is
to identify high priorities for intervention to prevent degradation, and to
inform restoration designs, focusing on modification of the vegetation
distribution and hillslope form. Previous modeling attempts to generalize the
predictions of plant water availability based on spatial pattern were
constrained in two ways: (i) The models used to make predictions are generally
tested against indirect metrics of the runon-runoff process, such as net
discharge from a runoff plot, rather than against observations of site-to-site
source-sink transport of water during storm events; thus their ability to
constrain the source-sink behavior within a runoff site is questionable. (ii)
The model experiments used to connect dryland surface features to water
redistribution rely on individual realizations of idealized land surfaces.
Consequently, uncertainty is poorly characterized, and the meaning of the
resulting metrics for real landscapes is unclear. This proposal exploits
isotopic tracer experiments to reveal patterns of connectivity and water
availability to vegetation on a well-characterized dryland hillslope at the
Lehavim Long Term Ecological Research site in Israel. The patterns will be used
to test the predictions of runoff-runon models by adapting these models to
predict Lagrangian transport of water using Coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian Modeling
techniques. Model experiments with the tested model will then draw on the
emerging field of multi-point statistics to enable realistic realizations of
landscape surface features, allowing uncertainty in predicted water
availability, degradation risk or restoration quality to be characterized. The
research will provide insights into landscape-scale controls on desertification
vulnerability based on the likelihood that runoff is captured on a hillslope, or
is lost via export from vegetated slopes.