* 1632341
* SBIR Phase II:  Intuitive Touch Feedback via Ungrounded Tactile Shear Feedback for Virtual Reality and Human-Machine Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,02/29/2020
* William Provancher, Tactical Haptics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,409,168.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its potential to
revolutionize human-machine interfaces, with possible applications in computer-
aided design (CAD); military, maintenance, and pilot training interfaces;
industrial and construction operator interfaces; robotic and laparoscopic
surgery; physical therapy, rehabilitation, and swing training; education;
telerobotics; automotive navigation and safety systems; and video games. While
haptic interactions in these applications can already be portrayed with desktop
robotic force feedback devices, the developed haptic technology could provide
realistic haptic feedback at a much lower price point (required for consumer
devices) and unlike current force feedback devices, the developed haptic devices
can be used to naturally interact in large workspace applications like motion-
input video games or VR experiences. The proposed research will enhance the
scientific understanding of human-haptic and multi-modal interactions in virtual
environments, and will create a model for this technology to migrate into
adjacent fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase 2 project seeks to meet the market demand for intuitive, immersive,
and inexpensive haptic technologies in the emerging field of consumer virtual
reality (VR). Multiple companies are now making inexpensive 3D head-mounted
displays (HMDs) for VR, but current haptic interfaces are either too expensive,
have limited range of motion, or are too crude to portray realistic haptic
interactions in VR. The company has created an ungrounded haptic motion
controller that utilizes a new form of touch feedback that applies in-hand shear
forces to create compelling physical feedback at a price that is viable for
consumer markets. The proposed research objectives are based on feedback from
key stakeholders and VR enthusiasts who have tried the company?s current high-
end haptic controllers. Their feedback suggests improving the overall user
experience of the controllers through reducing device size, mass, and system
latency, while improving device ergonomics and reducing cost. The Phase II
research builds on the findings of Phase I, which showed that even simpler
implementations of the newly developed haptic technology were still found to be
more compelling than traditional vibration feedback. The project will result in
a reference design that can be mass produced.