* 1632231
* I-Corps:  Customer Interview and Discovery for a Revolutionary Electronic Lab Notebook
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Susan Jenkins, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team is working to revolutionize research methodology by removing
redundancies in experimentation, creating a more collaborative environment, and
securing intellectual property. Research capacity will increase as more
scientists have time to take on larger tasks, thereby accelerating the pace of
scientific discovery. Beyond efficiency issues, a gap has also been developing
between handwritten systems and digital results. This team seeks to close that
gap and create a seamless digital environment containing all pertinent
experimental information and analytics. A digital mergence allows scientists to
quickly access research archives and avoids hours of manual searching through
notebook stacks. Billions of dollars are wasted on resources, time, and
organization required for paper lab notebook maintenance. The proposed system,
Labii ELN, creates a digital environment to organize and simplify research.

This team will take a one of a kind approach and utilize protocol templates for
ceasing all repetitive behaviors, templating them the first time for easy reuse.
The proposed technology will allow users to create protocol templates (root)
followed by branched experimental documents (nodes), which are composed of
variable fields that are altered during experimentation. This means less
information is worked with and requires inputting. The connection between roots
and nodes allows for novel features like Summary Analysis. The team's current
commercialization plan will start with targeting wet lab researchers. On the
academic side, the team will start with Universities in the bay area (Stanford
University, UC Berkeley,UCSF). In industry, the team will target small and
medium size biomedical and pharmaceutical companies. Once beta testing is
completed and the team has added features recommended by customers, this I-Corps
will seek nationwide adoption.