* 1632229
* STTR Phase II:  New Perfluorodioxolane- and Perfluorodioxane-based Copolymer Membranes for Gas Separations
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Zhenjie He, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 729,221.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase II project is to produce a better natural gas treatment membrane
that will allow end users to capture the ease of processing and environmental
advantages of membrane technology at a substantially reduced price. Natural gas
processing to remove CO2 and other contaminants is the largest industrial gas
separation application with an estimated global separation equipment market of
approximately $2-3 billion per year. At present, membrane processes have a 10%
market share, while amine absorption processes account for the bulk of the
market. Conventional membrane materials are limited by their relatively modest
CO2/CH4 selectivity, which offsets their environmental and efficiency
advantages. The novel perfluoro polymer membranes developed in this program show
enhanced performance when treating gas mixtures at industrial relevant
conditions. Study of these perfluoro polymer membranes will improve scientific
understanding of structure/property relationships for a new family of materials.
Most importantly, applied at a commercial scale, these new perfluoro membranes
offer the potential to overcome the limitations of prior membranes, and thereby,
transform natural gas processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
Phase II research project are to complete the development of novel
perfluoropolymer membranes for use in natural gas CO2 removal. During Phase I,
membranes with superior CO2/CH4 separation performance compared to commercial
membranes were identified in comparative high-pressure mixture tests. In Phase
II, the research and development plan is to scale up production of the most
promising perfluoro polymer. An optimized membrane based on this polymer will be
made on a roll-to-roll production line and fabricated into membrane modules.
These modules will be evaluated in laboratory parametric experiments and
validation tested at an operating natural gas field site. Results from these
tests will be used to update an economic evaluation of the perfluoro membranes
compared to conventional technology applied to natural gas CO2 removal.
Completion of these technical objectives will bring this advanced membrane
technology to the cusp of commercialization.