* 1632707
* Collaborative Research: The reticulation/activation nexus in organizations:  An agent-based model and empirical test using unique data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Steven Corman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 205,060.00

Understanding the development of communication networks in organizational
contexts is a fundamental research problem in the science of organizations. An
explosion of research in this area over the last 30 years has produced an
understanding of how networks operate in equilibrium conditions based on dyadic
features like balance, homophily, and exchange. Yet we still do not understand
the effects of individual agency and contextual factors like organizational
activity. The purpose of this project is to develop and test a theory of network
structuring and development based on the activities of human agents influencing
one another within group contexts. This project makes four contributions: (1)
modeling network nodes as agents with their own motives and networking
tendencies, (2) describing the influence of focused activities on network
development, (3) accounting for the influence of organizational structures and
work units on network development, and (4) explaining network dynamics as the
product of a loop of structure and behavior which influences one another over
time. Understanding these phenomena will enable better design of a wide range of
organizations, as well as better prediction and mitigation of organizational
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical context of this work is Network
Reticulation Theory (NRT). This theory draws-together elements of structuration
theory and activity focus theory to explain how perceived network relationships
are activated by triggers in an organizational system, for example how a
deadline in a software engineering firm activates certain elements of an
organizational network to produce a hackathon, potentially strengthening the
constituent network relationships in the process. We study this process using a
unique dataset comprising ubiquitous observation of a software engineering shop,
from which data about perceived relationships, observed communication, task
activities, and member perceptions are recorded for 79 employees over a period
of three years. To evaluate the theory, we employ three complimentary methods:
(1) A direct test on the empirical data using statistical relational event
modeling; (2) a multi-agent social-network simulation that faithfully models NRT
by capturing activation, reticulation, and enactment processes; and (3) a
cognitive multi-agent social-network simulation that adds architecture for
decision making at the network nodes. The project also utilizes a novel method
for identifying network connections from audio recordings that offers a useful
supplement to sociometric badges.