* 1632259
* NSF/SBE-BSF:Integration of kinesthetic and tactile information in perception, action, and learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Ferdinando Mussa-Ivaldi, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,212.00

Simple acts such as opening a jar or lighting a match depend on the ability to
grasp objects with different shapes and to apply well-regulated forces and
movements in different directions. When we hold a glass of water, the forces
applied by the fingers are directed against the surface of the glass, and our
brain coordinates these forces to prevent slippage and maintain the orientation
of the glass. The planned studies will combine computational methods derived
from control engineering and robotics with techniques and theories from
neuroscience to understand how the brain controls grip forces when lifting and
manipulating objects and how it estimates an object's mechanical properties. The
investigations will consider how grasping an object is affected by uncertainties
about the object properties (e.g., it's hardness, slipperiness, texture, etc)
and how fundamental manipulation skills may be enhanced by artificially
augmenting tactile information. The outcomes of these studies will influence
several domains including (1) neuroscience (understanding our ability to control
and manipulate objects with our hands); (2) technology (for presenting force
information to users of robotic devices such as teleoperation and robot-assisted
surgery); and (3) neurorehabilitation (for developing intelligent robotic
prostheses and new exercises to promote the recovery of lost manual skills).
These studies will establish a collaborative interaction between scientists in
the United States and Israel having a range of expertise that includes robotics,
control, motor systems neuroscience and
neurorehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Getting the fingers to cooperate
during dexterous manipulation requires the integration of different types of
information. The fingers have a rich array of tactile sensors that generate
signals related to the interaction with the object. However, for the brain to
know the magnitude and direction of these forces, it must also know the
orientation of the fingers in space. This information is obtained by other
sources that form the basis for the sense of position of the body in space. The
control of grasp can also be informed by kinesthetic force sensors in the
muscles that in turn are integrated with the sense of the joint's configuration
in space. This project takes advantage of a new technology that allows applying
controlled stretches to the skin of the fingers. Skin stretch devices mounted on
a robotic manipulator will be used to apply a variety of controlled
perturbations while subjects are performing manipulation tasks. Perturbations
will be applied to increase or decrease the consistency between tactile and
kinesthetic feedback, and to investigate how the brain adapts the ability to
maintain a stable grasp during both unpredictable and predictable forces. The
approach will combine theory and experiments to tackle the integration of
multiple information sources in perception and in controlling manipulation and
grip forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported by a
partnership between the National Science Foundation and the U.S.-Israel
Binational Science Foundation.