* 1632582
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated Public Speaking Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Debra Cancro, VoiceVibes, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,009,443.00

This Phase II project aims to develop software to automatically assess public
speaking skills and prepare students with better oral communications skills
necessary to perform job tasks. Oral expression is the most highly valued
ability throughout the economy and ranks as the second most highly-valued skill
for high-wage, high-growth, high-skill occupations. Approximately 4.5 million
college students take a basic communications course each year, however, as class
sizes get larger and online learning becomes more common, public speaking
instruction becomes increasingly difficult. Practice and feedback are essential
aspects of these courses, yet it is a struggle for teachers to find enough time
to sufficiently interact with students. This SBIR project aims to develop the
key concepts of automated public speaking assessment such that a student?s vocal
delivery can be objectively measured and presented in a manner that creates an
independent, personalized learning experience. Unlike traditional methods of
public speaking assessment, the proposed system can be available at any time,
provide objective feedback and track student practice and improvement. The
proposed Software-as-a-Service is projected to generate $16 Million in revenue
over five years and create more than 25 high-paying, US-based jobs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)
Phase II project proposes to develop an automated assessment system for public
speaking that determines how a speaker would be perceived by an audience.
Automated assessment for speech has already occurred in spoken language
proficiency, which leverages Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) and semantic
analysis. Automated voice assessment has also been utilized in lie detection and
emotion detection, which focus on autonomic responses in the user?s voice, such
as when stress affects the vocal cords. The hypothesis behind this SBIR project
is that speakers can consciously use and modify non-semantic speech behaviors to
produce more desirable listener perceptions. Automatically linking listener
perception to speech behaviors represents a novel direction in automated
assessment for speech. The Phase II objective is to develop software sufficient
for automated public speaking assessment such that a student?s vocal delivery
can be objectively measured and presented in a manner that creates an
independent, personalized learning experience. Voice analytics capability
investigated in Phase I will be enhanced and developed into a cloud-based
service which helps students practice, track, and improve their public speaking
habits.