* 1632283
* Improving Word Production through Comprehension Exposure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Wendy Francis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 326,600.00

When children learn their first language, and when adults learn a new language,
they are able to understand many words before they begin to use them. In other
words, comprehension precedes production. The present research investigates the
cognitive processes used for language comprehension and production and whether
they are sensitive to a person's prior experience with the language or with
particular words. The investigators will also explore whether the way adults
learn words presented on their own (as often occurs in language classes)
generalizes to everyday language experience (i.e., reading prose, listening to
natural speech, and producing natural speech). The research will allow the
investigators to determine the cognitive processes that overlap for reading,
listening to speech, and producing speech and to assess the durability of memory
after these different language experiences. The research activities will
increase diversity in research training and participation by including research
assistants and research participants from ethnic minority groups in a region
with low education and income levels. The research may also have educational
implications for vocabulary development of second language learners, both in
terms of study techniques for students and teaching practices for educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project links implicit memory, lexical access, and
vocabulary development in controlled experiments with English speakers and
Spanish-English bilingual speakers. Word comprehension and production processes
are typically investigated separately. In contrast, the present study explores
the impact of comprehension exposures on later production, using a repetition-
priming procedure. The first overarching goal is to reveal the nature and
durability of memory traces left by auditory and visual comprehension exposures
to words as indexed by their impact on later spoken production. Second, the
project aims to determine whether patterns of learning elicited by isolated
words also result from words seen or heard in sentence contexts. Third, the
research addresses fundamental questions about lexical processing that have been
debated in the literature, for example, whether comprehension and production
processes involve access to common phonological word-form representations,
whether comprehension and production involve access to both modality-general and
modality-specific representations, and what stages of word production are
impacted by experiential variables such as word frequency and language
proficiency. More generally, the research is expected to inform models of word
production and implicit memory.