* 1633952
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Dynamics and Functionality of Origami Structures and Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Suyi Li, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 192,604.00

Origami is the ancient art of folding paper into decorative shapes and
geometries. Over the last several decades, it evolved and became a design
framework for many engineering and architecture applications. Examples include
deployable space structures, kinetic buildings, self-folding robots, surgery
devices, and advanced materials. Origami folding so far has been considered as a
static process. People typically focus on its design and geometry, or internal
actuation mechanisms that makes the folding autonomous. This award supports a
collaborative project that will investigate the fundamental dynamic
characteristics of origami folding. In particular, the research will explore how
to harness the extraordinary properties of origami for applications like
vibration isolation at low frequency, recoverable impact absorption, and
impulsive actuation. Furthermore, the research will produce design tools that
can generate sophisticated folding patterns and assign material properties that
are suitable for a wide variety of dynamic performance requirements. The results
of this project will become the building blocks for the next generation of air,
marine, and land vehicles, intelligent machines and robots, or smart
infrastructures, enhancing their functionality, safety and sustainability. The
findings will thus advance the aerospace, civil, mechanical, robotics and many
other industries. Education and broadening participation plans will focus on
student learning and community outreach at various levels and on the enhancement
diversity through inclusion in the research activities of members of
underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will, for the first time,
rigorously investigate the dynamic characteristics of origami folding and
develop its corresponding engineering potentials. Preliminary studies have
discovered that origami with generic crease patterns exhibits many attractive
properties via folding, such as zero/negative stiffness, pressure dependent
multi-stability, and piece-wise stiffness jump. Such surprisingly rich
properties and the corresponding dynamic responses will be analyzed in detail
based on an equivalent truss-frame model, which transforms the continuous
origami structure into a finite degree of freedom system. The truss frame model
would also become the basis of a comprehensive synthesis tool that incorporates
crease perturbation and optimization, so that the origami can be customized for
prescribed dynamic performances. This synthesis tool will bridge the currently
separated branches of studies: the mathematical theories of origami
design/folding and the engineering of origami based applications. Overall, the
new modeling, analysis and synthesis tools for origami dynamics will create a
significant intellectual leap and build a strong foundation for many future
related research and development efforts.