* 1633184
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Large-Scale Multi-Parameter Analysis of Honeybee Behavior in their Natural Habitat
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Tugrul Giray, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 409,744.00

Honey bees exhibit highly complex behavior and are vital for our agriculture.
Due to the rich social organization of bees, the overall performance and health
of a bee colony depends both on a successful division of labor among the bees
and on adequate reaction to the environment, which involves complex behavioral
patterns and biological mechanisms. Much remains to be discovered on these
matters as research is currently limited by our ability to effectively collect
and analyze individual's behavior at large scale, out of the laboratory. The
technology developed in this project will enable biologists to study the
individual behavior of thousands of bees over extended periods of time. It
builds on innovative algorithms and software to analyze big data collected from
colonies in the field. Study of behavioral patterns at such scale will provide
unique information to advance knowledge on biological processes such as
circadian rhythms that influence bee behavior in addition to playing an
important role in animals and humans. The models developed will help better
understand factors involved in colony collapse disorder, thus guiding future
research on threats to such an important pollinator. This work will be performed
through the tight collaboration of a multi-disciplinary team of researchers to
combine the latest advances in computer science and data science with expertise
in biology. It will provide the opportunity to train students from
underrepresented minority on research at the intersection of these fields and to
reach more than 600 undergraduate students, high school students, and the
general public about how the Big Data approach can contribute to current
scientific and ecological challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop a platform for the high-throughput analysis of individual insect
behaviors and gain new insights into the role of individual variations of
behavior on bee colony performance. Joint video and sensor data acquisition will
monitor marked individuals at multiple colonies over large continuous periods,
generating the first datasets of bee activities of this kind on such a scale.
Algorithms and software will be developed to take advantage of a High
Performance Computing facility to perform the analysis of these massive
datasets. Semi-supervised machine learning will leverage the large amount of
data available to facilitate the creation of new detectors for parameters such
as pollen carrying bees or fanning behavior, currently annotated manually.
Predictive models and functional data analysis methods will be developed to find
patterns in individual behavior based on multiple parameters and over large
temporal scales. These advances are expected to help uncover mechanisms of
individual variations previously unobservable. They will enable the first large
scale biological study on the circadian rhythms of the bee based on the
variations in behavior of individuals in multiple activities instead of
reasoning on single activities or averages. Progress, datasets and software will
be shared with the community on the project website
(sites.google.com/a/upr.edu/bigdbee).