* 1633756
* NRT: Graduate Climate Adaptation Research that Enhances Education and Responsiveness of science at the management-policy interface (Grad-CAREER)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Nancy Huntly, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,689,908.00

Climate change is a major 21st-century challenge for science and society. In the
American West, changing climate is increasing the threats of drought and fire.
Such threats require both new science-based information and effective teams of
scientists, managers, policy-makers and other citizens who can use that
information to solve problems. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to Utah State University will train the next generation
of climate adaptation scientists to meet those important needs. The project
anticipates training eighty (80) MS and PhD students, including twenty-eight
(28) funded trainees, from the natural, physical, and social sciences,
engineering, and mathematics. This project will prepare STEM graduates for
careers that integrate science with management and policy to understand and
adapt to changing climate and will provide new science-based understanding of
ways to adapt to changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a Climate Adaptation Science specialization within nine MS and eight PhD
degrees, offered in eight departments and five colleges. The training program
emphasizes interdisciplinary research and integrates training in informatics,
modeling, communication, leadership, project management, risk assessment,
decision-making under uncertainty, and interdisciplinary teamwork. Project
research will advance understanding of changing hydroclimate (drought and
flood), fire regimes (frequency, area burned, and severity), land cover (range
shifts and invasions), social and economic effects, and potential adaptations.
The project closely integrates research, instruction, and real-world experience
and will foster collaborations among scientists, federal, state, and local land
managers, policy-makers, trainees, and citizen stakeholders. Trainees will
complete a novel two-part internship with a government, industry, or NGO partner
that brackets a year-long research studio and embeds trainees in a cycle of
creating actionable science. Other novel elements are an individualized
communication plan and research-based curriculum supported with short-courses.
The project team will test models for educational elements to better prepare the
future STEM workforce for an increasing variety of interdisciplinary research,
management, educational, and policy-related careers, including application of
data-intensive techniques, cloud-based collaboration, communication with diverse
audiences, and project management. Comprehensive assessments of the program and
its elements will inform best practices in graduate STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship
model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.