* 1633873
* Effects of Age on Specificity and Control of Recollected Content
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Rugg, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 543,556.00

The United States is an aging society. Presently, about 9% of the population is
aged 70 years or older. This proportion will have grown to around 15% by 2030,
bringing with it a dramatic increase in the economic and social costs of age-
related cognitive and physical impairment, and fuelling an urgent need for
research in aging. Advancing age is associated with an accelerating trajectory
of decline in several important cognitive abilities, including episodic memory,
the ability to accurately recollect the details of a recent event. Importantly,
age-related decline in memory accuracy is not always accompanied by a decline in
memory confidence, the strength of our conviction that a memory is accurate.
This increases their risk of basing important choices and decisions on erroneous
information. The present research aims to understand why a mismatch between the
feeling that a memory is accurate and its actual accuracy is more common in
older than in younger people. The findings will shed new light on why older
people are prone to make inaccurate, confident memory judgments and will
contribute to the development of interventions that ameliorate this tendency.
The research will also provide training in the cognitive neuroscience of aging
for masters and PhD students, and for postdoctoral trainees. An important
additional broader impact will be the contribution of the research to the
outreach and education activities of the Center for Vital Longevity at the
University of Texas at Dallas. These activities include frequent talks on age-
related research by Center members (including trainees) to a wide range of
community organizations, public lectures, and a biennial international
scientific conference.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will use functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to monitor the brain activity of older (65-75
yrs.) and younger (aged 18-30 yrs.) people. The research is motivated by
findings that although accuracy of episodic memory is highly age-sensitive, the
subjective experience of remembering is less affected. Thus, older individuals
are more likely to report a strong sense of recollection in concert with an
inaccurate memory judgment than are young individuals. We will examine two
possible accounts of this age-related dissociation between 'objective' and
'subjective' measures of episodic memory. The first account proposes that the
dissociation reflects age differences in the 'precision' of recollection.
Experiment 1 will assess this account by using multi-voxel pattern analyses to
examine whether the fidelity with which information about a study event is
'reinstated' in the cerebral cortex is lower in older people. The second account
proposes that older individuals are as capable of recollecting detailed
information as young individuals, but are less able to control recollection so
as to align its content with the goal of the retrieval attempt.