* 1633825
* NRT-IGE: Research to Innovation to Society
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The world's innovation landscape is changing. Innovation has become a
fundamental prerequisite for sustainability that embraces not only the discovery
of new ideas but also implementable research solutions to societal and market
requirements. Addressing this shift requires STEM professionals who are
simultaneously excellent researchers, capable innovators, and skilled leaders.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to Oregon State University will
pilot and test a team-based, experiential curriculum that simultaneously
integrates basic scientific research with market research and with professional
skill development and practice. Learning outcome and evaluation data will be
used to determine if this transformative curriculum develops researchers with
the desired attributes to contribute to the national STEM agenda. If successful,
the pilot will lay the foundation for institutionalization of this team-based,
experiential approach as a new graduate STEM degree option that can be adopted
at universities across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research to
Innovation to Society educational platform is built upon the Lens of the Market
program and aims to train STEM graduate students across all disciplines as
career resilient, innovative scientists and engineers. Academic and industrial
scientists and engineers with demonstrated track records of STEM commercial and
leadership success will partner with educational faculty to implement the
curriculum. Two cohorts of interdisciplinary graduate student teams, supported
by their faculty advisors, will expand their disciplinary research to explore
implementable research solutions to societal and market requirements through an
experiential learning process. Instruction will be delivered through multiple
formats including face-to-face team interactions in a traditional classroom
setting and online through videos, webinars and assignments; all materials are
designed to be scalable and broadly accessible online. To support their project,
teams will gather data from both primary and secondary sources, exposing them to
experts in both business and academe. The curriculum is designed to develop
networking, communication, data gathering and business analytic skills, as well
as provide a broader societal context for the students' disciplinary research.
Monthly presentations of findings by teams will culminate in a capstone
presentation to faculty, administration, market leaders and innovation ecosystem
leaders both online and face-to-face. Assessment and evaluation at multiple
stages of the students' work by peers, instructors and market/business experts
will form the basis for recommending adoption of this approach as a
transformative alternative STEM graduate degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated
solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.