* 1633921
* Hydrodynamic Behavior and Growth Processes of Large Ice Particles in Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Pao-Kuan Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Accurate knowledge of the fall behavior and the growth of large ice hydrometeors
are necessary for understanding the thunderstorm processes and the numerical
modeling of them. They are also of fundamental importance to the study of cloud
physics. These processes include the riming growth of graupel and hail,
collision between graupel/hail and ice crystals, and the aggregation of
snowflakes. They occur in deep convective clouds and it influences the further
development of such clouds due to its thermodynamic and dynamic effects. The ice
crystal-graupel collision is known to be connected with the electrification of
thunderclouds. Hail damage costs billions of dollars annually to agriculture and
properties. Snow aggregates dominate the anvil process in storms. Quantitative
knowledge of these processes is necessary for accurate weather and climate
predictions, but so far this is poorly understood.

Intellectual Merit: This project will perform a numerical study to investigate
the fall behavior and diffusion and collisional growth of large ice particles
(graupel, hail, rimed crystals and snow aggregates) for a wide variety of ice
particle types, shapes and sizes. Numerical models will be developed to simulate
the fall behavior of these large ice particles as they accrete other particles
while changing their shapes. Collision growth models will also developed to
study the collision growth rates of them due to accretion of supercooled
droplets or ice particles. The former involves solving numerically the relevant
Navier-Stokes equations to obtain the flow field of the falling particle that
may perform complex motions such as translation, vibration, rotation, etc. The
equation of motion of the supercooled droplets or ice particles around the
falling ice particle will be solved so as to determine the trajectory and hence
the collision efficiency. The computation of the ventilation coefficient of the
falling ice particle will be conducted and the convective diffusion equation of
water vapor around the ice particles will be solved to determine their diffusion
growth rates.

The results from the study will fill a major gap in this fundamental area of
cloud physics and provide necessary quantitative information on how these
processes operate in clouds. Such information can be used by a cloud resolving
model to design better ice growth parameterizations to understand better the
convective cloud dynamics. They can also be used by larger scale weather/climate
models to improve their parameterizations to minimize the prediction
uncertainties. Better models will allow forecasters to make better forecasts on
severe storms.

Broader Impacts: The results of the study will have direct impact to our society
as they will be applicable to enhance our capability of weather and climate
predictions through the use of mesoscale cloud resolving models and larger scale
numerical weather/climate prediction models. The research activity will help
training graduate students and young scientists who will contribute to
atmospheric science research. The research results will be disseminated in
scientific journals, meetings, and public lectures so that wider audience
becomes aware of them.