* 1633908
* Support for activities related to the 13th International Conference of Mercury as a Global Pollutant
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2018
* USD 36,992.00

Mercury is a global contaminant whose presence in the biosphere has been
increased by human activity. The ocean plays an important role in the global
cycling of mercury. Understanding the biogeochemistry of mercury, and its
methylated forms, particularly methylmercury, is important for understanding the
role of climate change and human activities on the accumulation of methylmercury
in seafood. Elevated levels of methylmercury in aquatic organisms are a major
concern as there are substantial human health and wildlife effects associated
with consuming contaminated fish and shellfish. To promote a forum for exchange
of information and synthesis, scientists in 1990 held the first international
mercury conference, which has since become a regular conference every 2-3 years.
Now known as the International Conference on Mercury as a Global Pollutant
(ICMGP), the thirteenth ICMGP is planned for Providence, RI in July 2017. This
will be the third time the meeting has been held in the U.S. This award, with
contributions from four different divisions of the National Science Foundation,
provides support related to U.S. coordination of this conference, primarily in
the form of travel support for and mentoring of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned mentoring activities at the meeting will provide
students an excellent opportunity to interact with established and young
scientists and to gain insights into publishing their research, writing resumes,
networking and finding employment, and writing grants to obtain funding for
research. The meeting is the primary forum for the dissemination of new results
of mercury research, and promotes international collaboration in research and
synthesis. Finally, as methylmercury levels in seafood, freshwater fish and
other foods are an important driver for concerns about human and environmental
health, the proposed activities at the conference will enhance understanding and
lead to better management of the potential health impacts of this element, in
all its forms, especially in light of the added impacts, which are not well
understood, of climate change. Activities at the meeting will also endeavor to
build links with tribal and other groups, and medical practitioners not directly
related to the meeting, and to enhance interaction between journalists and
scientists to communicate the results of scientific research.