* 1633915
* The History of Tomorrow: A research proposal
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Gerald Sider, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 28,900.00

Why do the members of one community experiencing catastrophic economic and
social loss retain an optimistic outlook for the future and others under similar
circumstances experience stress and despair? This Early Action Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports the development of a new theory and
methodology in the social sciences for investigating and understanding
communities facing increasing uncertainty about their social and economic
future. Substance abuse is just one manifestation of social stress that
characterizes communities where viable futures are increasingly difficult to
grasp for large segments of the population. This project is rooted in the
investigator's four decades of anthropological field research in communities in
the north Atlantic Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, and similar
comparative experience in the communities of Robeson County North Carolina. Both
communities have experienced economic and social stress brought about by
relocations, factory closures, and natural disasters. However, the majority of
members from each community have experienced and interpreted these events in
very different ways. The insights gained from this project hold promise for
understanding the different ways communities experience social and economic
uncertainty. From these insights, the researcher hopes to gain new knowledge
about the relationship between these stressors and a vision for a viable future;
insights that can inform intervention methods that support community health and
well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a comparative study of
communities in severe economic and social stress, seeking to understand the very
different ways that the communities themselves conceptualize the causes and
consequences both of the stressors and of their very different reactions to
social and economic uncertainty. This research will examine the data from two
communities in the north Atlantic Canadian province of Newfoundland and
Labrador, with comparative research with two communities in Robeson County North
Carolina. In both places local communities, since the mid-1990s, have
experienced major declines in employment and wages, plus declining social
support programs. The researcher points out that there have been locally
constructed and fairly intense efforts both to help those who suffer and to
mitigate the consequences of social and economic stress, yet the differences
persist. The emphasis in this research begins with seeking to understand the
range of responses from community to community. Using these circumstances as a
starting point, the Principal Investigator will develop new theories and methods
for the study of "everyday life histories" as a means for assessing locally
constructed concepts of risk and uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
builds on the concept and methods for studying "everyday histories" first
developed at the Max Planck Institute for History. This research project further
develops these concepts and methods by a examining of how people have lived and
currently live within and against a history that stretches into what they see as
an increasingly uncertain future. Toward this end the researcher will be
reviewing and reinterpreting decades of his field notes on these communities,
and further developing research methods which focus both on socially constructed
silences in communities and obstacles to the social recognition of both "open"
and "half-hidden" pleas for help. The research will contribute not only to a
more nuanced and powerful theory of social stress and stressors but has the
potential developing a methodology for uncovering the complex relationships
between stress as a social phenomenon and the negative behavioral and physical
responses to it.