* 1633299
* NRT-DESE: Interdisciplinary Graduate Training to Understand and Inform Decision Processes Using Advanced Spatial Data Analysis and Visualization
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,993,930.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to SUNY at
Stony Brook will provide science and engineering graduate students with unique
interdisciplinary skills to assist and eventually lead in the translation of
complex data-enabled research into informed decisions and sound policies. Within
all sectors of industry and government, effective decision making depends on the
ability of scientists to interpret data and communicate results in a way that
supports the decision-making process. This new training program responds to this
challenge with an interdisciplinary set of new courses and a suite of activities
united by the theme of "Scientific Training and Research to Inform DEcisions"
(STRIDE). It specifically will include the rarely explicitly taught skills of
decision support, such as understanding the perspectives of stakeholders,
science communication, and translating scientific uncertainty. The project
anticipates training 90 PhD students, including at least 20 funded doctoral
trainees, and a similar number of non-trainee MS and PhD students that will
participate in program components from the departments of atmospheric and marine
sciences, ecology and evolution, computer science, biomedical informatics,
applied mathematics and statistics, journalism, and advanced computational
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STRIDE will initially target environmental
sustainability (including climate change, marine ecology and natural resource
management, and illegal deforestation) and energy sustainability, and will add
population health in the third year. Research in advanced visual data analytics
to support decisions will be pervasive in all areas. The cross fertilization
between disciplines focused on decision making will prepare students to make
discoveries in the domain sciences and will lead to innovations in visual data
analytics. To develop research skills in new contexts and to diversify career
perspectives, trainees will have summer externships at non-academic partners
such as IBM Research, Brookhaven National Laboratory, and the National Marine
Fisheries Service, with new partners being added each year. The program
comprises three major components: 1) a set of specially designed courses on
decision support, spatial data analysis, visualization, and communication
required for all students; 2) training in a STEM domain discipline; and 3) a set
of non-course-based program elements in which all students will participate,
including recruitment, skill development, professional development, and personal
development. In addition to degrees in their domain-science disciplines,
students will receive a graduate certificate from STRIDE after completing the
three proposed courses and program activities. Specific innovations to be tested
by rigorous evaluation include the seminar course in scientific decision support
that will feature many government/industry scientists, decision makers, and
journalists remotely leading discussions on the science, societal, and other
challenges associated with decision support in their respective fields. Another
new course focusing on science communication for decision makers will be
provided by the Alan Alda Center for Communicating Science in the School of
Journalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.