* 1633971
* Characterizing Dynamic Transitions and Bifurcations to Understand How Flagella Beat
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Susan Dutcher, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,314,000.00

Cilia and flagella are thin, active, beam-like structures that extend from cells
and beat rhythmically to move fluid or propel the cell. "How do cilia and
flagella beat" remains one of the most important unsolved questions in science.
Cilia are found in the human body, on cells that line the airways and fluid-
filled passages in the brain. Flagella share the same structure as cilia, and
are found on swimming cells, such as sperm. From an engineering perspective,
cilia and flagella are tiny machines that independently and automatically
produce wave-like motion. The components of these machines have previously been
identified, but how these components work together to produce waves, without
external control, remains mysterious. This award supports fundamental research
into mechanisms that produce rhythmic motions at the microscopic scale.
Researchers from engineering, biology, and imaging will work together to
identify and characterize key changes in behavior, such as the initiation of
beating, or the transition from forward swimming to backward swimming.
Leveraging a summer research program for students from under-represented groups,
this interdisciplinary project will provide training and research experience at
the intersection of biology and engineering, for graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods from dynamical
systems and nonlinear mechanics can elucidate the mechanism of flagellar
beating. Mathematical models of flagella are explicit quantitative statements of
mechanistic hypotheses. A given model predicts specific bifurcations and
transitions in behavior in response to changes in internal or environmental
parameters. The PIs plan to pursue three experimental aims using the model
organism Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. In each case observations will be compared
to model predictions: (1) Characterize bifurcations from static equilibrium
(paralyzed flagella) to oscillatory motion; (2) Characterize transitions from
asymmetric waveform (forward swimming) to symmetric waveforms (backward
swimming); (3) Measure internal mechanical deformations associated with these
responses. The PIs will model flagella with one-dimensional partial differential
equations (1D-PDEs), and analyze the stability of these PDEs using efficient and
powerful methods developed with prior NSF support. High-speed video microscopy
and image analysis will be used to characterize flagella motion, and optical and
acoustic trapping will be exploited to measure mechanical properties. The
ability of focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) to visualize
the deformation of the flagellar "skeleton" (the axoneme) will be explored.
Focusing on bifurcations and transitions, the PIs can rigorously test the
hypotheses, and firmly establish the basis of flagellar oscillations.