* 1633013
* RAPID: Chemical treatment efficiency of point-of-use filters deployed in Flint, Michigan
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Shawn McElmurry, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,992.00

1633013&lt;br/&gt;McElmurry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in the source and
treatment of Flint's drinking water have resulted in extensive corrosion and
numerous violations to the Safe Drinking Water Act through elevated lead
concentrations. As a measure of protection to consumers, faucet-mounted point-
of-use filters are being deployed across the city at a scale not previously seen
in the United States. The point-of-use filters distributed in Flint are rated
for a maximum lead concentration of 150 ppb; however, concentrations of more
than 40 times that were observed in January 2016. Therefore, there is an
immediate need to rapidly evaluate the treatment efficiency of PoU filters. This
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant provides a unique opportunity to advance
fundamental scientific knowledge regarding physical-chemical process responsible
for lead and DBP removal while simultaneously ensuring public health. Controlled
laboratory experiments will be conducted to determine treatment efficiency under
the range of conditions observed in Flint. These results will be compared to
those obtained from filters in homes where filters are subjected to typical use
conditions that often deviate significantly from conditions used to certify
chemical removal efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies will be conducted to
evaluate two hypotheses: (1) lead and copper removal by the ion exchange resin
will be reduced by competition from other cations and dissolved organic matter
present in Flint drinking water, and, (2) adsorption of trihalomethanes on the
activated carbon filtration media will decrease with increasing disinfectant
dosage. This work will advance the understanding of the removal of lead, copper
and disinfection by-products under real world conditions where complex
interactions with colloids and dissolved organic matter occur. The work will
utilize controlled laboratory experiments, conducted in state-of-the-art
facilities at two major research universities (Wayne State University and
Michigan State University) with a strong commitment to collaborative and
innovative research. The proposed study will help protect human health and
improve the security of municipal water supplies. Laboratory experiments and
field sampling will be done in collaboration with Michigan State University and
University of Michigan, focused on microbial conditions within point-of-use
filters. Results of this study will be disseminated with the assistance of
another faculty at Wayne State University, whose research focuses on translating
scientific information to the public. Graduate and undergraduate students from
groups underrepresented in science and engineering will conduct experiments and
collect field samples providing hands on training in the areas of water
treatment, colloid chemistry, and disinfection processes. Skills these students
obtain will be invaluable in advancing the protection of the nation's water
supply. Additionally, the project team will develop and provide lectures and
special programs on issues related to aging infrastructure and corrosion control
that will be presented at regional meetings of the American Water Works
Association.