* 1633557
* NRT: Coastal Climate Risk and Resilience (C2R2)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,999,055.00

The nation's coasts are home to much of the American population, they play an
important role in the US economy, and they support many valuable ecosystems.
About four million Americans currently live within one meter above the high tide
line, and 23 million live within six meters. In many parts of the country, sea-
level rise between 1960 and 2010 (about 8 cm in the global mean) has already led
to a two- to five-fold increase in the rate of "nuisance" flooding, and rising
seas are making extreme floods more likely. Further amplifying coastal flood
risk, intense hurricanes may become more frequent in a warming world; while
frequent heat, humidity and precipitation extremes provide additional stresses
to societies, economies, and ecosystems. Yet traditional, disciplinary programs
are poorly configured to train the workforce needed to assess coastal climate
risk and to develop and deploy integrated strategies for increasing coastal
climate resilience. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to Rutgers University will prepare the workforce that will build coastal
resilience in the face of climate risks, by training individuals at the MS and
PhD levels who conduct research that integrates all the elements of coastal
systems and that communicate effectively with coastal stakeholders in defining
research problems, conducting research, and applying research to address real-
world resilience challenges. The project anticipates training approximately one
hundred (100) MS and PhD students, including twenty (20) funded trainees, from
the Earth system sciences, social sciences, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preparation for developing and addressing
transdisciplinary research questions related to coastal climate risk and
resilience, as well as applying the knowledge gleaned through this research to
developing resilient coastal systems, trainees will learn to: (1) serve as
disciplinary experts in interdisciplinary teams; (2) formulate and investigate
research questions and concept/systems models that integrate natural science,
social science and engineering perspectives; (3) incorporate stakeholder needs
into the construction of research questions and models and engage stakeholders
in knowledge co-production; and (4) communicate with stakeholders about coastal
climate risk and resilience. Over their first two years, trainees will take four
core courses: (1) a methods and perspectives course; (2) a course on
communicating science to decision-makers; (3) a summer field course, and (4) a
studio workshop that brings trainees together with coastal stakeholders to
address real decision problems. Faculty will work with trainees to incorporate
transdisciplinary research into their theses and to track and reflect on their
experiences through the use of mental mapping techniques. Trainees will also
engage in additional professional development activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship
model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.