* 1633125
* The Panulirus Hydrographic Stations (Hydrostation S): Years 65-69
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 858,369.00

The physical properties of the ocean from the surface layers to the abyssal
water masses are changing in concert with natural and anthropogenically
influenced physical forcing and sustained observations of the ocean are
critically important to establish these rates of change. One of the longest
open-ocean hydrographic stations in the world is maintained at the Hydrostation
S site (formerly known as the Panulirus site) located about 25 km southeast of
Bermuda in the North Atlantic Ocean. This repeat biweekly hydrographic
observations was initiated by Henry Stommel and co-workers in 1954. Now, in its
seventh decade, it continues to be recognized as one of the most important
sustained ocean time-series and provides an invaluable metric for the long-term
state of the North Atlantic subtropical gyre in relation to the meridional
overturning circulation, western boundary transport, and gyre recirculation. For
example, the upper ocean warming trend has strengthened (about 0.8Â° C since the
1970's) while the deep Labrador Sea has cooled by a few tenths of a degree. The
signature of deoxygenation has been observed at Hydrostation S in the upper
ocean (about 7 micro-moles/kg/decade decrease in dissolved oxygen) as well as an
intensification and expansion of the oxygen minimum zone. These changes suggest
that the North Atlantic subtropical gyre is experiencing deoxygenation as in the
Pacific Ocean as a result of increased upper ocean stratification and reduced
solubility of oxygen in warmer waters. The Hydrostation S program and its data
set are managed as a service to the ocean community, being openly distributed
and used as a resource in understanding processes and patterns of variability in
the ocean, as well as for education, mentorship and outreach activities. The
Hydrostation S project will contribute to the research and training of six
research specialists and research technicians at BIOS and contribute to the
research projects of at least three Ph.D. students through on-going educational
partnership with Princeton University and the University of Southampton in the
U.K. The one-day Hydrostation S research cruises are an ideal platform for
testing new sensors and for providing hand-on training to undergraduate students
enrolled in summer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hydrostation S
project is designed to address the overarching hypothesis that the physical
properties of the upper-ocean to deep-ocean are changing in concert with natural
and anthropogenically influenced physical forcing. Sustained observations of the
ocean, such as those from Hydrostation S, remain critically important to
establish rates of change to provide quantitative empirical data for myriad
regional and global ocean synthesis and modeling of ocean processes and future
ocean change. The major objective of Hydrostation S into the seventh decade is
to continue the frequent water column sampling of temperature, salinity, and
dissolved oxygen (and indirectly, sampling of important ocean carbon
time?series) of the North Atlantic subtropical gyre. Such work is complementary
to other sustained observations such as the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study
(BATS) and Ocean Flux Program (OFP). As for the past five years, two CTD
profiles will be conducted to better capture the deep-water variability while
maintaining all the previous discrete depths. The first CTD cast will profile to
full ocean depth (3,200-3,500 m) while the second CTD cast will profile from the
surface to 500 m to allow for biogeochemical instrumentation not rated for full
ocean depth and to support ancillary studies of ocean physics, biological
processes and biogeochemistry. A secondary objective will be to build upon the
collaborative comparison of physical data collected as part of two autonomous
sensor projects. In the latter stages of the project, as ocean glider deployment
becomes more sustainable and reliable, collaborative and comparative efforts
will be used to test the capability of ocean gliders to provide data of
sufficient quality to detect long-term oceanic change in a "virtual" mooring
time-series mode. The robust and highly accurate Hydrostation S data will be
used to test the capability of emerging technologies over the next five to ten
years.