* 1633429
* NRT-IGE: Reducing Attrition of Underrepresented Minority and First-Generation Graduate Students in Interdisciplinary Computational Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Marjorie Zatz, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 352,578.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of California,
Merced will pilot a graduate education innovation in Interdisciplinary
Computational Sciences (ICS) to reduce attrition rates, particularly for
underrepresented minorities and first-generation students for whom degree
completion is a particular challenge. The project will undertake a systematic,
integrated approach that provides team-based interdisciplinary research and
student support and mentoring. Another central element of this approach is
career preparation for research positions in industry and national laboratories,
as well as academia. Project evaluation will examine implementation, student
achievement, and retention and will use formative assessment to guide
refinements. If successful, this pilot project will result in an educational
approach that improves doctoral completion rates for underrepresented groups and
improves career preparedness, and that is scalable and replicable to additional
programs and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the pilot
program are to foster computational and data analytic skills within an
interdisciplinary framework; reduce attrition, especially among underrepresented
minorities and first generation graduate students; and prepare students for
careers in, or in partnership with, national laboratories and industry. Program
activities in support of the goals include a two-day introductory workshop
followed by weekly project meetings and instructional modules focused on
specific skills required to solve interdisciplinary computational science
problems. Module content will include programming languages, tools for data
analytics, model building, fundamental algorithms, and data interpretation and
visualization. In addition, the program will provide professional development
modules focused on project management, teamwork, communication and presentation
skills. All of the modules will be complemented with continuous mentoring from
faculty, peers, and partners from industry and the national laboratories. This
pilot project offers students the opportunity to move away from narrow
disciplinary training, broadening their approaches to problem solving and their
ability to work in diverse teams while also expanding their computational skills
and familiarity with data analytic tools. Assessment will evaluate the success
of instructional modules and the structure and pedagogical strategy of the
project as a whole, with formative assessments informing revisions in an
iterative process. It is expected that the interdisciplinary team-based approach
employed in this project, in combination with professional development, social
supports and multiple mentors, will result in improved completion rates for
underrepresented minority and first generation STEM graduate students and
prepare them for future career success, thus helping to meet a serious national
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.