* 1633722
* NRT-DESE Intelligent Adaptive Systems: Training computational and data-analytic skills for academia and industry
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Christopher Kello, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,921,681.00

The world is bursting with data, not just in sheer amounts of it, but also in
terms of complexity. Interdependencies among variables abound, and their
relationships can change over time in intricate, nonlinear ways. Such
complexities are common in nature and intelligent systems have evolved in
biological organisms to adapt to these interdependencies and nonlinearities.
More recently, engineers have begun to build intelligent systems for
applications in health, security, and industry that can similarly adapt. The
scientists who study intelligent adaptive systems in nature, as well as the
engineers who build them in the lab, are increasingly in need of conceptual and
technical abilities to deal with large, complex systems and datasets. These
abilities provide a common basis for exchanging hypotheses and theories among
mathematicians, physicists, biologists, cognitive scientists, computer
scientists and engineers; all of whom work on common problems of adaptation,
learning, regulation, and prediction. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of California, Merced, will help the
next generation of PhD students make interdisciplinary breakthroughs in theories
and applications of intelligent adaptive systems. The project anticipates
training 100 PhD students, including 50 funded trainees, from doctoral programs
in applied mathematics, cognitive and information sciences, electrical
engineering and computer science, mechanical engineering, physics, and
quantitative and systems biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research in
cybernetics, connectionism, and complex adaptive systems focused on general
principles of intelligent adaptive systems that cut across disciplines and
domains. The NRT program will advance the next wave of research in this area, by
delving more deeply into principles of learning and adaptation as they manifest
across a wider range of biological, human, and technological systems. The
training program includes an intensive computational basecamp, custom course
modules on intelligent adaptive systems, lab rotations, communication skills
development workshops, and industry networking opportunities. Taken together,
these NRT activities will enable the trainees to achieve conceptual and
technical capabilities for dealing with large, complex datasets. All NRT
trainees will have the opportunity to learn about entrepreneurship, network with
industry mentors, engage in professional development, and engage with the local
community to educate, disseminate research, and develop outreach partnerships.
The NRT program will transform the capacity for interdisciplinary research and
education at UC Merced. At the institutional level, the NRT program will serve
as a model for collaborative, interdisciplinary graduate education. An extensive
recruitment plan will connect with and enhance resources and programs at other
UC campuses and a number of Hispanic-Serving Institutions to increase the
diversity of scientists and engineers working on intelligent adaptive systems.
Finally, the NRT program will have a direct and transformative economic impact
in California's Central Valley, by fostering a culture of innovation and higher
education in under-privileged communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.