* 1633286
* A Visual Analytic Observatory of Scientific Knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Chaomei Chen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 381,842.00

This project increase the accessibility of scientific knowledge by creating a
cross-referenced repository of scientific assertions, metrics and indicators of
research impact and trends, and tools for accessing and exploring scientific
knowledge. The project expands the scope of the study of scientific knowledge by
directly addressing the integral role of uncertainties and discrepancies in
understanding and communicating scientific knowledge. The observatory tracks how
a scientific assertion evolves over time in the scientific literature. The
project advances the capabilities of the study of scientific knowledge by
providing references so that researchers can routinely and systematically
compare and evaluate metrics and algorithms designed to capture the impact of
scientific contributions. The increased accessibility of scientific knowledge
improves research productivity as well as the understanding of science and
relevant policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents scientific
knowledge as a semantically organized and adaptive network of scientific
assertions, structures of reasoning and argumentation, and relevant evidence
extracted from the growing body of scientific literature. Extracted concepts,
semantic relations, and argumentative structures are synthesized across
scientific publications using techniques from machine learning, computational
linguistics, quantitative studies of science, and visual analytics. In addition,
uncertainties and discrepancies associated with scientific assertions and their
impacts are identified and cross-referenced in the repository so as to keep
track of their evolution over time. Existing and newly developed metrics and
indicators of research impact are linked directly to assertion-level evidence
and patterns. The observatory serves as a sustainable platform for researchers
and tool developers to access scientific knowledge and relevant resources for
conducting their own studies and evaluating the quality of new metrics and
algorithms in the broad context of the science of science and innovation policy
research.