* 1633831
* NRT INFEWS: UM BRIDGES: Bridging Divides across the Food, Energy, and Water Nexus
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Lisa Eby, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,205,874.00

Growing demand for food, energy, and water and increasing stresses on these
resources have created critical needs at the food, energy, and water nexus. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University
of Montana will address global challenges and national needs by training a
network of STEM graduate students to contribute to more sustainable and secure
food, energy, and water systems in a range of careers. The University of Montana
NRT program will train the next generation of scholars and practitioners by
teaching graduate students how to bridge the divides needed to advance
innovations at the nexus of food, energy, and water systems. Graduates will be
prepared to bridge divides across sectors within the food/energy/water nexus;
scales, from local to global; disciplines, including physical, biological, and
social sciences; science, practice, and policy to ensure decision-relevant
science and science-informed practice; and audiences, to communicate effectively
across diverse constituencies and multiple platforms. The project anticipates
training forty-eight (48) MS and PhD students, including twenty-eight (28)
funded trainees, from the biological, physical, and social sciences. An
additional seventy-five (75) STEM graduate students will participate in specific
program elements alongside the forty-eight (48) NRT trainees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Montana NRT will be built around a set
of linked training elements and research initiatives. Integrative,
interdisciplinary campus and field-based coursework will develop core knowledge
at the food/energy/water nexus and translational skills. In addition,
internships and international experiences will bridge science and practice,
collaborative lab experiences will build interdisciplinary skills, and workshops
will build cutting-edge quantitative, computational, and digital communication
expertise. These training elements will connect evidence-based educational
activities to program goals and use rigorous assessment and adaptive learning to
ensure success. Trainee research will examine and address critical food, energy
and water problems through decision-relevant science that addresses land use,
climate change, uncertainty, governance, and adaptability. Four broad research
themes will be targeted: (1) tradeoffs between food, energy, and water in river
and rangeland systems; (2) energy transitions, fossil-fuel switching, and the
implications for agriculture and water; (3) agricultural system resilience in
the face of drought and climate-variability; and (4) tribal and indigenous
issues at the food/energy/water nexus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.