* 1633830
* BIGDATA: F: Data Driven Optimization on Flag Manifolds with Geometric Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Michael Kirby, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 599,999.00

This research concerns the development of innovative mathematical theory and
algorithms to facilitate knowledge discovery in the massive data sets generated
by scientists, engineers and today's data driven society. New approaches will be
developed that permit the encoding of large quantities of data in a way that
enables the detection of similarities and differences buried in the volumes of
information. The framework is especially useful for characterizing degrees of
similarity, and discovering features or patterns that may be shared between data
sets. The project focuses on the use of tools from geometry and optimization to
provide effective data representations that expand the toolkit of analysts and
enhances their capacity for understanding large and complex data sets. The
methodology will be validated on real world data sets like extreme weather
simulations or biological data sets such as those capturing the human immune
response to infection by pathogens. The techniques being developed may be viewed
as part of the emerging field of geometric data learning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical approach exploits the geometric framework of the
Grassmannian, the manifold that parameterizes the set of subspaces of a given
dimension of a vector space. The appeal of this approach is that subspaces, as
abstract points on the Grassmann manifold, are an effective tool to capture the
natural variability in data observations stemming from, for example, variations
in illumination, or noise. If a subspace of data intersects another subspace of
data in some prescribed number of dimensions, then these abstract points should
be considered to be more related than subspaces that intersect in fewer
dimensions, or not at all. This type of geometric picture, when formulated in a
mathematical framework, leads to the use of flag manifolds and Schubert
varieties for representing and comparing data. The proposed research program
addresses new problems in data driven optimization subject to geometric
constraints, for example, when the feasible set is a Schubert variety. This
framework allows us to extract geometric models that characterize patterns, and
leads naturally to comparisons between large sets of observations based on
similarity measures which are functions of angles between subspaces.