* 1633094
* Collaborative Research: NRT-DESE: Interdisciplinary Research Traineeships in Data-Enabled Science and Engineering of Atomic Structure
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Caesar Jackson, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 439,069.00

In many important natural, synthetic and engineered materials, functionality and
properties emerge at or below the nanoscale; however, quantifying atomic
structure (i.e., local chemistry, bonding, atomic positions, spatial
correlations and topology) in three-dimensions, through time and varying length
scales, remains a challenge. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to North Carolina State University and North Carolina
Central University will develop a new educational paradigm for Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering of Atomic Structure (SEAS) to address the demand for a
new generation of interdisciplinary, data-driven scientists who can apply
advanced statistical methods to atomic-structure data generated from cutting-
edge analytical and computational experiments. The research pioneered by these
students will ultimately lead to a greater understanding of how the atomic
structures of materials govern their physical properties (e.g. electronic,
optical, mechanical). The project anticipates training at least forty (40) MS
and PhD students over the five-year grant, including twenty (20) funded
trainees, from materials science, physics, statistics and applied mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With large investments in our national scientific
infrastructure at both Federal laboratories and universities, a new and evolving
generation of atomically sensitive instruments has opened new opportunities for
next-generation science. Parallel to these developments in measurement sciences,
great strides have been made in computational materials science, which are
providing unprecedented opportunities for predictive materials design. The SEAS
effort will develop a new graduate-training model, responding to the emergence
and rapid growth of this critical interdisciplinary research at the interface of
materials and data science and contributing directly and indirectly to the
national Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), a multi-agency initiative
spearheaded by the White House that advances the U.S. economy by enabling faster
deployment of new materials. The SEAS traineeship program will immerse graduate
students in a unique interdisciplinary curricular and research environment in
which the trainees will be team-mentored by a diverse group of faculty and
external industry and national laboratory scientists. The students will design
professional development portfolios that will include laboratory rotations,
interdisciplinary research group activities, internships, research training
modules, communication training, and leadership-training activities. SEAS will
promote and enhance diversity within the traineeship and larger professional
community, and an integral part of the traineeship will be a bridge-to-the-PhD
program across the partnering institutions aimed at better preparing
underrepresented students to succeed in a research-intensive PhD
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.