* 1633791
* Collaborative Research: Academic hiring networks and scientific productivity across disciplines
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Aaron Clauset, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 392,503.00

Advances in science come from the collective and linked efforts of thousands of
researchers working within and across disciplines. This project creates rigorous
models of the composition, dynamics, and network structure of the United States'
scientific workforce across heterogeneous independent institutions with
different strengths and emphases. The systematic influence of these
institutional and individual characteristics on scientific advances across
disciplines is investigated. The results of this project will generate new
insights into the composition of the scientific workforce and scientific
productivity across fields. In addition, this project trains new graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge computational and statistical research
techniques, and will develop and disseminate new large-scale open data sets on
the composition of the United States' scientific workforce and provide new
software for collecting structured data automatically from open unstructured
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses state-of-the-art computational
and statistical techniques from network science, machine learning, and social
modeling to create a new technology platform for automatically and
systematically collecting high-quality structured data on the composition,
dynamics, and output of the scientific workforce. These data will be combined
with social survey results of individual researchers and with rigorous network
methods to model the relationship between workforce composition, productivity,
and observable differences at the individual and institutional levels within and
between scientific fields. Mathematical models of the short- and long-term
evolution of workforce in order to evaluate the likely outcomes of certain types
of interventions and policies are developed.