* 1633516
* NRT-UtB: Neurophotonics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,928,842.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Boston
University will train scientists and engineers in the emerging interdisciplinary
field of neurophotonics - the use of light-based tools to study brain function
at the cellular scale. Understanding how neural activities and circuits drive
human computation, behavior, and psychology is motivated by a critical societal
need to address brain diseases that involve disruptions or deterioration of
neural circuitry - including Alzheimer's, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson's,
cerebral palsy and multiple sclerosis. Recent scientific discoveries and
powerful new tools in brain research have inspired broad student interest in
career paths focused on understanding brain structure and function, as well as
new industrial and academic career opportunities. Neurophotonics is among the
most rapidly evolving research frontiers in brain science because it allows
researchers to monitor and influence neuron activity and neural circuits at
their most fundamental level. A prominent neurophotonic technique is
optogenetics, through which communication signals from neurons are precisely
monitored, activated, or inhibited using light. This project will support
training for eighty (80) PhD students, including twenty (20) funded trainees,
across the disciplines of neuroscience, biomedical engineering and
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will become versed in the biology of
neural function and the development of optical instruments, photo-excitable
materials, and imaging techniques to sense and affect neural circuits. NRT
trainees will graduate having attended a hands-on neurophotonics technology boot
camp, participated in multiple laboratory research rotations, completed a four-
course core curriculum, conducted challenging doctoral research in a
neurophotonics laboratory, and written a neurophotonics-themed dissertation co-
mentored by NRT faculty. The traineeship project will emphasize immersive
experiential learning activities and peer-to-peer learning, two educational
approaches that have been shown to reinforce learning while simultaneously
improving outcomes for STEM trainees, especially underrepresented minorities.
Interwoven with educational activities will be a professional preparation
program that supports trainee career goals, develops communication skills, and
builds professional networks. Trainee learning objectives will focus on
identifying important research problems in neurophotonics, applying light-based
methods to measure and control neural circuits, working on team-oriented
projects, and communicating effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.