* 1633650
* I-Corps: HeartMapp. A mobile app for patients with Heart Failure
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Ponrathi Athilingam, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Heart failure is a significant public health problem. Currently there are over
five million Americans, predominantly older adults, suffering from heart
failure. These patients are expected to follow complex medication regimen and
self-management practices at home to stay healthy and prevent getting admitted
to hospitals. A mobile application (HeartMapp) is proposed to act as a health
coach by reminding patients to follow health care providers' recommendations at
home. Decision making on heart failure symptoms are often confusing and
challenging for patients. The HeartMapp offers automated feedback to patients
based on the patients' weight, heart rate, and symptoms entered in HeartMapp.
Thus, patients are alerted when symptoms are mild to take the next step and
prevent worsening and readmissions. Under new regulations, if these patients are
readmitted within 30-days after discharge from hospital, the hospitals are not
reimbursed, as well as penalized if the readmission rates are higher than a
government set limit. Reducing readmission penalty for heart failure will
provide financial benefit for health care organizations by generating revenue.
Therefore, hospitals are also interested in finding ways to keep patients
engaged in their self-management. In order to make HeartMapp available, this
project needs to better understand the complex health care ecosystem, i.e., all
the players in this market, the customers and the value that HeartMapp provides
to them, the users and buyers and the approval process, and the revenue streams
and resources needed to make it happen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HeartMapp is an
easy to use non-pharmacological, non-invasive application developed with five
main features as intervention options: 1) assessment of daily weight, blood
pressure, and chronic heart failure (CHF) symptoms with automated feedback to
enhance decision making for management of symptoms; 2) exercise including
physical activity (walking) and deep breathing to improve physical health and
well-being; 3) real time vital signs monitoring utilizing a wearable Bluetooth
device; 4) CHF info that includes audio enabled interactive CHF education to
improve knowledge; and 5) Stats, a graphical module that displays trends on
patient performance. From the technical standpoint, HeartMapp is currently
available in the Android platform but it needs to be updated and enhanced to
include the features coming out of this I-Corps project and translated into
other software platforms (iOS and Windows) to expand the customer base. The
current vision is to create a startup company or collaborate with an existing
company to host the software and market the technology and license it to be
included as part of existing solutions. The final report of I-Corps project will
serve as a guiding document to: 1) submit a Phase I SBIR proposal in order to
update the technology and test the HeartMapp for its efficacy in improving self-
management of patients with CHF and thus potentially curb costly readmissions;
2) submit a Phase II SBIR proposal to take the technology to the market place;
3) Create a startup company or join an existing company interested in the
commercialization of HeartMapp; and/or 4) find investors to provide the
necessary funding to achieve our goals.