* 1633866
* EAGER: Synthesis of New Ferrolites:  Zeolites Containing an All-Iron Framework The First of a New Family of Transition Metal Based Zeolites?
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 155,548.00

The development of new materials is an important aspect of solid-state chemistry
research, where the use of very high temperature liquids to grow crystals of
desired new materials can lead to both the improvement of existing and the
creation of new devices, such as new batteries or new permanent magnets. With
the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry, this research project
focuses on the preparation of new types of zeolites, a class of microporous,
crystalline materials consisting of silicon, aluminum and oxygen that both occur
naturally and are synthesized industrially on a very large scale to satisfy the
widespread demand for their use in catalysis applications. This project details
the development of a new class of zeolites that contain iron instead of aluminum
and silicon. These iron-based zeolites can be utilized as catalysts for
industry, as new magnetic materials for sustainable energy creation, and as new
cathode materials for sodium batteries. To accomplish these tasks,
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers are being trained
in cutting-edge techniques for synthesizing and characterizing these materials
using state of the art instrumentation. The educational aspect of this research
assures that highly trained men, women, and underrepresented minorities can
enter the workforce and meet industry's need for scientists.

Using the first sodalite-type zeolite containing an all iron framework as a
model, the hydroflux synthetic method developed in the zur Loye group is applied
to the synthesis of new iron-based framework materials that can impact a large
number of research areas ranging from simple catalytic materials, to new
magnetic materials, to new sodium ion batteries for stationary power storage.
The synthetic objective is the compositional and structural expansion of the
crystal chemistry of zeolites, specifically synthesis of ferrolites
crystallizing in new framework structures via new synthetic routes. The
optimized reaction conditions target the formation of new iron based frameworks,
specifically the zeolite A and zeolite Y type structures, that are then
investigated for their magnetic behavior and for their ability to ion exchange
sodium, a necessary requirement for stationary sodium battery applications. The
different frameworks are highly magnetic due to the presence of Fe-O-Fe
linkages, which exert an important influence on the structure-specific magnetic
behavior. Similarly, the specific framework structure, with different sized
channels, is expected to greatly impact the sodium ion mobility and, thus, that
optimization is important for battery applications.