* 1633857
* BIGDATA: F: Open-World Foundations for Big Uncertain Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Guy Van den Broeck, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 432,202.00

Driven by the need to learn from vast amounts of text data, efforts throughout
natural language processing, information extraction, databases, and AI are
coming together to build large-scale knowledge bases. These systems continuously
crawl the web to extract relational data from text, and have already populated
their databases with millions of entities and billions of tuples. Large-scale
probabilistic knowledge bases are revolutionizing the way we access data. They
are now routinely used by scientists to build knowledge bases of publications,
by law enforcement to extract information from the dark web, and by regular
search engine users who find their results augmented with structured
information. Such knowledge bases are inherently probabilistic: to go from raw
text to structured data, a sequence of statistical machine learning techniques
associate probabilities with database tuples. This project revisits the
semantics underlying such systems, and provide a more adequate foundational
framework. In particular, the closed-world assumption of probabilistic
databases, that facts not in the database have probability zero, clearly
conflicts with their everyday use, and obstructs the progress in this area.

More specifically, this project develops a new semantic foundation based on the
open-world assumption, that facts not in the database are possible, but have
unknown probability. It designs the basic algorithms for query answering in this
setting, both exact and approximate. Moreover, in a deep theoretical component,
this project studies fundamental questions of data and domain complexity that
are unique to open-world reasoning about big uncertain data. Finally it develops
proof-of-concept applications in machine learning and data mining, and
additional knowledge-representation layers that strengthen open-world reasoning.
The developed semantics provide meaningful answers when some tuple probabilities
are not precisely known. The developed algorithms allow for efficient query
answering, even when reasoning about the open world, in time linear in the
database size for tractable queries. This project provides a scientific leap at
the fundamental, semantic level. It also provides a context for training
undergraduate and graduate students in subjects spanning databases, artificial
intelligence, theory, and machine learning, and will target the integration of
probabilistic knowledge bases into computer science curricula.