* 1633948
* Collaborative Research Belmont Forum: People, poll
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Vance Vredenburg, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2021
* USD 276,304.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a six-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a group of the world?s major and
emerging funders of global environmental change research. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international environmental research most urgently needed to
remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. Each partner organization provides funding for
researchers from their country to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in a
Collaborative Research Action, the six partner organizations have provided
support for research projects that utilize a strong inter- and trans-
disciplinary approach to examine climate, environmental, and related societal
change in mountain regions. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers
to cooperate in a consortium of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that brings together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the
effects of pollution, pathogens and human impacts on mountain ecosystems at the
interface of aquatic and terrestrial habitats. The research will be conducted in
four mountain ranges (Pyrenees, France; Dhofar Mountains, Oman; Sierra Nevada,
USA; and Great Hinggan Mountains, China), and will take place along similar
elevations. The use historical and newly collected data, to develop indicators
of change, and develop and define essential biodiversity variables relevant for
the mountain regions that can be used in models as well as by the general
public, stakeholders and policymakers.