* 1633956
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Understanding Citizenship and National Political Identity Among Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Amy Trauger, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2017
* USD 13,474.00

This study investigates whether and how school classrooms become spaces of
citizenship formation. The project focuses on the Arizona Revised Statute (ARS)
ยง 15-112, which is the basis for elimination and alteration of ethnic studies
courses in Arizona public and charter high schools. The ban focuses on specific
courses, despite research showing how those courses are central to student
success. Debates surrounding such courses reflect concerns about the U.S.-Mexico
border, migration, and what constitutes American culture. Project investigators
inquire into the process by which school classrooms and specific types of school
curricula shape national identity, citizenship practices, and educational
outcomes. The project focuses on the role of education among underrepresented
groups to foster inclusion and national identity, and is directed and conducted
by individuals who are underrepresented in STEM fields. The data will be
disseminated through conference presentations and publications, reports to
participants and through the Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research. Ethnic studies courses are currently a topic of similar debate
in other states, and an analysis of the impacts of the ethnic studies ban in
Arizona is likely to inform decisions made elsewhere.

This research examines the following questions: 1) How do high school classrooms
function as political spaces, and what are the associated educational outcomes?
2) Does the ban promote a form of whitened citizenship in the United States? If
so, how? 3) What are the processes of citizen-subject formation available to
teachers and high school students in this context? The project's intellectual
merit derives from new disciplinary engagements with the geographies of young
people and the role of the school as both a system and a space in constructing
and producing the citizen. Until recently social science research on minors
emphasized parenting and behavioral studies, and largely ignored the political
context of minors. This project addresses the distinctness of political spaces
inhabited by teenagers and how they are engaged in the process of citizen
formation. The investigators will collect data through in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with policy-makers, teachers, activists and former students;
narrative analysis of court documents and public records; and direct observation
of classes, Arizona House of Representatives Education Committee meetings, and
Tucson Unified School District school board meetings. This combination of
qualitative approaches is designed to triangulate information about professed
beliefs, political narratives, and observed behavior.