* 1633124
* BIGDATA: IA: Democratizing Massive Fluid Flow Simulations via Open Numerical Laboratories and Applications to Turbulent Flow and Geophysical Modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 952,570.00

Computer simulations of turbulent fluid flows are playing an increasingly vital
role in engineering applications (e.g. reducing drag forces on vehicles and
predicting wind turbine aerodynamic efficiency) and in geophysical sciences
(e.g. describing the fate of pollutant dispersion or Lagrangian transport and
mixing in the ocean). Simulations consist of discretizing and integrating the
partial differential equations governing fluid flow and transport forward in
time, providing solutions for physical variables (fields such as velocity and
pressure) as function of time and space in the entire domain of interest. Since
such simulations generate enormous amounts of data, the prevailing approach has
been for researchers to analyze the data "on the fly" during the simulation runs
while only a small subset of time-steps are stored for subsequent analysis. As a
result, often large simulations of the same process must be repeated after new
questions arise that were not initially obvious. Many (or even most)
breakthrough concepts cannot be anticipated in advance, as they will be
motivated in part by output data and must then be tested against it. As a
result, there is a need for methods to store entire space-time data from such
simulations. This project develops innovative tools for the efficient creation
of open numerical databases that contain massive outputs from computational
fluid dynamics simulations used in turbulence research and geophysical transport
modeling and makes these available to the entire community. Several of the
datasets to be included into the Open Numerical Laboratory will be contributed
by external researchers. In addition to enhancing engineering and geophysical
fluid mechanics and turbulence research, democratized access to large-scale
turbulent flow simulation data will also play a crucial role in education and
training for the next generation of researchers. Active learning through new
educational modules that allow students to query simulation datasets in
unprecedented detail will provide new educational paradigms. More broadly, the
lessons learned from this project will be generalizable to many other fields
where numerical simulations generate very large datasets that are difficult to
access using prevailing approaches. In this way, the project will enhance the
scientific and broader impacts of the US high-performance scientific computing
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop innovative tools
for the efficient creation of open numerical databases that contain massive
outputs from computational fluid dynamics simulations used in turbulence
research and geophysical transport modeling. An ingest pipeline to be developed
will enable users to transfer data from file systems containing the output of
their massive direct numerical simulations, build a database, and serve it to
the community for open exploratory data analysis and innovative turbulence and
oceanic mixing research. To date, the investigators involved in this project
have built an Open Numerical Laboratory focusing on direct numerical simulations
(DNS) of canonical turbulent flows, in which the entire space-time data are
available to the wider research community. However, the existing datasets are
few in number and databases have been created one by one, using methodologies
difficult to replicate on a massive scale. Moreover, emerging Exascale
simulations will potentially result in data sets of unprecedented scale (tens to
hundreds of PetaBytes). Advanced computer science algorithms will be required to
tackle these challenges. This project will (a) develop automated, and scalable
data management algorithms to ingest, index and serve very large data sets
generated by a wide range of groups, (b) explore novel algorithms using spatio-
temporal subsampling combined with online interpolation with re-simulation,
yielding large compression factors depending on the subsampling stride, and (c)
use machine learning algorithms to identify localized regions of interest in the
simulations and save these 4D domains in a database for detailed follow-up
analytics. The new databases will include data from (1) the largest channel flow
DNS, (2) rotating and stratified turbulence of geophysical interest, (3) a DNS
of developing wall boundary layer and (4) detailed ocean circulation models with
complex boundary conditions. As part of the innovative domain science
applications, data sets will be used to improve turbulence models using data-
assimilation concepts, study Lagrangian vortex dynamics, and explore geophysical
transport in a regional general circulation model of the North Atlantic Ocean.