* 1633535
* Late Cenozoic dynamics of the latitudinal biodiversity gradient: Regional extinction, range expansion, and biological attributes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* David Jablonski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 401,560.00

The most dramatic biological pattern on Earth, the gradient of increasing
diversity of species and major groups from the poles to the tropics, is well-
documented but the processes generating and maintaining this pattern remains
poorly understood. Understanding the factors behind the latitudinal diversity
gradient is crucial for developing a more rigorous picture of the dynamics of
biodiversity, and for better management of marine biodiversity informed by
history to predict species' responses to future global changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate those processes, this research will
inventory the past and present spatial distributions of species in an
ecologically and economically important group, the marine bivalves, an ideal
target because their excellent fossil record can track the origin, spread, and
range-contraction of lineages in response to past episodes of global change.
Factors potentially shaping the present-day diversity gradient, such as the rate
of environmental change and features of the species themselves, such as food
source and body size, will be evaluated by synthesizing museum collections and
published records. The work will contribute a large block of data to the public
Paleobiology Database, support training of undergraduates and a postdoctoral
scholar, and produce on-line educational resources, including a high-school
teaching module derived from the research.