* 1633282
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Computation and Access Control on Big Multiuser Data
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Mariana Raykova, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 183,414.00

This project is developing new foundational cryptographic techniques for
outsourcing data and computations on it, which fully preserve data privacy. The
focus is on real-world settings involving multiple users where privacy with
respect to all other users is required, as well as privacy from the service
provider. The project will aim to minimize the interaction between users in the
system, making the computational complexity for each client independent of the
total number of users. The investigators are developing protocols that allow
many users to outsource their data to a cloud provider and later access it
obliviously with respect to both the provider and other users while achieving as
closely as possible the above efficiency requirements. This enables not only
access but also computation over the outsourced data using a more efficient
computational model called random access machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
techniques aim to minimize the work performed by the users as well as the
communication between users and the service provider. The project develops
cryptographic techniques that protect data privacy while enabling its use in
cloud computing. Resolving these issues is of increasing importance due to the
explosion of data produced by people and machines. The investigators are
committed to the dissemination of research results and education of students in
this area.