* 1633336
* NRT: RIP-TIDES: Research Intensive Pedagogical Training of InterDisciplinary Estuarine Scientists
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* William Cochlan, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,922,930.00

Urbanized estuaries and coastal regions, where rising sea level, warming
temperatures, and invasive species intersect growing human populations,
intensifying development, and economically important activities, are among the
most vulnerable to the pressures of disruptive global changes. Interdisciplinary
STEM professionals are needed to develop and implement evidence-based adaptation
strategies and solutions that will harmonize human-built and natural
environments to support coastal ecosystem and community resilience. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to San Francisco
State University will prepare a new generation of masters-level graduates with
the scientific and professional skills needed to enter STEM and STEM-allied
careers that address research projects focused on adaptation, mitigation and
conservation solutions for urbanized coastal areas confronting the effects of
climate change. Trainees will be recruited from a diversity of populations to
enhance the creativity and success of our nation's future STEM professionals.
The project anticipates training forty (40) to sixty (60) MS students, including
forty (40) funded trainees, from the Departments of Biology, Earth and Climate
Science, Chemistry, and Geography; trainees will participate in an
interdisciplinary MS degree program in Marine Science based at the Romberg
Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
combine coursework, an interdisciplinary research experience, and a professional
internship to graduate MS students adept at working at the interface of science
and society in a time of global change. The new MS curriculum will consist of:
(1) an integrated series of courses and workshops to provide a comprehensive
background in global change impacts on urbanized coastal areas and professional
and communication skills training; (2) an internship with a policy, management
or public education organization; (3) an independent research project; (4)
teaching experience through a teaching assistantship; and (5) dedicated advising
sessions throughout the program to support student success and professional
development. Formal coursework will introduce students to interconnected aspects
of estuarine and coastal processes, biotic responses, critical habitats, human
impacts, and resource management issues associated with global change. Graduate
seminars will emphasize critical reading of relevant primary literature.
Workshops will address professional skills, scientific communication, scientific
writing, data analysis, ethics and budgeting. Our program will train MS students
to reach diverse audiences through effective communication and education, and
support policymakers in translating science to inform decisions. Trainees will
be mentored in conducting cutting-edge research projects that examine impacts of
global change and that illuminate fruitful areas for action in developing
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.