* 1633967
* Predicting Fiber Attrition during Processing of Long-Fiber Reinforced Composites using a Mechanistic Model Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tim Osswald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,840.00

Due to their light weight and superior strength, Long Fiber-Reinforced
Thermoplastics (LFTs) are used by the automotive and aerospace industries to
manufacture critical load bearing structures. One of the major problems with
LFTs is that the fibers that reinforce the plastic break during the molding
process, compromising the strength of the final part. The fiber breakage also
influences other concerns that manufacturers have when making these parts: how
the fibers align (fiber orientation) and how they bunch up, leaving portions of
the part without fibers (fiber density distribution). Therein lies the problem -
it is the fibers that give a part strength. Today, manufacturing companies spend
an enormous amount of time and resources trying to control the process to keep
the fibers from breaking, bunching up or excessively orienting. They do this by
repeatedly making prototypes until getting it right (trial-and-error). The
computer simulation within this project can help the engineer visualize the
fiber motion within the molding process, and thus solve the underlying problems
before actually making a part. This project will result in a tool that industry
can use to control the manufacturing process of discontinuous fiber-reinforced
polymer composite structures, allowing engineers to make a part they know they
can trust. With this increase in trust, these energy-efficient production
methods for light weight parts will have a much wider acceptance. An increase in
light parts will result in fuel efficiency in the transportation sector,
significantly reducing CO2 emissions and directly supporting important worldwide
climate change minimization strategies. Furthermore, being able to design LFT
parts with confidence will unleash the potential of cost-competitive production
of environmentally friendly, light weight and strong composite parts, and
provide a technical edge to the automotive and aeronautical industries at a time
when energy efficiency and innovation are needed.

The modeling approach presented in this project is aimed at providing a tool
required to understand and predict defects that arise in the molding of fiber
reinforced composites, which today's simulation programs are not able to handle,
in particular fiber attrition and fiber density distribution development during
flow. The simulation in this project models the behavior of fiber suspensions at
polymer processing concentrations using a single particle simulation approach
for fiber bending and fiber breakage. The model represents each fiber in the
system as a flexible chain of beam elements interconnected by nodes. Modeling
flexible fibers is essential to properly understand behavior such as fiber
jamming and fiber breakage, which is not accounted for when using the common
rigid fiber assumption. The model researched here includes effects such as
hydrodynamic forces, fiber flexibility, and excluded volume forces due to fiber-
fiber and fiber-wall contacts. Results obtained with this simulation work will
be validated with measurements conducted in controlled experimental set-ups at
the PI's laboratories, and ultimately comparisons will be made with realist
parts made by the PI's industrial partners. At the end of the project, the
mechanistic model approach will be coupled to commercial software packages. The
final product will allow the process engineer to predict process-induced fiber
breakage as well as the properties of the final part during the design phase.
Additionally, the processes can be modified to find optimal conditions, screw
and gate geometries in order to minimize fiber attrition and achieve ideal fiber
length distributions. The final tool will be the first model that incorporates
and couples all three fiber properties and their interactions: fiber
orientation, fiber density and fiber length distributions. With a higher level
of understanding of the fiber motion phenomena during molding it will eventually
be possible to mass produce polymer composite parts with increased properties
and controlled quality making light weight polymer composites available to a
wider range of applications.