* 1633259
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: BirdVox: Automating Acoustic Monitoring of Migrating Bird Species
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Juan Bello, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 612,383.00

Current bioacoustic monitoring of natural environments requires processing by
humans to extract information content from recordings. Thus human processing
creates a fundamental bottleneck in which data collection far outpaces
capabilities to extract relevant and desired information. Bioacoustic research
on automatic species classification in natural environments can be broadly
divided into two groups: distinguishing a predefined set of known species from
audio clips and extracting species as events that occur in a continuous audio
stream. Both classification techniques have their specific problems--many of the
data used distinguishing predefined species are recorded under "studio"
conditions and not extensible to natural conditions, while processing of
continuous audio streams generate many false positives.

To overcome these challenges we will take a multi-tiered approach: Analyzing a
data set consisting of full-night recordings from 10 recording units over 100
nights. Building a web-enabled software to engage citizen scientists to identify
the flight calls, providing us with a large and extensive model training
dataset. Developing novel convolutional deep-learning networks, which are well
suited for analysis of complex auditory scenes. Visualizing patterns detected
and classified flight calls in space and time to produce novel information about
the bird migration. Comparing model-generated acoustic data with radar, video,
and direct visual citizen science datasets to produce the most comprehensive
accounts of nocturnal bird migration possible. The combination of domain
knowledge in bird vocalizations, engaging citizen scientists to allow
development of large well annotated training datasets, and taking a novel deep-
learning approach, will finally resolve the machine classification of acoustic
signals in natural environments.