* 1633160
* Student Investigator Travel Awards for OHBM 2016
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Martin Lindquist, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 27,077.00

The Organization for Human Brain Mapping (OHBM) is the primary international
organization dedicated to non-invasive neuroimaging research and the functional
organization of the human brain. The Annual Meeting of OHBM is regarded as the
premier venue for the integration of innovative brain imaging methods and
cognitive neuroscience, and has emerged to address the need of the brain-mapping
scientific community for a forum to disseminate findings and enable interactions
among scientists investigating the functional organization of the brain with
emerging imaging-based methods. Since 1994, the OHBM has sponsored twenty-one
highly successful meetings, where attendees are exposed to cutting-edge
neuroimaging data acquisition methods, emerging approaches to large-scale
neuroimaging data analysis, the visualization of results, and their applications
in health and disease. This award will fund travel awards for deserving students
and trainees to attend the 2016 Annual Meeting to be held in Geneva,
Switzerland. Travel awards will be given to the 25 students with the highest-
ranked abstracts. Of these at least 15 travel awards will be awarded to the
students with the top-ranked abstracts among 3 targeted groups (women,
minorities, disabled).

The Annual Meeting provides a means for students of neuroimaging to attend
educational courses, hear lectures from leading brain researchers, form new
collaborations, and to present their original research. Historically, female
representation in the mathematical and computational sciences has been low. In
contrast, in both neuroscience and psychology it has been relatively very high.
Hence, the ability to work in the cross-section of statistics, computer-science,
psychology, and neuroscience promises to provide computational training to a
diverse audience and help bridge the gender gaps in the STEM fields. In
addition, improved understanding of the organization of the human brain is
directly relevant to treating neurological and psychiatric disease, and the use
of non-invasive imaging methods is increasingly important to translational
investigation and training in clinical neuroscience. As neuroimaging is used in
a wide-range of scientific disciplines, we would expect benefits for society in
areas ranging from economic and social policies to medical, educational and
psychological interventions.