* 1633158
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: F: Too Interconnected to Fail? Network Analytics on Complex Economic Data Streams for Monitoring Financial Stability
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Shawn Mankad, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 525,247.00

The recent financial crisis has accentuated the need for effective monitoring,
oversight and regulation of financial markets and institutions. Complex market
structures involving intricate interconnected relationships among financial
institutions can help propagate and amplify shocks and hence also foster
systemic risk. This project develops an integrative framework, based on
accounting principles, that leverages a wide array of diverse quantitative
financial datastreams, complemented by metadata and market announcements for the
purpose of identifying and predicting market participants that could endanger
the overall financial system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds
upon modern statistics and computer science works, as well as recent financial
and economic ideas aimed at assessing threats to financial stability and
uncovering the complexity of financial systems in different market conditions.
It will result in both new methods for complex Big Data and empirical results
that can advance the state-of-the-art in financial research, as well as tools
that support and enhance financial policymaking and decision-making. Key tasks
of the project include: (1) Develop a rigorous accounting framework to integrate
multiple financial and econometric data streams from many platforms and
technologies. (2) Develop and customize a range of new network models and
analysis tools for use with multiple financial data streams. An important idea
will be to extend network and econometric tools in order to compare the
structural evolution of different types of networks in response to external
events and policy changes.