* 1633991
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Chronic Kidney Disease, Environmental Risk and the Transformation of Agrarian Landscapes and Livelihoods
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,997.00

This project investigates how environmental illnesses reconfigure the
relationships between health, knowledge, and agricultural modernization. In
recent years a mysterious and severe form of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKDu) has
emerged in several agricultural communities around the world. Those affected are
predominantly young and middle aged male agricultural workers who do not suffer
from the risk factors typically associated with kidney disease. While the exact
cause of CKDu is still a source of scientific uncertainty, narratives that link
the disease to the agrarian landscape have captivated popular imagination and
influence farmers' cultivation practices, albeit in uneven, haphazard, and
poorly understood ways. This project builds upon political ecology of health and
science and technology studies (STS) to investigate how uncertainty about the
cause of CKDu shapes health-environment interactions and agrarian landscapes and
livelihoods. In doing so, it will account for the complex ways that farmers
perceive and act on agricultural health risks while illuminating how contested
understandings of environmental illnesses can fundamentally restructure
agricultural practices, systems of production, and relations of expertise.
Through this analysis, the proposed research will contribute directly to the
development of policies and programs that facilitate agrarian livelihoods in the
context of disease.

Since the first reports of the emergence of a new form of Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKDu) in the early 1990s, Sri Lanka's once peripheral dry zone has become the
epicenter of an epidemic that is slowly crippling agricultural communities
across the island's rice belt. The proposed project focuses on three dimensions
of the relationship between CKDu and agricultural practices to explain how this
scientifically contested illness is remade into an agricultural problem, and
with what effects. First, the project investigates how ideas about the
environment and its links to disease are formed, reinforced, and circulated.
Second, it evaluates how farmers' cultivation practices are changing in response
to the problem of CKDu and documents their shifts to native rice varieties and
also to organic - or chemical free - systems of production, albeit in spatially
uneven and sometimes transitory ways. Additionally, this study investigates how
uncertainty about CKDu's cause mediates farmers' interactions with the
environment and shapes the uneven adoption of native seeds as disease management
strategies. Finally, the project examines how relationships between health and
agricultural modernization in the dry zone have changed over time and inform
contemporary agrarian shifts in response to CKDu. The project integrates
archival research, ethnographic methods, and household surveys to study two dry
zone farming communities. Findings of this research will provide insights into
how contested agri-environmental-health problems shape practices of disease
management and give rise to new forms of agricultural production. While this
research is anchored in an analysis of shifting agrarian livelihoods in CKDu
endemic areas of Sri Lanka, its findings will be applicable to other geographic
regions where parallel epidemics of mystery kidney disease are found in
agricultural communities such as India, Egypt, and Central America.