* 1633911
* Finescale Structure and Dynamics of the Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Robert Todd, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,167,885.00

While the significance of the Gulf Stream to the global climate system has long
been recognized, subsurface observations that resolve its variability and
dynamics are limited. Understanding the dynamics of the Gulf Stream under the
current climate is a critical first step, and this study will contribute
significantly to advancing knowledge of the fine scale structure, dynamics, and
stability of the Gulf Stream and may shed light on western boundary currents in
other basins. Estimates of subsurface Gulf Stream structure and variability will
serve as targets for modeling efforts. Observations from this program will be
made available in near-real time for use in operational numerical models where
they have demonstrated impacts. Concurrent biological and physical measurements
within the Gulf Stream collected during this program are likely to lead to
opportunities for interdisciplinary studies. Outreach and education activities
will include involvement with established undergraduate summer programs at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, inclusion of new findings in graduate
instruction through the Massachusetts Institute of Technology-Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution Joint Program, and showcasing of the research and
underwater gliders at public events. The project will train and support one
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on a successful 1-year pilot
study, this project will use autonomous underwater gliders to collect high-
resolution measurements of temperature, salinity, currents, and biological
indicators within the Gulf Stream between southern Florida and New England for
two years. At the conclusion of the field program, an unprecedented set of
approximately 150 cross-Gulf Stream transects through the upper 1000 m over a
three-year period will offer a unique opportunity to examine the fine scale
structure and dynamics of the Gulf Stream. This project will focus on 1)
seasonal and along-stream variability in Gulf Stream structure, including
potential vorticity and implications for stability; 2) large-amplitude internal
waves and thick bottom mixed layers that are formed when the Gulf Stream flows
over the continental margin upstream of Cape Hatteras; and 3) quantifying the
effects of horizontal stirring using along-isopycnal temperature, salinity, and
potential vorticity as passive tracers. This research will stimulate future
theoretical and analytical advances in the understanding of western boundary
currents and their role in the Earth's climate system.