* 1633275
* Collaborative Research: NRT-IGE: Deploying Holistic Admissions and Critical Support Structures to Increase Diversity and Retention of US Citizens in Physics Graduate Programs
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,054.00

The issue of diversity in STEM is of national importance. The future needs of
the US technological workforce necessitate cultivating the entire domestic
talent pool, especially groups historically and currently underrepresented in
STEM: women, African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans.
Successfully transitioning underrepresented students to graduate studies is key
to this vision, but the majority of STEM PhD programs are failing in this
regard. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the Rochester Institute of
Technology and the American Physical Society (APS) will explore interventions
that may help increase the access of US women and underrepresented minorities to
physics PhD programs and increase the PhD completion rates of these groups. This
innovative project will, for the first time, investigate how physics faculty
approach admissions and student retention. Evaluation data from this project
will allow the design of training materials to help faculty use more inclusive
practices. Because these interventions are likely to be transferrable to
different fields and institutions, the project has the potential to
revolutionize how STEM graduate admission is carried out and to increase the
completion rates of US citizens in STEM PhD programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address graduate STEM education inclusion at both the admission and
retention phases. To address access, the project will investigate faculty
attitudes and admission measures. Physics faculty attitudes toward diversity,
merit, and non-cognitive constructs will be assessed as a measure of change
readiness. Participating faculty will then be trained in holistic admissions, a
method that is proven to increase diversity in graduate education. The project
will develop and validate a non-cognitive assessment tool as part of the
holistic admissions packet. To address retention, faculty will be trained on
evidence-based support structures that can help new graduate students manage the
difficult first years of graduate school. Experimental faculty-centered
workshops on admissions and retention will be developed and delivered by the
project to four partnering programs at three universities (Rochester Institute
of Technology, University of Central Florida, and University of Denver) and then
at national meetings hosted by the APS. Formative assessments of these workshops
throughout the grant period will be used to revise and refine the materials,
resulting in an Admissions and Retention Faculty Training Program that may be
used by departments across the country. The APS will curate the resulting
materials and help facilitate training during and after project completion,
ensuring wide dissemination and sustainable impact of proven
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.