* 1633008
* NRT-IGE: Advancing Graduate Education in the Chemical Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Michael Ashby, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 493,563.00

A clear need for reconsidering the doctoral curriculum in the chemical sciences
has emerged. The long-established apprenticeship model for training graduate
students, whereby a doctoral student learns from one master advisor, assumes
that most graduating Ph.D. students will become faculty members within a
university or conduct industry research to address foundational questions in the
sciences. Today most Ph.D. chemists do not seek academic appointments and much
less basic research is being conducted in the chemical industry. In addition,
the knowledge and skill base doctoral students are expected to master continues
to expand, while market-like behaviors undertaken by faculty to secure grants,
contracts, and patents may create doctoral training contexts in which doctoral
research skill development is uneven or unnecessarily extended. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) track to the University of Oklahoma will pilot an
innovative graduate curriculum in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
that emphasizes customization of individual student programs and careful
monitoring of progress. Learning outcomes and evaluation data will be used to
determine if this transformative curriculum effectively promotes efficient
individual doctoral training while decreasing the time to degree. This
curriculum is anticipated to provide a template for revision and reinvigoration
of doctoral programs in the chemical sciences nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the components of this innovative curriculum model
are based on recommendations from landmark national studies concerning STEM
graduate education, this pilot will test these components within a comprehensive
curricular revision project. The curriculum model will employ competency-based
assessment, accelerated learning, and concrete milestones to meet the goals of
broadening participation in the chemistry Ph.D. program while decreasing the
time to degree. Through greater oversight, customized curricula, and the use of
student-led Individual Development Plans, the number of graduates per year is
expected to increase as a result of minimizing attrition and decreasing the time
to degree. Greater emphasis will be placed on professional development and skill
sets that reach beyond the traditional, narrow definition of chemistry so
graduates will be better positioned to contribute to an increasingly diverse
workforce. The effectiveness of the new curriculum will be evaluated by
comparison with historical data at the University of Oklahoma and current
practices and data from a number of peer institutions. The project will document
"real time" student and faculty experiences and detail emergent challenges as
the curriculum is enacted, thereby delineating how the curriculum model may be
best replicated across doctoral programs and serve as a resource for other
universities nationwide. Project dissemination will include the development of a
web-based toolbox of resources to facilitate widespread adoption of successful
components. Networked Improvement Communities of faculty and administrators from
peer institutions will be used to promote cultural change, invigorate the
national debate, maintain reform momentum, and to navigate institutional
barriers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.