* 1633959
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reconstruction of Alpine Aquatic Ecosystem Responses to Temperature Changes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* David Porinchu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,960.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS) PROGRAM

ABSTRACT

This doctoral dissertation research will investigate the responses of high
elevation aquatic ecosystems to amplified thermal conditions during the
Quaternary and the Pleistocene-Holocene periods. Specifically, the research will
focus on reconstructing recent and long-term environmental conditions in the
alpine and sub-alpine lakes in the Front Range of the Colorado Rockies. New
insights will be provided on how the changes in these freshwater systems would
affect food web mechanisms, predator/prey dynamics and the expansion of invasive
species in these critical ecosystems. Furthermore, the research will advance our
understanding of how such changes in the structure, function and composition of
aquatic ecosystems would impact access and availability of freshwater resources
for recreational and economic use. Findings from this research will provide
resource managers with new information that will help in managing the ecological
and economic impacts of ongoing environmental changes. The doctoral student will
work with government agencies to create and disseminate materials to further
public education and outreach. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.

The addition of cold, silt-enriched water from accelerated glacial melt into
alpine aquatic ecosystems will impact the physical and geochemical conditions of
these systems. Understanding the magnitude and rate of change that characterized
the transition from the previous glacial to the present interglacial conditions
will establish a baseline for comparison of aquatic ecosystem responses to
modern thermal amplifications. The doctoral student will conduct a paired study
of glaciated and unglaciated lakes to assess the dampening effect of glacial
meltwater input on chironomid communities during the recent past and during the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition, and document the response of aquatic ecosystems
in alpine and subalpine environments to glacial ice retreat. Chironomids are a
family of flies and their larvae and pupae are important food items for fish
such as trout. To reconstruct past environmental conditions, lake sediment cores
will be collected and analyzed for abundance of chironomid remains using Carbon
(C) and Nitrogen (N) isotope analyses. The research will apply a chironomid-
based inference model to describe changes in the productivity of the aquatic
ecosystems through time. Variations in C will be used to track vegetation change
within the lake and catchment and fluctuations in N will be used to establish
changes in lake productivity as well as the trophic status of the lakes.