* 1633750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: User Performance and Cognitive Load Measures of Geovisualization and Tactile Feedback Maps
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Dorothy Sammons, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,938.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate multi-sensory
visual and tactile interfaces for understanding complex spatial data. The
project will contribute new insights to an emerging interdisciplinary research
thrust involving geography and other spatial sciences, geoscience education,
cartographic visualization, and cognitive psychology that examines how the
dimensionality of a topographic map affects map users' ability to understand and
apply spatial information. By comparing cognitive load and learning effects on
the basis of dimensionality, the project will help identify the role spatial
ability plays in supporting comprehension of map data and what instructional
strategies may be appropriate for varied levels of dimensionality. The project
will help improve spatial thinking abilities through the development of engaging
instructional strategies and hands-on use of the innovative technologies in
order to better prepare students for success in science, technology, education,
and mathematics (STEM) careers. The project's research on multi-sensor
interfaces will support further inquiry into the role of dimensionality as a
factor in spatial thinking to advance STEM education that potentially can
benefit a broad range of users but will have special value for kinesthetic
learners and visually impaired individuals because of greater emphasis on
interactive, tactile features of multi-sensory instruction. The source code and
resources for teaching spatial skills from a subsequent map-reading
instructional module will be made readily accessible to assist others in
improving STEM educational capabilities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent innovations in three-dimensional (3-D)
geovisual and tactile interactive displays can facilitate multi-sensory
learning. While the presentation of mapped landscapes using two-dimensional
(2-D) topographic contour lines for a map user requires transfer of abstract 2-D
spatial data to visual the 3-D world, the augmented-reality sandbox, a 3-D
tangible user-interface, enables users to touch and manipulate 3-D map surfaces
in real-time. Learning is multi-sensory, because interactive tactile feedback
complements visual feedback, but previous studies disagree about the learning
effect of varying the dimension in which spatial information is presented.
During the conduct of this study, the doctoral student will use an experimental
design to assess the effect of map dimensionality on learning performance scores
and on mental effort while controlling for differences in spatial thinking
ability and gender. He will measure prior spatial thinking ability of research
subjects using two widely used spatial ability tests, the mental rotations test
and the paper-folding test. Geoscience undergraduate students will be placed
into different groups based on their gender and will be randomly assigned to
receive instruction conveyed through one of the three topographic map
interfaces: the 3-D augmented-reality sandbox; a 2.5-D geovisual computer
interface through which a 3-D image is superimposed on a 2-D computer screen; or
a 2-D printed map. This research design will focus on ascertaining whether and
how map dimensionality influences participants' abilities to use spatial
information from topographic maps with the least amount of mental effort.
Learning performance will be assessed as each group completes a common post-test
on map-reading skills. Mental effort will be measured through the use of eye
tracking analysis of pupil size and movement as correlated to participant self-
ratings using the mental-effort measurement scale. Comparing interactions
between mental effort and performance scores on the basis of dimensionality will
identify how spatial thinking supports comprehension of topographic map profiles
and what instructional and learning strategies may be appropriate for varied
levels of dimensionality.