* 1633753
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Big Imaging-Omics Data Mining Framework for Precision Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Heng Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,321,556.00

The research objective of this proposal is to address the computational
challenges in an innovative BIGDATA application on imaging-omics based precision
medicine. Recent advances in high-throughput imaging (such as histopathology
image) and multi-omics (such as DNA sequence, RNA expression, methylation, etc.)
technologies created new opportunities for exploring relationships between
histology, molecular events, and clinical outcomes using quantitative methods.
However, the unprecedented scale and complexity of these imaging-omic data have
presented critical computational bottlenecks requiring new concepts and enabling
tools. This project builds a new computational framework to integrate novel big
data mining algorithms with cloud and high-performance computing strategies for
revealing complex relationships between histopathology images, multi-omics, and
phenotypic outcomes. This project is innovative and crucial not only to
facilitating the development of new big data mining techniques, but also to
addressing emerging scientific questions in imaging-omics and many other
biomedical applications. The developed methods and tools are expected to impact
other cancer genomics research and enable investigators working on cancer
medicine to effectively test their scientific hypothesis. This project
facilitates the development of novel educational tools to enhance several
current courses. University of Texas at Arlington is a minority-serving
institution and has large population of Hispanic and Black Americans. This
project engages the minority students and under-served populations in research
activities to give them a better exposure to cutting-edge science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve the key and challenge problems in big
imaging-omics data mining, this project explores the following research tasks.
First, the large-scale non-convex sparse learning models are developed for
identifying outcome-relevant phenotypic traits from big histopathology images.
Second, the biological domain knowledge is utilized to guide the sparse learning
models to uncover the molecular bases of complex traits. Third, the data
integration models are designed to integrate imaging-omics data from multiple
sources and discover the heterogeneous biomarkers. Fourth, the Baysian learning
model is explored to predict longitudinal cancer outcomes. Fifth, the cloud
computing and high-performance computing strategies are developed to support the
big imaging-omics data mining, such as optimizations for various data mining
workloads on heterogeneous hardware (e.g. GPU and NUMA multicore processors) to
fully unlock the potential of data center hardware. It is innovative to
integrate big data mining algorithms with cloud and high-performance computing
to imaging-omics that hold great promise for a systems biology of the precision
medicine.