* 1633720
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Efficient Distributed Computation of Large-Scale Graph Problems in Epidemiology and Contagion Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Gopal Pandurangan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 565,877.00

A number of phenomena of societal importance, such as the spread of diseases
and&lt;br/&gt;contagion processes, can be modeled by stochastic processes on
networks. The analysis &lt;br/&gt;and control of such network phenomena involve,
at their heart, fundamental graph-theoretic problems. &lt;br/&gt;The graphs
encountered are typically of large-scale (having tens of millions of nodes);
&lt;br/&gt;further, typical experimental analyses involve large designs with a
number of parameters, &lt;br/&gt;leading to hundreds of thousands of graph
computations. Novel methods for solving these problems&lt;br/&gt;are needed,
since fast response times are critical to effective decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop efficient
distributed algorithms &lt;br/&gt;and associated lower bounds for graph-
theoretic problems that arise in computational &lt;br/&gt;epidemiology and
contagion dynamics. This will have a significant impact on these specific
&lt;br/&gt;applications, through more efficient algorithmic tools for enabling
complex analyses. &lt;br/&gt;The project will also make fundamental
contributions to the design and analysis of &lt;br/&gt;distributed algorithms
for graph problems in large-scale networks, and will&lt;br/&gt;result in an
algorithmic toolkit with building blocks for performing large-scale
&lt;br/&gt;distributed graph computation. The project will lead to significant
curriculum development &lt;br/&gt;for undergraduate as well as graduate
students, as well as public health analysts. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project
will help in involving minority and underrepresented students in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of the project will be on distributed
algorithms for fundamental topics &lt;br/&gt;in graph algorithms such as graph
connectivity, distances, subgraph analysis, and different&lt;br/&gt;kinds of
centrality measures. These topics underlie some of the recurring problems in the
&lt;br/&gt;modeling, simulation and analysis and control of different kinds of
contagion processes. &lt;br/&gt;For all these problems, the project will focus
on developing provably efficient distributed &lt;br/&gt;algorithms and showing
lower bounds under a message-passing distributed computing model. &lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will also develop efficient implementations of these algorithms, and
evaluate their &lt;br/&gt;performance and solution quality in real-world graphs
arising in epidemiology. The graphs &lt;br/&gt;that arise in these applications
have several novel characteristics, which will present new &lt;br/&gt;challenges
as well as opportunities for distributed computing.