* 1633196
* Risk Averse Multistage Stochastic Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Shabbir Ahmed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 449,856.00

Multistage stochastic programming is well established as an important framework
for sequential decision making under uncertainty in a variety of applications.
The mathematical models underlying this approach constitute an extremely
challenging class of optimization problems. There has been very significant
research progress in solution strategies for these problems, but much of it has
been restricted to the risk neutral setting and when the underlying mathematical
structures are simple (convex). Recently, in power systems applications, the
increasing volatility brought forth by the penetration of renewable energy
sources along with their structural complexities motivate the explicit
consideration of risk and non-convex structures in this framework. This project
aims to make fundamental theoretical and algorithmic contributions to risk-
averse multistage stochastic programming, especially with integer variables to
model non-convexities, and investigate its applications in the energy sector. If
successful, results from this project will provide valuable planning and
scheduling tools for power system operators. The developments can also impact a
variety of other application areas including manufacturing, finance and service.
The results of this project will be disseminated through publications and
conference presentations, and will be adopted in graduate courses on stochastic
programming. The project will contribute to the training of future academics and
researchers by supporting the research of doctoral students.

The project will develop sampling and dynamic programming based approaches for
risk-averse multistage stochastic integer programs. Theory and algorithms
underpinning such approaches have been researched extensively in the risk
neutral and linear setting. Incorporating risk aversion in this framework raises
crucial questions regarding risk measures that make sense from the point of view
of dynamic decisions, and are computationally attractive from the point of view
of approximation via sampling and optimization via dynamic programming.
Incorporating integer decisions introduces nonconvexities, and requires novel
analysis and algorithmic techniques for their resolution. The research will
focus on multistage problems under the assumption of stagewise independent, or
more generally Markovian, structure of the uncertain data process and binary
state variables, and exploit the resulting structure to develop scalable
approaches. In particular, the project will investigate (i) modeling and
structural issues for various risk measures, (ii) sampling based approaches for
evaluating and optimizing risk-averse objectives, and (iii) approximate dynamic
programming approaches.