* 1633631
* NRT-DESE: Team Science for Integrative Graduate Training in Data Science and Physical Science
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Maritza Salazar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,967,150.00

Massively parallel computers simulate data about molecular phenomena at
previously unimaginable scales, satellites scan the planet capturing vast sets
of measurements about ecosystem health, and particle accelerators generate
tremendous amounts of data revealing fundamental properties of the smallest
building blocks of matter; all with potentially broad societal benefits in areas
such as drug discovery, energy conservation, and materials science. To fully
realize these benefits will require a workforce with the technical skills to
extract useful information from massive scientific data sets, calling for new
approaches to graduate student training that emphasize expertise in data-driven
science. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
the University of California Irvine (UCI) will tackle this challenge by creating
a training ecosystem comprised of leading UCI, national-laboratory, and private-
sector researchers across particle physics, earth science, chemistry, statistics
and machine learning; all bound together by expertise in the emerging Science of
Team Science. The project anticipates training over sixty (60) MS and PhD
students, including twenty (20) funded trainees, from diverse backgrounds in
computational statistics, machine learning, earth science, particle physics,
synthetic chemistry, and team science. After graduation, students from this
program will have both the technical and team-science skills to be leaders in
the emerging field of data-driven science, and to participate in and lead
interdisciplinary research teams at national laboratories, in academia, and in
industry labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda of the program seeks to
create the foundation from which bridges can be built between the traditional
scientific route of building interpretable models based on physical principles
and data-driven modeling approaches that can provide high fidelity predictions
but may lack clear interpretability in terms of the underlying science. The
program will involve a number of interrelated research themes across multiple
disciplines in the information and physical sciences, including machine learning
(e.g. temporal and spatial data modeling, multi-scale models, deep learning, and
scalable learning algorithms), particle and astroparticle physics (e.g.
accelerator based experiments), earth systems science (e.g. reducing ecosystem
response prediction uncertainties), and chemistry (e.g. prediction of physical
properties of small molecules). A significant aspect of the program is an
emphasis on team science as a core theme. Students will collaborate in small
interdisciplinary research teams consisting of students and faculty with
different disciplinary skills, and will take part in team-science workshops
leading to student-led development of a team-science certificate in years 3 to 5
of the program. Summer internships for student participants, at both national
and industry research laboratories, will serve to reinforce the students'
academic training via participation in large-scale interdisciplinary data
science research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.