* 1633755
* BIGDATA: F: Bringing Interactive Data Management to Scientists, Analysts, and the Masses: A Holistic Unification of Spreadsheets and Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kevin Chang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,795,429.00

With the proliferation of datasets in many spheres of our everyday life,
including science, finance, and commerce, managing tabular data, i.e., data
represented by a set of tables or relations, has become increasingly essential.
The state of the art in tabular data management spans two distinct paradigms
with a sharp divide--spreadsheets and databases--with drastically different
strengths and weaknesses; both enjoying tremendous successes but facing
fundamental limitations. To date, interactive ad-hoc management of large data
remains cumbersome and difficult. This project aims to holistically unify
database and spreadsheet technology, and thus bring to scientists, analysts, and
lay users, the ease of use and interactivity of spreadsheets with the
scalability, expressiveness, and collaboration capabilities of
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops DataSpread, a system to
holistically unify databases with spreadsheets--to marry the traditional
strengths of scalability, expressiveness, and consistency of databases with the
interactivity of spreadsheets that billions of end-users are so familiar with,
and in the process rethink user-facing interactions beyond spreadsheets which
the project will develop and evaluate via extensive user studies. The research
team studies the development of new models, algorithms, structures, and
interaction primitives to make the unification practical. Specifically, this
research develops new methods for compactly representing spreadsheet data and
computing over queries on a spreadsheet, positionally aware indexing structures,
and mechanisms for efficiently propagating updates to the user viewport. The
project also studies the design of new interaction primitives to replace full-
fledged SQL, which is more conducive to a spreadsheet interface, and in support
for user-centric transactions. While aiming at developing general techniques to
advance the state of the art in data management, the project will be driven by
the collaborators' real-world challenges--for use cases, pain points, practical
deployment, joint open-source development, and critical evaluation and feedback.