* 1633603
* NRT-IGE: Information Infrastructure for Society:  Integrating Data Science and Social Science in Graduate Education  and Workforce Development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,896.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of Maryland will
pilot an innovative, cross-disciplinary curriculum that integrates Data Science
with Social Science. The project will advance the scientific understanding of
the dynamics of human behavior by integrating the toolkits and analytical
frameworks developed by social scientists with the new types of data, models and
tools developed in the fields of computer science and statistics. The curriculum
provides an innovative approach to training students in the creative and
scientific use of the growing number of available data. It covers all phases of
a research project, addressing social issues including problem formulation, data
collection, manipulation, processing, and analysis. The project pilots an
innovative modular training program that is tailored to fill specific needs of
both traditional and nontraditional graduate students, and provides direct
pathways both to future employers and to advancement with current
employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances the understanding of how
best to train students and working professionals in the STEM fields,
particularly social science. The project tests a pedagogical approach that has
been successful in other areas, namely, modular "nano" classes that are focused
on experiential learning based on specific social problems and feature peer-to-
peer learning between persons in the social sciences and computer science.
Because the projects and problems to be worked on within the nano classes are
designed together with federal, state, and local agencies, students will have
the opportunity test and showcase their knowledge to current and future
employers. The effectiveness of the program is evaluated by analyzing the
reactions of the participants to the material provided, learning outcomes in
terms of improved qualifications, use of learned material in their respective
jobs, effects upon job performance, and estimates of rate of return. The data
curation, management, interrogation and integration tools are built into a data
facility system, within which collaboration is fostered, and which can be
replicated and used by other curriculum adopters. A series of small randomized
experiments will allow the empirical test of learning modules and improve them
based on the results. The overall result of the project can be adapted by
institutions in the US, and a program of outreach activities with the
institution's international partners will allow an even broader
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.