* 1633500
* Collaborative Research: Defects Driven Reliability Modeling and Stress Burn-in Optimization in Nanoelectronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Tao Yuan, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 178,619.00

Yield and reliability are critical factors in determining the success of
nanoelectronics manufacturing. They are traditionally evaluated separately based
on different sources of information. Yield is generally estimated based on
process control data such as measurements of manufacturing defects; while
reliability prediction generally relies on lifetime data obtained from
reliability tests. It is difficult to implement an end-of-line reliability
assessment approach at early stages of a product's life cycle when data are
limited. If successful, this research will enable a unified framework for
managing yield, reliability, and stress burn-in in nanoelectronics manufacturing
using process-control data. In addition, the integrated research and education
plan associated with this award will provide interdisciplinary education and
research opportunities for students from the underrepresented and impoverished
Appalachian Ohio area and promote STEM education through K-12 outreach
activities.

This award focuses on yield and reliability of nanoelectronics products via
spatiotemporal modeling of defects. The spatial modeling and temporal modeling
of defects refer to modeling of the spatial distribution of defects and modeling
of the growth of defects with time when devices are subject to stresses,
respectively. A multidisciplinary team consisting of two PIs with expertise in
nanoelectronics manufacturing and reliability engineering, respectively, is
formed. Systematic accelerated destructive degradation tests followed by
detailed physics-of-failure analysis will be conducted to explore failure
mechanisms and to derive physics-based random defect-growth models. New yield
models will be built based on the knowledge of defect size distribution and
spatial distribution of defects. New reliability models will be suggested based
on the defect-growth mechanisms and models. The reliability models will lead to
new burn-in procedures. Ultra-narrow copper interconnect lines with sub 100
nanometers width prepared from a plasma-based etch process will be used as the
testbed for the methodology.