* 1633130
* BIGDATA: IA: Acting on Actionable Intelligence: A Learning Analytics Methodology for Student Success Efficacy Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Bernie Dodge, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,096,196.00

The research supported by this project will study how instructors,
administrators, and education researchers take advantage of rich student and
student performance data collected by the university. The data will be used in
the development of a new statistical model that will identify students in need
of help and the sort of help that they need. The system is built upon
statistical models that are used in personalized medicine to determine the best
medical interventions for an individual patient. The research will be carried
out by an interdisciplinary team from statistics and data science, institutional
research, instructional technology, and information technology and they will
develop a learning analytics methodology to automate the tasks of data
collection and processing, data visualizations and summaries, data analysis, and
scientific reporting in student success efficacy studies. As part of this
development, the concept of individualized treatment effects is introduced as a
method to assess the effectiveness of interventions and/or instructional regimes
and provide personalized feedback to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically the research goal of the project is to develop and test new
statistical methods for analyzing large sets of student data. The data sets to
be analyzed and tested arise from administrative student data collected by San
Diego State University. Additionally, the research will develop new methods of
data cleaning for the student information system and learning management system
data collected by the university to make the entire analysis procedures more
efficient. The technical contribution is to utilize a new random forest of
interaction trees machine learning method that enables the analysis of treatment
effects for individuals and for subgroups (e.g., testing the success of a
pedagogical or other intervention for both individual students and for specific
subgroups of students). The results of the statistical analysis will be
displayed as dashboards to report the findings for the assessment of
intervention strategies in improving student retention and performance.