* 1633331
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Novel Bootstrap Procedures for Efficient Large Social Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yulia Gel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 519,599.00

Understanding the structure and dynamics of social networks is crucial for
detecting any anomalous behavior and for managing its impacts. Most existing
approaches view a network as a series of snapshots, where a snapshot represents
the state of a network in a given time period. Therefore, different network
operations need to be individually performed over each snapshot. In reality,
online social networks are continuously evolving and therefore, network
operations should be automatically performed as networks evolve and need to be
done efficiently and reliably. Viewing the problem from this perspective allows
us to create a solution that supports advanced, real-world use cases such as
tracking the neighborhood of a given node or tracking how network connections
evolve in time to determine effective marketing campaigns. These examples
indicate the need for efficient computing techniques for important network
statistics as the large networks evolve over time. To address this problem, the
researchers in this project complement existing distributed evolving social
graph analysis techniques with bootstrap and other statistical re-sampling based
approaches. The ultimate goal is to develop novel data-driven tools so that when
needed, not only certain estimates of statistical network models could be
computed efficiently but their estimation errors are reliably quantified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project primarily targets development of new
efficient and robust methods for anomaly and outlier detection on large sparse
networks. The resulting methodology provides the following functions: 1) a
computationally efficient finite sample inference for an extensive range of
network topology statistics; 2) a flexible data-driven characterization of
network structure and dynamics, and 3) comprehensively quantifying uncertainty
in modeling and estimation of large networks, without imposing restrictive
conditions on network model specification. The expected advances are both in
research methods - new approaches to data-driven nonparametric inference for
large sparse networks and in substantial enhancement of knowledge of network
dynamics and formation in the era of digital communication. The project can
significantly benefit students by providing a broad exposure to
interdisciplinary applications of large network and fostering awareness of
interdisciplinary relationships -- hence enhancing their capacity for critical
thinking and opening up new career paths.