* 1633098
* NRT-INFEWS: Paths to Sustainable Food-Energy-Water Systems in Resource-Limited Communities
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Craig Just, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,999,263.00

The complex interconnectivity of society's food, energy and water resources, as
well as their inextricable link to socioeconomic factors, present both grand
challenges and opportunities that demand new paradigms in problem solving and
cooperation across non-traditional disciplines. Nowhere will this challenge be
greater than in resource-constrained communities, not only in the developing
world but also in the often-overlooked populations of rural America and poor
urban centers, where solutions to food/energy/water challenges will need to be
tailored to specific communities. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Iowa will produce a new generation
of water sustainability professionals specifically trained to promote
sustainable development of food, energy and water resources in these underserved
communities, not only as researchers and professors, but also as entrepreneurs,
consultants, and civic, professional and global engineers. This project
anticipates training fifty (50) MS and PhD students via new graduate degree and
certificate programs in Sustainable Water Development, including twenty (20)
funded trainees, by leveraging university expertise in all facets of water
sustainability including engineering, economics, policy, law, public health,
geography, ecology and informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
re-envision STEM graduate education in fields related to water sustainability at
the nexus of food and energy resources. We propose a new training paradigm in
which educational and research activities at all degree levels (MS and PhD) are
focused on experiences that connect trainees directly to the most vulnerable
communities in need, thereby satisfying students' stated desires to engage in
work that addresses social injustices arising from disparities in resource
security. Courses, research projects, community service, and professional
training experiences will all be tailored to the trainees' desired career paths.
To launch this model, we will create a new graduate degree program at the
University of Iowa focused on the development of sustainable water resources in
resource-limited communities (e.g., rural and poor communities). The Sustainable
Water Development degree will be housed in the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, while building upon strengths across the campus in
the area of water sustainability and emphasizing the critical roles of both
water quality and quantity as well as food and energy production. Major research
efforts will address high priority research needs for such communities,
including: forecasting, mitigating and adapting to climate variability;
innovative solutions for minimizing waste streams and promoting resource
recovery; new water treatment infrastructure suitable in scale and associated
energy demand for small communities; and management of biogeochemical cycles and
agro-ecosystem structure to promote environmental quality. In addition, we will
develop a graduate certificate program in Sustainable Water Development
available to the entire graduate STEM population at the university, thereby
adding valuable specialization to existing degree programs in water-relevant
STEM fields (e.g., chemistry, biology, physics and
mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.