* 1633216
* NRT-DESE: Data Intensive Research Enabling Clean Technologies (DIRECT)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,070,825.00

Discovering new materials that will generate and store renewable energy in a low
cost, environmentally benign, and scalable fashion is perhaps the most important
technological challenge facing society today. All phases of this scientific
process (design, synthesis, and characterization) are routinely stymied by the
same challenge: researchers are not equipped to handle the deluge of data coming
from our labs and high performance computers. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Washington will create,
test and evaluate a new training model for graduate students in the area of data
intensive research in materials for clean energy. The University of Washington
program, DIRECT: Data Intensive Research Enabling Clean Technologies, addresses
these challenges by training a new generation of energy researchers who are
equipped to handle the massive data sets arising from all stages of materials
discovery. This project anticipates 72 trainees (18 MS and 54 PhD students),
including 16 funded trainees, from Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Materials
Science &amp; Engineering, Molecular Engineering and Human Centered Design &amp;
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIRECT creates a new training modality
comprised of three phases: 1) new graduate coursework at the nexus of data
science and advanced materials for energy, 2) a project-based learning scheme to
apply new skills and work on challenging real world problems in a team-based
setting, and 3) capstone experiences that leverage broad networks spanning
industry, national labs and several international partners. The thematic focus
of the research is next-generation materials for batteries and photovoltaics. We
will use an ethnographic approach rooted in the social sciences to understand
why some methods are successfully deployed while others are not, and learn how
to apply data science tools in a contextualized manner to materials science to
maximize usability. The project-based learning component of the traineeship will
provide graduate students the chance to teach and practice leadership and
management skills, a unique opportunity most trainees would not otherwise
receive. DIRECT trainees will be equipped for many new career options that
require data science training and will be prepared with the skills needed to
thrive in the economy of the 21st century. The project will also provide unique
information about the effectiveness of project-based learning in the acquisition
of advanced technical skills and disciplinary knowledge in graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.