* 1633305
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Factors that Influence African Americans' Entrepreneurship in STEM Fields
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Colleen Casey, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,112.00

Minority business entrepreneurship, specifically in the areas of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) provides multiple opportunities
for innovation, job creation, high earning potential, and for increasing the
diversity of the U.S. workforce to reflect current population demographics. The
purpose of this dissertation research is to understand the factors of STEM
programs that influence STEM-educated African American graduates to pursue high
tech entrepreneurship. Currently, there is evidence that while the U. S. has
experienced growth in the number of African American entrepreneurs, this growth
has not occurred in STEM fields, which are highly linked to high tech firms.
Knowledge about African American STEM entrepreneurship is limited, as current
data sets captures minimal information on the background or education of
entrepreneurs. This research aims to fill that gap by analyzing administrative
and survey data collected from STEM program alliances (collaborations between
multiple colleges/universities) across the country. A greater understanding of
which factors in education influence African Americans to pursue
entrepreneurship can provide empirical data to guide policies and programs that
encourage and support African Americans in STEM, allow for the modification or
re-evaluation of existing programs, and promote the linking of entrepreneurial
activities with STEM-support programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
identifies what educational experiences predict African American
entrepreneurship in STEM fields by reviewing existing STEM-support programs. The
review of these programs and their components such as social networking,
mentoring, role models, and financial support, allows identification of bridging
factors which encourage entrepreneurship, as well as to what degree knowledge
about entrepreneurship is provided. The results of a quantitative analysis of
survey data from undergraduate and graduate STEM-support programs as well as
business owner characteristics aims to reveal the relationship between these
factors and entrepreneurship in STEM fields. These results can be used to
determine which factors are more likely to cultivate entrepreneurship among
African Americans.