* 1633330
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Discovering Context-Sensitive Impact in Complex Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Huiping Cao, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2020
* USD 369,457.00

Successfully tackling many urgent challenges in socio-economically critical
domains (such as sustainability, public health, and biology) requires obtaining
a deeper understanding of complex relationships and interactions among a diverse
spectrum of entities in different contexts. In complex systems, (a) it is
critical to discover how one object influences others within specific contexts,
rather than seeking an overall measure of impact, and (b) the context-aware
understanding of impact has the potential to transform the way people explore,
search, and make decisions in complex systems. This project establishes the
foundations of big data driven Context-Sensitive Impact Discovery (CSID) in
complex systems and fills an important hole in big data driven decision making
in many critical application domains, including epidemic preparedness,
biological pathway analysis, climate, and resilient water/energy
infrastructures. Thus, it enables applications and services with significant
economic and health impact. The educational impacts of this project include the
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, and the enhancement of
graduate and undergraduate Computer Science curricula at both Arizona State
University (ASU) and New Mexico State University (NMSU) through the
incorporation of research challenges and outcomes into existing classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to establish the
theoretical, algorithmic, and computational foundations of big data driven
context-sensitive impact discovery in complex systems. This project develops
probabilistic and tensor-based models to capture context-sensitive impact from
complex systems, often modeled as graphs, and designs efficient learning
algorithms that can capture both the contexts and the impact scores among
entities within these different contexts. The modeling of the context sensitive
impact considers dynamic nature of relevant contexts and the diverse
applications. This requires addressing several major challenges, including
latent contexts of impact, heterogeneous networks of entities, dynamicity of
impact in varying contexts, and high computational and I/O costs of context-
sensitive impact discovery. Therefore, this project designs novel scalable
probabilistic and tensor-based algorithms to capture and represent context-
sensitive impact. These algorithms and the novel data platforms they are
deployed in are efficient and scalable in terms of off-line and on-line running
times and their space requirements. To achieve necessary scalabilities, the
developed platforms employ novel multi-resolution data partitioning and resource
allocation strategies and the research enables massive parallelism and efficient
data access through new non-volatile memory based data management techniques.