* 1633353
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: F: Latent and Graphical Models for Complex Dependent Data in Education
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Matthias von Davier, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 319,626.00

This is a comprehensive research proposal on the statistical modeling and
analysis for educational assessment. This research addresses issues concerning
fundamental statistical problems that arise in the analysis of Big Data in
education. The research focus is on modeling and inference for large-scale data
with complex dependence and structures (such as high-dimensional response and
process data). These data arise from the introduction of new methods of testing
student knowledge that rely on scenarios presented to the students and on
simulation-based environments where student responses to a simulated environment
are tested. This research is collaborative between Columbia University and the
Educational Testing Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics studied include
latent graphical modeling for high-dimensional item response data, modeling and
segmentation of process data via dictionary models, estimation of item-attribute
relationship, dimension reduction, theoretical analysis and computational
methods for the proposed models. The analysis combines techniques and concepts
from mathematics and probability and applies them to nonlinear statistical
models and data analysis. The proposed model combines latent variable and
graphical approaches for high-dimensional data; for modeling process data,
recent advances in modeling and segmenting techniques for natural language
processing will be investigated. In the theoretical development, several
algebraic concepts to formulate model identifiability and perform combinatorial
analysis on high-dimensional discrete spaces will be studied. In addition,
optimization algorithms will be developed using recent advances in numerical
methods.