* 1633970
* Field Application of Induced Partial Saturation (IPS) for Liquefaction Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Akram Alshawabkeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 341,754.00

Catastrophic effects of earthquakes on our built environment including,
buildings, bridges, dams, and power plants, are often caused by ground failures
due to soil liquefaction. Liquefaction refers to the loss of bearing capacity of
saturated sandy soils to support structures during earthquakes. Existing
techniques that can be used to prevent occurrence of liquefaction are very
costly and can only be implemented at new sites and only at existing structures.
There is a critical need to develop a cost-effective and practical liquefaction
prevention technology that can be applied to new sites as well as sites with
existing structures resting on liquefiable soils. This research will explore
advancing an innovative concept referred to Induced Partial Saturation (IPS) in
which water saturation of a liquefiable sands is reduced, thus preventing its
failure during earthquakes. Induced Partial Saturation involves injection of a
gas generating chemical solution into the liquefiable sandy ground, leading to
controlled generation of oxygen gas bubbles within the pores of the sand through
transport and reactivity of the solution, thus reducing water saturation in the
ground. Research conducted by this team at Northeastern University demonstrated
that partial saturation of sands indeed prevents the occurrence of liquefaction.
The outcome of this research will advance IPS as a technically feasible,
practical, and cost-effective field technique for liquefaction mitigation. IPS
will have broad impacts, including reducing earthquake risk worldwide. Also, the
fundamental knowledge gained will have significant benefits in enhancing
technologies for remediation and restoration of contaminated groundwater, a
major problem with significant impacts on human health. Furthermore, this
research will continue to create unique opportunities for middle and high school
students and teachers to participate in activities in the researchers'
earthquake engineering laboratory, promoting science and engineering through
demonstrations and hands-on structural model creation and testing. The research
outcomes will be published and made available through the researchers' website.
The data and finding of this research will be uploaded to the NSF-supported
NHERI Data Depot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
investigate and advance Induced Partial Saturation as a feasible field technique
for liquefaction mitigation. To achieve this goal, the following three primary
research tasks will be conducted: 1) Evaluation of behavior of liquefaction
susceptible field sands treated by IPS, 2) Development of numerical simulation
to model the IPS process under real field conditions, and 3) Evaluation of the
performance of field experiments at a testbed at the Dedham campus of
Northeastern University to advance fundamental knowledge on IPS treated sands
and to verify the developed numerical simulation. The research tasks will lead
to new fundamental knowledge on inducing partial saturation under real field
conditions, and on the behavior of field sands to IPS treatment. The research
will also create opportunities to develop field tools and methods for
implementation of IPS as well as numerical simulation software to determine
design concepts and parameters for field application of IPS as an earthquake
liquefaction mitigation measure.