* 1633213
* NRT-UtB: University of South Dakota Neuroscience and Nanotechnology Network
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Brian Burrell, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,943,562.00

The environment facing today's graduate students in STEM fields is changing
rapidly. The number of STEM PhD students obtaining tenure-track jobs in academia
is decreasing, and consequently, STEM graduate degree holders are increasingly
finding jobs in non-academic fields. This means that the model for training STEM
graduate students needs to change to accommodate the potential career paths that
current and future generations of these students may enter. These include
training in topics such as science policy, project management, finance,
entrepreneurship, understanding intellectual property rights and technology
transfer, and how to work in interdisciplinary teams. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of South Dakota
will develop a training plan that incorporates a truly interdisciplinary vision
of research with the development of professional skills to enhance students'
preparation for and success in careers inside and outside of academia. The
project anticipates training forty (40) MS and PhD graduate students, including
twenty (20) funded trainees, from the departments of Chemistry and Basic
Biomedical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will receive
interdisciplinary research training that will focus on the development and
application of nanotechnology-based tools to better understand brain function
and develop treatments for brain disorders. Graduate students engaged in these
projects will receive both classroom and laboratory training in nanotechnology-
based chemistry and neuroscience research skills. What is novel about the STEM
training in this program is that the student trainees will themselves be
developing interdisciplinary expertise as part of their training, as opposed to
the traditional, discipline-specific approach. The research will be complemented
by the development of professional skills that include training to improve
communication to both scientific and general audiences, sessions with scientists
representing non-academic careers, and a series of classes (microtracks) from
the University of South Dakota Beacom School of Business. These microtrack
courses will be in themes such as finance, product development,
entrepreneurship, and intellectual property rights. Finally, students will have
the opportunity to participate in internships with both regional and national
companies that utilize STEM expertise. This training program will develop a
cadre of STEM graduate students with both the research and professional skills
to better address current and future STEM workforce requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship
model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.