* 1633509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Academic Cartography of Sugar Sweetened Beverages: Scientific and Technical Interdisciplinarity
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lexi White, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 7,414.00

This research investigates the interaction between scientific and legal academic
publications to understand interdisciplinary communication and illuminate how
science can inform and influence government policy through legal academic
papers. While many researchers have studied patterns in scientific articles,
little research contemplates how legal academic articles fit into the
publication enterprise. Legal publications are housed in different academic
databases, and are the product of a different publication structure primarily
curated by law students. Unlike scientific articles, many legal articles
specifically target statutory, regulatory, and judicial policy. These articles
can and do influence government policy. Additionally, articles on the same topic
may discuss that topic in vastly different ways in legal versus scientific
papers due to a difference in training and academic culture. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research looks at one specific topic 'sugar sweetened beverages'
that is currently trending in both scientific and academic publications to serve
as a case study. It examines the network patterns of how scientific and legal
articles cite one another across two academic publication databases (SCOPUS and
LexisNexis). In addition to looking at the citation patterns, this research also
looks at the textual content of these articles using a natural language
processing technique and creates a second network that maps the articles based
on their content similarity. By looking at the differences between the citation
patterns and the textual content similarity of the articles, this research can
identify papers and authors that straddle the boundaries between science and the
law. These boundary-spanning authors will then be interviewed about their
research process. These citation and content network maps, along with
qualitative data about key interdisciplinary authors will explore a key area of
interaction between scientific researchers and legal researchers. A better
understanding of these relationships can lead to better communication between
scientists, legal scholars, and even policy makers with improved impacts for
scientific research.