* 1633608
* NRT-DESE:  Preparing Resilient and Operationally Adaptive Communities through an Interdisciplinary, Venture-based Education (PROACTIVE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* James Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,989,899.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Clemson
University will respond to the urgent need for professionals capable of crossing
disciplinary boundaries to assess technological and societal risks, to
communicate those risks to decision makers, and to devise strategies that
improve community resilience to natural or man-made disasters. The last five
decades have seen a sharp increase in the frequency and impact of natural
hazards and a significantly higher risk of man-made disasters, particularly
since 9/11. Predicting and mitigating such extreme events is difficult due to
interactions among infrastructure systems with complex, poorly understood
feedback loops. Society needs professionals who can conceptualize complex
systems where physical, cyber, and human infrastructure systems converge and who
can transform this conceptual understanding into reliable computational models
that are validated by data. Moreover, these professionals must be equipped with
skills to effectively communicate with their peers in other disciplines and with
decision and policy makers to ensure cohesion between science and policy. This
NRT award will address these challenges through curriculum development,
transformation in graduate education, and research with societal impact. The
project anticipates training fifty-two (52) MS and PhD students, including
twenty-six (26) funded trainees, from a variety of science and engineering
disciplines related to model- and data-enabled infrastructure resiliency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions a new paradigm of graduate
education conducive to training STEM professionals who are transdisciplinary
system thinkers capable of crossing disciplinary boundaries and working in a
dynamic network of continuously learning individuals and evolving knowledge. It
represents a transformation in graduate education through the creation of
collaborative research communities with strong peer-learning aspects, resulting
in a local scientific community that enables students to learn the ?business? of
science (networking, collaboration, communication, etc.). The NRT award will
promote an agile, adaptive curriculum structure responsive to the changing needs
of students through the development of a modular, personalized training program.
It will enhance students? ability to apply academic research to complex, real-
world problems with an awareness of societal impacts via a uniquely integrated
research, training, and outreach program that studies infrastructure
vulnerabilities that disproportionately affect low-income regions. Developed
within a logic framework and with a thorough, research-driven evaluation plan,
this training program will be reproducible on a larger scale. Student and
faculty teams will conduct research in three core model engineering and data
science areas: (1) integrating models to models, (2) incorporating data into
models, and (3) communicating model predictions to decision makers. Their work
in each of these areas will allow them to highlight key model/data science
issues, understand how these issues translate to societal impacts caused by
vulnerabilities in infrastructure systems, and develop solutions to mitigate
damage caused by potential infrastructure vulnerabilities. The research on
infrastructure resiliency will result in new approaches for modeling and
analyzing coupled systems, enabling scientists and decision makers to come
together to better understand interdependent infrastructure systems and their
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program
is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.