* 1633894
* DDRI:State and Society Interactions: Negotiating Governance, Migration, and Citizenship
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,977.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze cultural practices,
population migration, and relationships between the state and its citizens in
order to better understand socioeconomic inequality, nationalism, and ethnic
conflict. Increasing income inequality between the majority and minority groups
often results in increased discontent among ethnic minority groups. This study
will contribute to knowledge about whether or not economic development in a
peripheral region will reduce such dissatisfaction and result in growing
attachment to the state by ethnic minorities. Fundamental research about the
geographic patterns of ethnic conflict and government responses is essential for
understanding political and economic trajectories in many nations, including
regions where such conflicts have directly involved the U.S. and in nations like
China, where such dynamics may have profound impacts on the nation's future
development. Project findings will inform policy-makers and researchers in
government and other organizations about the consequences of development
policies in regions heavily populated by ethnic minorities. The project will
advance collaboration between U.S. and Chinese scholars. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

In spite of claims that national identities are changing with the onset of
globalization, local attachments and independence movements persist and often
are accompanied by violence. Conflict about cultural, ethnic and religious
practices overlays key political questions of citizenship, identity, and
belonging in China. Research focusing on Chinese society and politics has
concentrated on the eastern coastal cities, but more attention is needed to
better understand the impacts of central governmental policies at the provincial
and local levels in the nation's western autonomous regions, which have large
numbers of ethnic minorities. In order to examine broader questions about state-
society relations and claims to territory, the doctoral student conducting this
project will examine urban governance, rural-to-urban migration, and how
citizenship is conceptualized in northwest China. She will seek answers to two
major questions: (1) How do various state actors use strategies of economic
development and community governance to assert government control at the urban
neighborhood level? (2) How do citizens from both majority and minority ethnic
groups conduct their daily lives and interactions with state agencies in these
political and cultural settings? The student will combine ethnographic methods
of interviews and participant observation with quantitative survey data about
urban life collected via smartphones. This investigation into everyday urban
experiences at the neighborhood level will shed light on the significant
connections between politics and daily life in Xinjiang, a peripheral region of
China marked by uneven development.