* 1633370
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Efficient and Exact Methods for Big Data Reduction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Qiaozhu Mei, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,653.00

Research in big data involves analyzing growing data sets with huge numbers of
samples, very high-dimensional feature vectors, and complex and diverse
structures. The ever-growing volume and complexity of these data sets make many
traditional techniques inadequate to extract knowledge from them. An emerging
area, known as sparse learning, has achieved great success in learning from big
data by identifying a small set of explanatory features and/or samples. Typical
examples include selecting features that are most indicative of users?
preferences for recommendation systems, identifying brain regions that are
predictive of neurological disorders based on imaging data, and extracting
semantic information from raw images for object recognition. However, training
sparse learning models can be computationally prohibitive due to the sparsity-
inducing regularization, which is non-smooth and can be highly complex when
incorporating complex structures. This project aims at developing algorithms and
tools to significantly accelerate the training process of sparse learning models
for big data applications. The key idea is to efficiently identify redundant
features and/or samples, which can be removed from the training phase without
losing useful information of interests. Success in these unique techniques is
expected to dramatically scaling up sparse learning for big data by orders of
magnitude in terms of both time and space. The PIs plan to integrate the big
data reduction tools developed in this project into their education and outreach
activities, including development of new courses and integration of project
components into existing courses. The PIs will make special efforts to recruit
female and underrepresented students to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major technical innovations of this project include the following components:
(1) the PIs will develop efficient feature reduction methods for the generic
scenario where the structures of both input and output can be represented by
directed acyclic graphs; the proposed formulations include many existing
approaches as special cases; (2) the PIs will develop efficient methods to
reduce the numbers of features and samples simultaneously under a unified
formulation, which can also incorporate various structures; (3) the PIs will
develop efficient methods to discard irrelevant data subspaces to accelerate the
process of uncovering low-rank structures commonly seen in big data. All the
proposed data reduction methods are exact, i.e., the models learned on the
reduced data sets are identical to the ones learned on the full data sets. This
project heavily relies on optimization theory, especially on sensitivity
analysis and convex geometry. The outcome of this project includes a unified
approach to accelerate sparse learning and provide a systematic framework for
developing efficient and exact data reduction methods. The systematic study and
in-depth exploration of redundant data identification is expected to deepen the
understanding of sparse learning techniques and dramatically enhance their
applications in big data analytics.