* 1633870
* EAGER:   Probing Single-Ion Magnets by Raman and Far-Infrared Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Ziling Xue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 319,990.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ziling (Ben) Xue in Department of
Chemistry, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, is developing spectroscopic
methods to characterize new classes of metal compounds with interesting magnetic
properties. The goal is to understand the magnetic properties of these metal
complexes in order to develop them into new materials for high-density data
storage and quantum computing. The magnetic metal compounds could have a much
larger storage capacity than the current data storage materials with significant
energy savings and reduced environmental impacts. The project is
interdisciplinary involving inorganic, physical, and materials chemistry. It is
particularly suited to the education of researchers at different levels. The
project will also offer students opportunities to conduct research at a national
laboratory and broaden their educational training. Professor Xue's group is
well-positioned to provide the high level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science, including first-generation college students from
low-income families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-ion magnets (SIMs) have been
actively studied as they have demonstrated slow magnetic relaxation and quantum
tunneling phenomenon. Anisotropy barriers to orientate molecular spins in
discrete molecules of SIMs are large enough to display magnetic hysteresis.
There have been active research efforts to design/prepare SIMs with large
anisotropies and slow relaxations. Large separations between magnetic ground and
excited states in SIMs are closely related to the large anisotropies and slow
relaxation. It is a challenge to precisely determine the separations between
magnetic ground and excited states, when the separations are more than 50
wavenumbers, and to spectroscopically probe magneto-phonon interactions leading
to spin-lattice relaxation. This project investigates ways to directly determine
magnetic separations more than 50 wavenumbers in SIMs and to probe magneto-
phonon interactions. Raman and far-infrared spectroscopies inside magnetic
fields are to be used to characterize SIMs, demonstrating that the
spectroscopies could be developed into effective methods to probe molecular
magnetism.