* 1633880
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Historical Biogeography of Dutch Elm Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Jacob Bendix, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 05/31/2018
* USD 12,934.00

This doctoral dissertation research will develop a spatially explicit
environmental history of Dutch elm disease (Ophiostoma ulmi), a fungal infection
that destroyed millions of elm trees in the United States, and analyze the
various management techniques that have been historically implemented against
the spread of the disease. The research will provide new insights into the
causality and spatio-temporal relationships of Dutch elm disease spread as well
as the broader dispersal of forest pests and diseases throughout America's
countryside and urban environments. The findings will be particularly relevant
for a better understanding of the biogeography of invasive species and invasions
as well as the impacts of human interactions with forests and urban
environments. The research has significant broader implications for forest
managers and public policy with regard to adopting proactive and effective
mechanisms for the control of other current and future tree diseases and pests.
The doctoral student will work with government agencies and nongovernmental
organizations at the local, state, and national levels to disseminate the
findings. The research can inform efforts to save flora and to prevent
significant economic impacts. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to
the introduction of Dutch elm disease in the United States, elm trees (Ulmus
americana) were planted ubiquitously in cities across the country. The
popularity of elm trees, however, was severely impacted by Dutch elm disease
which was introduced in the United States during the early 1930s. Over the next
four decades the disease spread until elms were effectively removed from urban
environments. The doctoral student whose dissertation research will be supported
by this award will focus on three core questions: (1) After its introduction to
the United States, what were the spatio-temporal extents of Dutch elm disease
spread? (2) What were the primary management methods used in an attempt to
control Dutch elm disease, how did they change over time, where were they
implemented, and why did they vary in success and failure? (3) How did Dutch elm
disease affect urban landscapes in the United States? The researchers will
combine archival data and mapping software in a Historic Geographic Information
Systems to visualize, map and analyze the spread of Dutch elm disease
particularly in relation to the policies used to control it at both a national
scale and at the local scale via a case study of Syracuse, NY. The doctoral
student will also perform a qualitative analysis on archival records to frame
the removal of elm trees as part of a historical narrative and a changing urban
landscape.