* 1633251
* Organizing the Firm for Innovation: A Bridge Between Innovation Strategy and Implementation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Wesley Cohen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 426,830.00

Innovation is an important source of growth for firms, whether it entails the
development of new products that require hiring more employees or the
introduction of new services that allow for expansion into different markets. A
key challenge facing firms, and the goal of this research, is to better
understand how organization choices are related to the likelihood of project
success. These choices include, for example, whether project managers are
provided specific versus general goals, the assignment of projects to existing
vs new organizational units, the degree of autonomy granted to project managers,
and whether all the resources needed for project execution are allocated
initially or over time as milestones are met. Research on the impact of these
choices will assist in guiding strategic decisions as well as management
practice related to project implementation. Policy makers and program
administrators involved in the funding of science and technology will gain
insight into how firms effectively organize for
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted with leading firms
across a range of different industries. Each of the participating organizations
has selected projects for the study that are succeeding as well as failing in
order to ensure variation in project outcomes. The research includes the
development of a survey instrument that will be administered to over 100
projects across the participating firms. Statistical analyses will examine the
relationships between organizational choices and innovation project outcomes.
The unique empirical setting, when combined with multiple methods of data
collection, will make a significant contribution to academic scholarship,
industry practice, and innovation policy.