* 1633036
* BIGDATA: IA: Hype Cycles of Scientific Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel McFarland, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,253,468.00

Scientific discovery is a collective process based on collaboration, assessment
and consensus. But the enormous expansion of scientific research makes it
difficult to tell which intellectual efforts forge collective advances. Better
models for identifying and tracking scientific movements from the vast
collections of articles, books, grants, and patents that compromise scientific
and academic work is crucial to improving our nation's ability to make advances
in science and industry, helping policy makers, funding agencies, and venture
capitalists as well as scientists and scholars themselves. Our project studies
innovation by collecting and analyzing texts in vast collections of scientific
and other scholarly articles, books, grants and patents. By looking at the
subtle patterns of language and how they change over time, we can describe and
predict where and when collective trends of knowledge innovation emerge and
decline; which scientific ideas and movements result in translational knowledge
key to industry and health care; and what the key drivers are for such
collective intellectual movements. This work is helping identify where the
potential is greatest for innovation, which fields are most primed and receptive
to the arrival of new discoveries, and the times and places where resources have
the greatest influence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on a large
dataset of texts the researchers have compiled on US research activity from
1990-2016, including scientific articles, grants, and patents, and by
disambiguating and linking mentions of individual people across these datasets.
This project uses topic modeling and other natural language processing
algorithms to identify distinct intellectual movements in these corpora by
drawing on the sub-languages that characterize them, also applying methods to
validate and evaluate these movements. This allows the researchers to model the
trajectories of movements over time with tools like latent growth mixture
modeling and k-spectral clustering, identifying the mechanisms associated with
each movement, how they rise and fall over time, and how they translate into
industrial or health applications. For example, the project studies how the
trajectory of intellectual movements is a function of their environment and
competing research efforts, and show the ways in which it depends on the timing
and magnitude of key resources (e.g., money, recognition, new recruits and
trainees, social networks of support, or the coherence of the knowledge itself).
In such a fashion, this work is an important first step in unraveling the recipe
for innovation as a collective, episodic process.