* 1633936
* Collaborative Research:   Fingerprinting source-to-sink connections for deep-marine vitriclastic deposits and their association to caldera formation on Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Brian Dreyer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 116,318.00

The most active volcanic provinces in the world are under the sea. Because there
is little interference from the thick crustal rocks that form the continents and
because the magmas that erupt on the seafloor are closer to and more
representative of their source in the mantle, submarine volcanic studies over
the last 50 years have helped to transform our knowledge of magma and magma
chamber dynamics and evolution. They have also improved our understanding of how
the Earth and its tectonic plates work and the cycling of geochemical elements
between crustal and mantle reservoirs and vice versa. This being said, with the
exception of a few that peek above the ocean as islands, most seafloor volcanoes
lie thousands of meters below the sea surface making it very difficult to know
when or how they are erupting. This research will improve our knowledge of these
processes by examining volcanically generated sediments deposited in and around
the Axial Volcano caldera 1,400 meters below sealevel and about 500 km off the
west coast of Oregon. The research is focused on understanding the history of
Axial Volcano caldera formation and determining the mechanisms of vitriclastic
formation and the applicability of their use in volcanic stratigraphic studies
on undersea volcanoes. Axial is the most thoroughly monitored and sampled
seamount in the world. Samples consisting of sediment cores, scoop bags, and
rocks as well as bathymetric maps of the caldera at 1 meter resolution will be
used in the analysis as will sedimentologic, stratigraphic, and geochemical
analytical approaches. Broader impacts of the project include support of two
early career scientists, graduate student training, and use of the new, major,
NSF-funded Ocean Observing Initiative network. Impacts also include
collaboration with two scientists whose gender is under-represented in the
sciences, both of whom are employed at institutions in the EPSCoR states (i.e.,
states that do not receive significant amounts of federal funding) of Idaho and
Rhode Island. Other impacts include international collaboration with German and
French scientists and outreach to K-5 schools by producing materials for
instruction on volcanoes and volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of
the research are to define the physical and chemical evolution of Axial Seamount
through the time of caldera formation and increase our understanding of
submarine volcano eruption styles, fragmentation processes, and vitriclast
dispersal mechanisms. Hypotheses to be tested include (1) the physical and
chemical characteristics of vitriclastic deposits can be used to fingerprint
their eruption, fragmentation, and dispersal origins and (2) lithofacies record
magma reservoir deepening associated with magma withdrawal and caldera
collapse.Technical The mineralogy of vitriclasts will be examined using X-ray
diffraction and scanning electron energy dispersive spectroscopy to constrain
their temperature and chemical conditions of origin. Stable isotopes of Hydrogen
and Oxygen as well as Cl/K2O ratios will be used to determine magma-seawater
interaction during vitriclast fragmentation and seawter assimilation into the
magma. A detailed morphometric, textural, and grain size analysis will be
carried out to determine if clasts are of phreatomagmatic origin. Magmatic
volatiles will be measured in 80 glass inclusions in olivine by secondary ion
mass spectrometry from samples taken from vitriclasts.