* 1633764
* NRT-IGE: Crossroads: Integrating Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching in Graduate Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Steven Gaines, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 03/31/2021
* USD 499,943.00

Interdisciplinary approaches will be key to solving societal challenges.
Although university faculty often collaborate across disciplines, most PhD
students are still trained in single departments and have little opportunity to
work in interdisciplinary teams. Moreover, interdisciplinary courses for
undergraduates are not common, so undergraduates are rarely exposed to the power
of interdisciplinary problem-solving before entering a graduate program. A lack
of interdisciplinary undergraduate courses also creates few opportunities for
graduate students to teach in interdisciplinary settings, even though one of the
best ways to learn a topic is to teach it. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE)
Track to the University of California, Santa Barbara, will address these
challenges by developing, enhancing, and assessing a recently developed model of
interdisciplinary graduate education (Crossroads). The model will engage faculty
and graduate students from multiple disciplines in a yearlong research project
that is transferred into the undergraduate classroom. This project will train
undergraduate and graduate students to apply multiple disciplines in problem
solving, and will be especially attractive to students from under-represented
communities who are eager for tools, such as interdisciplinary research, for
solving the world's grand challenges. This project will result in the creation
and dissemination of a suite of effective, transferable, and scalable
professional development activities addressing interdisciplinary teaching and
research, which have been evaluated, refined, and tested in a variety of STEM
areas.

This project will supplement the existing Crossroads program with a suite of new
activities (open to all graduate students) that will provide explicit training
in interdisciplinary scholarship and communicating that scholarship to broad
audiences. For example, the project will develop workshops that help students
articulate and discuss what it means to conduct research "in a discipline", to
productively collaborate within an interdisciplinary research group, and to
effectively communicate science to diverse groups. In addition, Crossroads
students will complete a graduate pedagogy course with modules on teaching in an
interdisciplinary classroom and on including authentic research in the
classroom. The core Crossroads model and the new enhancements will be tested
through the in-depth analysis of five Crossroads group projects (two in the area
of sustainability and three across all STEM areas). An evaluator will conduct
interviews, focus groups and surveys of students and faculty to assess whether
participation in Crossroads improved the students' ability to apply approaches
and tools from multiple disciplines to solve research problems, work in
interdisciplinary teams, and communicate research to individuals outside the
discipline. These assessments will be used to refine the approach as subsequent
projects are developed. The Crossroads program will be thoroughly documented and
the elements that are most effective, scalable and transferrable across STEM
fields will be widely disseminated across the University of California and
national education networks.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative models
for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education
Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel,
innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to graduate education.

This work is supported, in part, by the Division of Undergraduate Education.