* 1633937
* Collaborative Research: Combining Heating And Radio Diagnostics On Natural AeronomY (CHARDONAY)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* William Bristow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 11/30/2021
* USD 375,286.00

The research will use the High-frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP)
facilities to artificially perturb the ionosphere using high-frequency
radiation. This technique, known as ionospheric modification, stimulates
responses in the ionosphere that can be investigated in the absence of the
"clutter" accompanying natural excitation of the ionosphere by aurorae and high-
energy solar events. The proposed efforts would re-open the HAARP observatory
following its transition from military to civilian management at the University
of Alaska. The planned work is also very well coordinated with measurements from
an NSF-funded network of high-latitude radars. This proposal therefore
represents a substantial opportunity to build infrastructure. The HAARP facility
hosts an atmospheric radiation and radio science summer school, and so has the
potential to draw in new graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ionospheric
modification technique allows properties such as temperature and density to be
measured under highly controlled conditions. This information will used to study
phenomena such as turbulence, diffusion, conductance, and polar mesosphere cloud
physics. These processes all facilitate the transfer of energy from the solar
wind through the magnetosphere, thermosphere and ionosphere (MTI) to the neutral
atmosphere. Further understanding of this coupling is required in order to model
and predict the response of the MTI system to explosive solar events, and the
impact of this so-called ?space weather? on communication and navigation
systems.