* 1633740
* NRT-INFEWS: STEM Training for Actionable Research and Global Impact
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Daniel Kammen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,162,385.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of California at Berkeley will address challenges at the nexus of
food, energy, and water systems (FEWS) through the lens of alleviating poverty
and promoting equity. Poor communities often face extreme challenges accessing
nutritious food, clean and reliable energy, and safe water, which will be
amplified with additional climate variability, population growth, stress on
infrastructures, and pollution in the future. Through collaborative and
immersive interdisciplinary training, graduate students will develop novel and
lasting interdisciplinary approaches and technologies for solving FEWS
challenges and reducing poverty with positive global impact. The program will
engage over 400 students with up to 80 trainees, including 32 funded trainees,
from engineering, social sciences, environmental sciences, business, and beyond.
This effort enhances US leadership in basic research, human capacity building,
and technical development to meet energy, water, and food access needs worldwide
with positive environmental and economic sustainability
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme of this program addresses
grand challenges in the design, implementation and coordination of food, energy
and water systems within spatial and temporal constraints. Trainees will
research topics such as capturing and reusing nutrients and water in organic
waste products, development of small-scale water and energy technologies
necessary for the agricultural sector and developing infrastructures and
lifecycle methodologies to collect integrated information and data on food,
energy, and water systems. Integrating human-centered design, innovative
business models, and technological advancements with an interdisciplinary
framework of development and continual impact analysis, this program provides
cross-cultural learning, prototyping and scaling, and new models for productive
multi-stakeholder collaboration. The model for STEM graduate education is one
that emphasizes immersive interdisciplinary training, featuring team-taught
courses that pair faculty in a technology discipline with one in business/social
sciences using hands-on project-based learning approaches. Specific training
components include: (1) interdisciplinary research activities and field
training, (2) formal coursework, (3) creation of a FEWS concentration as a PhD
minor, (4) creation of a FEWS masters' level certificate, (5) career
development, (6) online modules &amp; tools, and (7) formative assessment and
evaluation of the program's effectiveness. Trainees will master the
interdisciplinary skills needed to create actionable and impactful research that
is transferable from the lab to the field at scale. These skills will be highly
transferable to contexts beyond poverty alleviation and will contribute to 21st
century workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.