* 1633969
* International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 12,000.00

The 8th International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) 2016 will bring
together researchers from electronic design automation (the practice of using
computer software to build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the
forward design of novel biological systems using engineering principles). The
goal of IWBDA is to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and
predictably engineered and therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine,
leading to advances in disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Existing
synthetic biology conferences and meetings do not explicitly focus on bridging
the gap between the work of experimentalists and computational researchers.
Bridging this divide is essential for the field of synthetic biology to fulfill
its promise. Furthermore, other venues do not actively include the Electronic
Design Automation (EDA) community, which can bring a wide range of experiences,
expertise, and perspectives to the design of novel biological systems. IWBDA
includes keynote and invited talks, tutorials, poster sessions, panel
discussions, as well as dedicated time for informal discussions. The
intellectual merit of this workshop is a key strength. This workshop will
provide a venue for between twelve and fifteen technical talks over two days.
These talks are chosen from two page extended abstracts which are later
archived. In addition, there will be two invited lectures, ten to twenty
posters, multiple group discussion sessions, and a featured student programming
competition (BDAthlon). Technical topics will be diverse and include areas such
as: Parts and Standardization, Biological Circuit Simulators, Biological Circuit
Design, CAD Tools for Synthetic Biology and Gene Network Reconstruction. No
other such workshop exists in Synthetic Biology/EDA.

The broader impacts of IWBDA are numerous. A wide variety of researchers (120+)
from EDA and synthetic biology will be brought together in a unique context
which does not exist elsewhere. IWBDA will capture and make public the slides,
posters, and abstracts from the session. In addition, a user survey will be
created to learn more about how workshops like this can better serve the
community. Finally, there will be numerous undergraduate, graduate and post
graduate student researchers in attendance. IWBDA encourages and supports woman
and underrepresented minority student participation and has a diverse technical
program and executive committees.

In keeping with its goal of establishing international collaborations and
research efforts, IWBDA 2016 will take place at Newcastle University in England.
The co-general chairs are Prof. Anil Wipat from Newcastle and Prof. Pietro Lio'
from Cambridge. The program chair is Prof. Chris French from the University of
Edinburgh. A keynote speaker is Prof. Natalio Krasnogor from Newcastle
University. We expect Newcastle, Cambridge, Imperial College, and the University
of Edinburgh (among other UK based universities) all to send participants at the
graduate to principle investigator level.

NSF support (Funding provided from the Directorate of Computer Information
Science and Engineering and the Office of International Science and Engineering
is gratefully acknowledged) ensures a technical and diverse set of
undergraduate, graduate, and post doctorial students can attend the conference
to present research, learn more about the field, and expand their networking
opportunities.