* 1633314
* Pricing the Priceless Spacecraft: The Social Life of Money in Robotic Planetary Exploration
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Janet Vertesi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 289,995.00

The recent economic crisis has created havoc for public funding of big science
projects, especially those that rely on long term support. Yet it is often
difficult to determine the effects of this fiscal uncertainty on the
technologies, communities, and scientific findings that such funding is meant to
support. This project uses the case study of NASA spacecraft mission teams to
examine how scientists secure, maintain, and compete for funding during moments
of financial crisis, with an eye to how these activities affect scientific and
technical results. The research offers policy implications for public funding.
During times of greater fiscal scrutiny and austerity, federal agencies and
policy-makers require data-driven understanding of the consequences for long-
term scientific and technical innovation that are associated with trade-offs in
funding levels and priority-setting. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
accumulates archival, interview, and budgetary data across three periods of
fiscal uncertainty endured by six spacecraft missions: the late 1960s and early
70s (Mariner 10 and Viking), the "lost" 1980s (Galileo and Mars Observer), and
the "faster, better, cheaper" era of the 1990s (Cassini and Pathfinder). The
research assembles as comprehensive a dataset as possible on the specific
technical and scientific changes on the ground due to budgetary crises,
combining oral history interviews with project managers and cost estimators with
hard numbers accumulated in reports. Planetary science is accustomed to
budgetary upheavals and has developed many strategies to mitigate the impact of
fiscal uncertainty. The fiscal backdrop for each of these missions illuminates
the social and interactional mechanisms for securing funding as well as the
ultimate effects of financial decision-making upon scientific work. Thus unlike
studies of technology or science that frame funding as an external affair, or
that examine science and politics as separate fields, this case demonstrates how
science funding is a continual process woven through scientific work, requiring
many layered relationships between individuals and institutions. The project
therefore unites many social science fields including history and sociology of
science, economic sociology, historical sociology and the science of team
science, to investigate the impact of fiscal challenges on scientific
collaboration, integration and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;