* 1633629
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Association Analysis of Big Graphs: Models, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yinghui Wu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 321,678.00

Association analysis is a fundamental problem in Big Data analytics. Emerging
applications require computationally efficient association models and scalable
association mining techniques to find regularities of graph data. Conventional
association analysis for transactional data is hard or infeasible to be adapted
to effectively support the next generation of graph data analytics, especially
under limited computing resources. In this project, the PIs develop models,
algorithms and tools to support association analysis over large-scale graph data
under resource constraints. The project formulates new variants of the
conventional association model that are enhanced by advanced capability of graph
queries. Both exact and approximate querying and mining paradigms are explored
to support effective association analysis over multi-source, large-scale, and
fast-changing graph data. The PIs instantiate the generic framework to two
practical association analysis scenarios, notably, a) multi-graph association
analysis, and b) association detection over graph streams. The project develops
a package of distributed and stream association mining techniques supported by
the proposed generic model and algorithms.

The enhanced model and algorithms enable scalable association analysis in a wide
range of massive data applications. The principles learned from this project can
be applied to big data analytics and system design in general. The study of new
association analysis framework has immediate applications in emerging areas,
including data quality, affinity marketing, and network security. Application
collaborators of the project include Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
LogicMonitor, and Facebook. Broader impacts of the project also include research
training and education of students including women and minorities, and design of
new curricula and education tools that target both CS and non-CS students.