* 1633426
* NRT-IGE: Promoting Creativity in Engineering and Technology Graduate Education through Integration of Arts, Design and Experiential Learning in the Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sohel Anwar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 452,958.00

Engineering graduate education in the U.S. is considered to be among the best in
the world; however, studies demonstrate that American education has been losing
competitiveness when compared with that of emerging economies and other
developed nations. Members of the U.S. Congress have expressed concern about the
health and competitiveness of the nation's colleges and universities.
Furthermore, employers often indicate that new university graduates lack
creativity and problem solving skills, even when they have advanced degrees in
specialized fields. Because creativity and innovation are the driving forces for
economic growth, it is critical to infuse innovative thinking and hands-on
experience into the engineering and technology graduate curricula. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) Track to Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI) will pilot a new cross-disciplinary education model to
achieve these ends. This project will promote creativity and innovation by
integrating arts and experiential learning components, such as intense studio
training, into engineering and technology graduate curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members in engineering and technology will work
with their counterparts in the fine arts to integrate Engineering, Technology,
and Arts (ETA) and develop an experimental Design Track in the existing
Mechanical Engineering master's program at IUPUI. Students in the proposed ETA
Design Track will acquire real-world problem solving skills through short-term
programs with industry and national laboratories. This project involves the
development of three interdisciplinary courses: (i) Irregular, free-form, and
origami inspired structures, (ii) Optimal design of mechatronic systems: toys,
robots and interactive structures, and (iii) Environmental pollution and
emission control. The courses will be team-developed and taught by faculty from
programs in interior design, video art and interactive installations, mechanical
engineering, and electrical engineering technology. These three courses will
constitute the proposed ETA Design Track and support a new Graduate Certificate
in Design. Pedagogical approaches will include problem-based, studio-based, and
experiential learning. The project will test the ability of ETA curriculum
integration, as well as experiential learning in industry or government
laboratories, to enhance creativity and innovation among participating graduate
students. Quantitative data will be collected using the Reisman Diagnostic
Creativity Assessment and contextualized using student and faculty interview
results. In addition, program outcomes will be tracked. Expected program
outcomes for the ETA Design Track include: increased integrative learning,
innovative thinking, patents, high-quality publications, and start-ups by ETA
graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.