* 1634354
* Collaborative Research: Pushing Molecules Around: Identifying and Understanding the Elementary Steps in Tribochemical Reactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 304,346.00

Lubrication of moving parts is essential to reduce friction and wear of
mechanical components. Typical lubricants are hydrocarbon compounds with
friction-reducing additives. Both improving the efficiency of the lubrication
process and its useful lifetime can reduce energy consumption, reduce
maintenance costs, and reduce the amount of waste lubricant. Lubricants can,
however, wear out through both the heating during use which can breakdown the
lubricant structure and by chemical reactions occurring at the bearing surfaces.
This award supports research into the basic mechanisms leading to this chemical
breakdown of essential lubricants through a collaborative effort involving both
experiment investigation of the process and its simulation. Fundamental
understanding of these surface-related chemical reactions, occurring under
conditions typical of their use, is lacking. The determination of these chemical
reactions can be used to design new more resilient lubricants where these
detrimental reactions are reduced or eliminated leading to improved lubricants.
The results of the research will therefore benefit many sectors of the US
economy and technology dependent on lubrication. Increased lifetime of
mechanical systems and reduced energy consumption would result from improved
lubrication technologies. The University of California-Merced and the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee actively engage undergraduates into these research
activities, with UC Merced possessing a high percentage of Hispanic and first
generation students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be
carried out on simple model systems comprising clean copper and gold lubricated
by gas-phase dialkyl disulfides, which, although simple, nevertheless retain the
key aspects of realistic lubricants. The reaction pathways and their kinetics
will be measured using in-situ techniques, by monitoring the gas-phase products
produced by sliding in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV), and by measuring the evolution in
friction force. These experiments will be complemented by surface analyses of
the rubbed region in the same apparatus. The experimentally-measured kinetics
will be modeled using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using reactive
potentials that can reveal the key ingredients contributing to increased
reaction rates at a sliding interface. The insights obtained from the MD
simulations and UHV experiments will be used to develop accurate analytical
models. These integrated experiments, simulations and analytical models will
lead to new fundamental understanding of the elementary steps that occur in
tribochemical reactions that ultimately underlie lubricant function. The
students within the program will participate in both aspects, calculation and
experiment, through exchanges between the institutions. These exchanges will
provide unique training and create a tight linkage between the computational and
experimental studies.