* 1634469
* Collaborative Research: Does Calcification By Paleoceanographically Relevant Benthic Foraminifera Provide A Record Of Localized Methane Seepage?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 218,355.00

Methane occurs in great quantities on continental margins as solid gas hydrates
in seafloor sediments. It is also a powerful greenhouse gas that has the
potential, when released from sediment-hosted gas hydrates, to dramatically
increase global warming. Unfortunately, methane gas hydrates are ephemeral
minerals that leave no direct evidence in the rock record. A long-lived
indicator of past methane-rich marine environments would be a useful tool for
assessing the impact of methane release from marine sediments in the past, which
could help us estimate how our presently warming oceans, which can destabilize
seafloor methane hydrate deposits and cause them to release their gases, may
induce methane gas releases in the future. This research is focused on exploring
the use of the carbon isotopic composition of calcareous tests of tiny sediment-
living single-celled organisms called foraminifera (i.e., forams) to realize
such a proxy for the occurrence of past seafloor methane seep environments. This
research will study whether foram tests record the seepage of methane by
examining whether the calcium carbonate that makes up their tests records the
isotopic signature of carbon in methane, which is significantly different from
that precipitated from seawater. Broader impacts of the work include the
development of teaching units on foraminifera for visually impaired K-12
students at a school in Watertown MA. The curriculum will consist of a
multisensory presentation (cold, sound, smell, touch, and heat). It will include
3D models generated by a 3Dprinter from micro-CT scans of foraminifera with
known ecology and cell biology. This module will also be included in the
curriculum of a local high school in Woods Hole MA and at the Florida Museum of
Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of the research will be to see if
forams calcify their tests in active seep environments and if the signature of
the carbon in the seeping methane is recorded in the calcium carbonate the
organism deposits. Approximately 40 to 50 forams taken from a 1200 meter deep
methane seep site on the Vestnesa Ridge west of Svalbard, Norway will be
studied. Multiple cutting-edge analytical techniques will be employed.
Individual foram tests will undergo a three-step investigation that consists of
(1) micro-computed tomography analysis to determine presence of authigenic
carbonate overgrowths, (2) stable isotope mass spectrometry to determine stable
carbon isotope values of the calcite, and (3) transmission electron microscopy
of the decalcified cell body to establish the organism's viability and
adaptation to methane seep habitats via symbionts. Coexisting pore waters from
the same sediment cores from which the forams were extracted will be analyzed
for inorganic carbon isotopic composition and other geochemical environmental
species. Broader impacts of the work include the development of teaching units
on foraminifera for visually impaired K-12 students at a school in Watertown MA.
The curriculum will consist of a multisensory presentation (cold, sound, smell,
touch, and heat). It will include 3D models generated by a 3Dprinter from micro-
CT scans of foraminifera with known ecology and cell biology.