* 1634168
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of Tropical Forest Degradation on Carbon Stocks, Habitat Structure, and Avifauna
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Ralph Dubayah, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 02/28/2018
* USD 14,735.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research will investigate how forest degradation from fire and
logging impacts carbon stocks, habitat structure, and avifaunal communities
across the landscape. The long-term consequences of these trends remain poorly
understood because of the sampling limitations of traditional field-based
methods. This project will use innovative methods that combine acoustic and
LiDAR remote sensing with field-based and satellite observations in order to
characterize degradation impacts over previously unavailable spatial and
temporal scales. The synergy between LiDAR and acoustic remote sensing has the
transformative potential to revamp the way biodiversity is monitored by
facilitating simultaneous multiple sampling over extended temporal periods.
Outcomes from this research project will be useful in providing a more holistic
understanding of the rapidly changing dynamics of tropical forests that will
help meet the global challenges of reducing biomass and biodiversity
degradation. The project includes a strong educational component that will
facilitate the transfer of key computational and remote sensing skills to
undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students
through an apprenticeship program initiated by the doctoral student. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Amazon Basin of Brazil, one of the most
biologically diverse regions of the world, forests have been heavily altered by
over four decades of deforestation for agriculture, fire and logging activities.
Understanding the impacts to biodiversity from forest degradation and the long-
term habitat suitability of degraded forests is critical for efforts to reduce
or minimize further damage to these environmentally sensitive areas. The
doctoral student whose dissertation research will be supported by this award
will focus on three core questions: (1) How does fire and logging impact carbon
stocks and habitat structure? (2) What are the magnitudes of carbon losses and
trajectories of carbon recovery following logging and fire activities? (3) How
do avian communities respond to fire and logging, and what can be inferred about
the biodiversity benefits of avoided degradation? The student will answer these
questions by analyzing a time-series of satellite imagery to reconstruct the
history of forest degradation and recovery that are reflected in contemporary
LiDAR, forest inventory data, and bioacoustic recordings. She will integrate
acoustic signal processing and Bayesian hierarchical occupancy modeling to
characterize the distribution of biomass and biodiversity across the impacted
forested areas.