* 1634468
* Dynamics of Cross-Equatorial Flows
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,788.00

One of the most important functions of the oceans in the global climate system
is the meridional (North-South) transport of heat and freshwater. These
transports Tare required to connect regions of heat (freshwater) gain with
regions of net heat (freshwater) loos, which are often located at great
distances. One clear and climatically important example of this is the surface
heat flux in the Atlantic Ocean. There is a net loss in the subpolar North
Atlantic and Nordic Seas, which is balanced by a net northward heat flux from
the southern hemisphere. The ocean also transports freshwater and important
gases like carbon dioxide and oxygen across the equator. While the dynamics that
control such large-scale transports are of general interest, the equator poses
an acute constraint on the flow dynamics and where, how, and perhaps how much
can be transported across hemispheres. The focus of this project is to better
understand how the mid-depth and upper ocean waters of the meridional
overturning circulation cross the equator. This study has the potential to
connect mid-latitude and equatorial dynamics and circulation regimes and further
our understanding of the global-scale climate system. This project will train a
post-doctoral fellow in theoretical physical oceanography, numerical methods,
and climate science. The results from this project will be incorporated into
graduate level classes and lectures at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer
School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work addresses a fundamental aspect
of the global-scale general circulation that is widely recognized yet still
poorly understood: how upper ocean and mid-depth flow cross the equator. Basic
potential vorticity considerations indicate that the equator poses a unique
dynamical transition for flows crossing from one hemisphere to the other. The
change in sign of the planetary vorticity across the equator implies that some
non-conservative process must become active if these waters are to be advected
outside the equatorial band. The basic dynamic constraints posed by the Ertel
potential vorticity equation provides the theoretical framework for the project.
The approach will make use of idealized, very high resolution numerical models
and scaling theory to determine which processes are active, how they are
connected to the meridional transport of heat and freshwater, and whether or not
they can be parameterized for accurate representation in low resolution climate
models. First idealized, very high resolution models of upper ocean and mid-
depth exchange across the equator forced by buoyancy and/or wind will be
developed. Then, diagnostics will be developed and applied to interpret the
dynamics in the model runs, including Ertel potential vorticity budgets,
Lagrangian particle tracking, and stability analysis. Mechanisms related to
lateral and vertical mixing of momentum and buoyancy, and their potential
connections to the large-scale mean and eddy field, will be identified. Elements
of the analysis have connections to mid-latitude dynamics, such as eddy-mixing
of potential vorticity, transformed Eulerian mean diagnostics, and boundary
layer scaling. Finally, the mechanisms controlling the cross-equatorial flow
will be related to secondary quantities of broader interest, such as meridional
heat and freshwater fluxes, eddy-driven mean flows, and air-sea exchanges.