* 1634764
* A Low-Power, Low-Cost Microbial Genetic Analyzer For Discovery and Monitoring of Ocean Microbes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Deirdre Meldrum, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2021
* USD 976,210.00

In this project, a team of engineers and biologists will work together to
develop an Ocean Microbial Surveyor (OMS); a miniature, autonomous genetic
analyzer that can quantitatively analyze DNA and RNA of the microbial biomass
sampled from an aquatic environment such as the ocean. Current technologies are
typically expensive, cumbersome, complex, and power-hungry, limiting the number
of users as well as the number of systems that can be deployed for scientific
measurements. The OMS developed in this project will leverage technology from
the biomedical research field to enable new capabilities for ocean monitoring,
to make these new technologies easily accessible to oceanographers, and to
increase the number of systems that can be deployed for scientific discovery.
The OMS will be inexpensive, low power, small and autonomous to enable large
networks of OMS systems to be used and to provide new measurement capabilities.
Marine microbes account for more than 90% of the ocean biomass, but they are
among the most under-studied life forms because of their often-inaccessible
habitats. It is important to be able to measure microbes in their natural
environment over time and space (spatiotemporal) scales to understand the
effects of climate change and other environmental factors on microbial
abundance, distribution, function, and production. The long-term goal is to
integrate the OMS into other ocean testing platforms and ultimately as a broad
network of industry-refined, multi-target microbial analyzers dispersed
throughout the globe, in the hands of diverse scientific
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are to
build science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) talent, innovate
for the future, improve society, and engage a wide audience in the technology
and science. STEM talent will be increased by providing excellent training
opportunities for two postdoctoral fellows and numerous undergraduate students
in a multidisciplinary research environment. The innovative technology developed
in this project will inspire diverse generations of scientists and engineers to
explore the oceans and enable access to new data from the genetic instruments
that may lead to new discoveries. Monitoring marine microbial activities may
help society understand critical issues such as how climate change and other
environmental stresses impact the primary production from marine microbes. The
new genetic sensors will be displayed and operated in the Biosphere 2 Ocean
habitat, near Tucson, Arizona, to provide outreach to groups of school children
and adults enabling them to observe science-driven technology development and
ocean microbial monitoring experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OMS to be
developed in this project is based on the integration of loop-mediated
isothermal DNA and RNA amplification (LAMP) with microfluidics to produce a
small footprint, low energy consumption analytical module that can be used on
various platforms such as buoys, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), and
robotic floats. LAMP is a fast, selective, sensitive isothermal reaction that
requires only "one-pot" and produces large quantities of amplification product,
enabling simple optical colorimetric detection. The completed OMS prototype,
incorporating the LAMP capability, will be able to perform 50 assays per
deployment with a user-specified sampling interval. Each assay will measure a
user-designed pair of DNA and RNA targets in triplicate. A prototype OMS will be
developed that integrates all hardware systems into a single microfluidic chip.
The project plan includes development of the hardware subsystems including
chassis design, power circuitry, pump and valve automation, illumination and
imaging systems, and thermal control design. A microfluidic chip for microbial
lysis and nucleic acids extraction (on-chip extraction) will be developed on the
benchtop and then integrated into a single microfluidic device with an "on-chip
quantification" unit for measurement of DNA and RNA from captured microbes. LAMP
reagents will be lyophilized with a company partner, and a chip will be
developed to dispense and lyophilize reagents. The target cost of the OMS unit
will be less than 1/10th that of existing instruments, supporting experiments
requiring multi-node sampling of microbial abundance and/or function.