* 1634575
* A Nonlinear Programming Paradigm for Hybrid Elements Formulation Towards High-Performance Collapse Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Konstantinos Papakonstantinou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 296,934.00

In a great variety of engineering simulations, including structural collapse
analysis, consideration of nonlinear effects is indispensable. Various
structural systems exhibit important nonlinearities under extreme loads, both in
terms of geometry and material, and a realistic evaluation of structural
behavior has been forcing researchers, engineering practice and building codes
to resort to increasingly sophisticated nonlinear analysis approaches. Accurate
and computationally efficient assessment of nonlinear phenomena is hence of
vital importance towards sustainable structural designs of enhanced safety.
Modern structural analysis efforts focus therefore in estimating structural
damage and performance all the way up to collapse. Reliably predicting the
behavior of a structural system until its collapse has significant economic and
life safety implications. The main objectives of this research is to circumvent
several deficiencies emerging in collapse and highly nonlinear simulations and
to upgrade the quality, efficiency and accuracy of difficult structural analysis
problems. Apart from the important scientific advancements in numerical analysis
of structural engineering problems and the societal and economic benefits in
relation to improved structural design, safer structures and effective failure
predictions, this research can also contribute to a much wider academic
spectrum. Similar phenomena of large elastic and inelastic displacements are of
particular interest in multiple scientific fields and applications, and research
outcomes can thus help the solution of related computational problems in
numerous areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An original hybrid element formulation
based on a new nonlinear programming paradigm will be studied in this research.
The exact kinematic expressions used are the essential properties that enable
high-performance collapse simulations, namely allow for accuracy, coarse
discretization, computational speed, algorithmic robustness and locking-free
elements, even with very large inelastic displacements. Towards these goals, the
total potential energy functional will be hybridized through Lagrange
multipliers that assure compatibility and will be evaluated at collocation
points within each element. This procedure results to a hybrid beam-column
finite element, whereas structural analysis is formulated and treated as a pure
nonlinear programming problem, seeking optima in terms of energy. This concept
unlocks an entirely new research path, having the potential to outperform
conventional linearization schemes and integrating the philosophy of nonlinear
structural analysis with nonlinear programming concepts and the abundance of
sophisticated methods in the field. Overall, this research project will advance
the quality of collapse simulations, will facilitate improved and physically
consistent damage limit state definitions, will pose new scientific and
computational paradigms, and will push the limits of computational efficacy in
demanding and computationally intensive large scale structural problems.