* 1634256
* Evaluating the Accuracy of Biogeochemical Cycling Rates from Transient Tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Rolf Sonnerup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 413,028.00

The ability to predict future oceanic uptake of carbon dioxide and,
consequently, the response of the coupled ocean/land/atmosphere system to
climate forcing, requires an understanding of both how the physical, chemical,
and biological systems presently function and how they are likely to respond to
predicted environmental changes. Oxygen consumption/utilization (OUR) and
nutrient regeneration (NRR) rates in the ocean interior provide an attractive
bottom-up approach to infer marine productivity in the sunlit surface waters.
Oxygen utilization rates are often estimated using the distributions of
"transient tracers,' compounds such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6) that are introduced in to the atmosphere and oceans by human
activity. Tracer-based estimates are subject to uncertainties based on several
factors including the time history of the tracers and ocean mixing.
Investigators at the University of Washington plan to use ocean models to
examine the sources of these uncertainties and determine where in the oceans the
tracer-based estimates agree best (and worst) with the actual rates. The
investigation of biogeochemical cycling rates and surface ocean productivity
based on tracer techniques will be put into context with those from other
measurement systems such as satellite or Argo floats and will provide an
improved view of biogeochemical cycling in the ocean. Recommendations on where
the technique works will be important for the interpretation of results from
future hydrographic cruises and can guide strategies for future tracer
measurements. The investigators will include undergraduate summer students in
the research, and participate in outreach programs in local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address the biases and
uncertainties in the tracer-based OURs and NRRs using a multi-model approach.
Analysis of existing tracer model output, including oxygen, phosphate, CFCs,
SF6, ideal ages and transit time distributions (TTDs), will reveal in which
regions and during which times transient tracer ages (combined with oxygen
fields) give the best estimation of the known oxygen consumption terms in the
model. They will expand this work using the National Center for Atmospheric
Research's Parallel Ocean Program model output (ocean-only configuration) which
contains a much larger variety of biogeochemical parameters and more complex
biogeochemistry (though no SF6, TTDs or ideal age spun up to steady state). In
addition to OURs, this allows investigation of the accuracy of tracer-inferred
NRRs, including denitrification rates, silicate production rates, and calcium
carbonate dissolution, as well as regeneration rates of dissolved organic
nutrients. Finally, a planned, near-future addition of multi-biogeochemical
tracer algorithms to the current offline will enable the investigators to look
at complex biogeochemistry and the full spectrum of transient tracer, ideal, and
TTD ages simultaneously. Finally they will address the robustness of apparent
changes in OURs/NRRs observed during recent and upcoming Climate Variability and
Prediction/Global Ocean Ship-based Hydrographic Investigations Program
(CLIVAR/GO-SHIP) Repeat Hydrography (RH) sections.