* 1634239
* Biogeochemistry of carbon monoxide cycling in hypersaline and arid soil systems: novel insights from newly discovered extremely halophilic CO-oxidizing Euryarchaeota
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Gary King, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2021
* USD 449,438.00

Extensive research has shown that soils are major sources and sinks of trace
gases that play important roles in atmospheric chemistry and global climate
regimes. However, most of this research has focused on forest, grassland and
cultivated soils that largely experience moderate conditions (e.g., temperature
and precipitation). Arid and semi-arid soils, which account for about one-third
of total global land area, have received relatively little attention. Saline
soils, which account for an area larger than France, and constitute about 18% of
total agricultural land area, have been also been overlooked. Nonetheless,
results of recent work with arid and saline soils indicates that they may
contribute significantly to regional-scale to global budgets of carbon monoxide
(CO), a trace gas that has critical regulatory functions in the atmosphere.
Research proposed here will include comparative studies of CO cycling in saline
and arid soils in Utah, California and Oklahoma, analyses of the capacity of
arid and saline soils to remove CO from the atmosphere, and analyses of the
coupling between CO removal and production within the soil matrix. The results,
which will be complemented by parallel studies of microbial communities and CO-
oxidizing microbes, will provide a comprehensive understanding of CO
biogeochemistry for a major category of Earth's soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work proposed here will involve multiple tasks. The extent
of coupling between Mo-dependent CO oxidation and anoxic CO production, and the
roles of each in hypersaline CO cycling will be addressed through flux studies
and soil and sediment incubations in laboratory experiments designed to probe
rates of oxidation and production as well as the organisms involved. New
insights about the range of conditions that support CO oxidation will be derived
from analyses of activity across a wide range of extremes in water availability;
both ex situ and bench-top analyses of soils and sediments will be used to
assess limits of CO oxidation. The importance of solute stresses versus matric
potential stresses will be determined by comparisons of saline and arid systems
across a range of similar water potentials. Finally, genomic data from new and
existing CO-oxidizing isolates will be used to establish an evolutionary history
for Mo-dependent CO oxidation and a geobiological context for its origin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in several stages of the project. Students of Westminster College and
University of Utah will be involved with field research, and receive training on
biogeochemistry and microbial diversity analysis. In addition, students from the
"Sequence the Campus" program of the Louisiana State University will be involved
in the project. The PI will make additional efforts to recruit under-represented
students through LSU's EnvironMentors Chapter.