* 1634048
* Collaborative research: Transformations and mercury isotopic fractionation of methylmercury by marine phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 258,354.00

The accumulation of mercury (Hg) in seafood is a public health concern. The
presence of Hg in seafood depends to a large degree on the air-sea exchange of
Hg, with atmospheric deposition leading to accumulation of Hg in the ocean. The
pathways to seafood start with the uptake of Hg by phytoplankton from seawater
where is has always been assumed to accumulate to be eaten by grazers and passed
on to larger organisms. This project challenges this assumption with preliminary
data that suggests certain phytoplankton species can transform Hg to volatile
forms (mercury vapor &amp; dimethylmercury) that are lost to the atmosphere, a
processes that removes Hg from the ocean rather than simply concentrating it
into the ecosystem and seafood. This process, which has not been studied before,
could dramatically alter our view of the Hg cycle in the ocean. The researchers
funded by this project will look for the specific phytoplankton species that are
capable of volatilizing Hg and quantify the rates at which they do so. They will
also examine the suspected role of associated sulfur and selenium compounds in
the process, as well as quantifying the changes in the Hg isotopic values for
potential use as chemical tracers of the source of Hg in the ecosystem and food
supply. These results should allow oceanographers to better quantify and refine
our knowledge of Hg cycling in the ocean. The project will support participation
of graduate students, a postdoctoral scientist, and incorporation of new
information directly into courses taught by the researchers. Funding will also
support continuing activities by the participants in activities that disseminate
information on mercury and its effect on public and environmental health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemical cycling of mercury (Hg) in the ocean may be
more complex than previously assumed. New evidence has challenged the idea that
methylmercury (MeHg) merely accumulates in phytoplankton and undergoes little to
no transformation before being passed into the food web. This project aims to
more fully elucidate the mechanisms behind the intracellular transformation of
MeHg to volatile Hg and dimethylmercury (Me2Hg) that can be lost to the
atmosphere, as well as to evaluate the range of algal taxa that can perform this
transformation using directed culture work. Additionally, the PIs will
investigate evidence that thiols, organic selenium (Se) compounds, and sulfides
are required to facilitate these reactions within the phytoplankton, and
specific pathways will be investigated and quantified through this research.
Stable Hg isotopic data has been used to track Hg sources and pathways in marine
systems and its fractionation during these MeHg transformations will also be
quantified for future field study of marine Hg. The investigators hypothesize
that coccolithophorids and other haptophytes capable of these intracellular
reactions may account for a significant portion of the production of volatile Hg
in the ocean. If this turns out to be the case, understanding and quantifying
these volatilization processes may significantly alter our current understanding
of the overall biogeochemical cycling of Hg in the ocean.