* 1634768
* Structural Properties and Strong Relaxations for Mixed Integer Polynomial Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Aida Khajavirad, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 327,218.00

Research in mixed-integer nonlinear optimization has witnessed a significant
growth at the theoretical, algorithmic and software levels over the last few
years. While these new classes of algorithms have already had a remarkable
impact across science, engineering, and economics, there exists a variety of
important applications that these methods are unable to address. Compared to
linear and convex nonlinear solvers, mixed-integer nonlinear solvers are very
slow, cannot handle large-scale problems, and require a high level of user
expertise. In fact, many optimization experts believe that in case of nonconvex
nonlinear problems, one has to give up on either speed or the guarantee of
solution quality. This project aims to address this trade-off, by developing
foundational theory to construct strong and tractable polyhedral relaxations for
a variety of nonconvex sets that frequently appear as building blocks of
nonconvex mixed-integer nonlinear optimization problems. Successful resolution
of the research goals of this project will potentially transform solver
technology for mixed-integer nonlinear optimization problems; a very powerful
framework that subsumes many real-world optimization problems. The project
addresses the educational and outreach activities through graduate student
mentoring, integration of research results in course work, and broad
dissemination of the results of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Factorable
programming is a widely-used technique for bounding general nonconvex functions.
In particular, factorable reformulations of many nonconvex problems, including
quadratic programs, multilinear programs, and polynomial optimization problems,
contain a collection of multilinear equations. A main focus of this research is
to study the facial structure of the convex hull of a set defined by a system of
multilinear equations in the space of the original variables. Through an elegant
hypergraph-based representation scheme, various structural properties,
decomposition techniques, and lifting operations for such sets will be studied.
A rigorous study of the strength and complexity of the relaxations will be
performed, and new classes of polynomially-solvable optimization problems will
be presented.