* 1634664
* Nonlinear Vibrations of Systems of MEMS Oscillators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Alan Zehnder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 410,878.00

Micro-scale and nano-scale electromechanical systems are extremely small
(microscopic) devices which are used in sensing, navigation, clocks, printers,
drug delivery, personal health care and other applications. For example, mobile
phones contain multiple micro-scale sensors which function to determine which
direction is up, to measure pressure and temperature, or to find magnetic North
of the Earth. Many micro systems incorporate vibrating, or resonant, micron to
nanometer scale flexible structures. The structural elements could be as simple
as a cantilever beam etched from a silicon wafer, to complex three-dimensional
architectures built from multiple layers of materials. As a result the "design
space" for resonant micro-scale oscillators is tremendous. Making best use of
this space requires a deep understanding of materials, fabrication, packaging,
electronics, optics and mechanics. This project will focus on advancing
knowledge of the nonlinear dynamics of single, pairs and arrays of resonators
and oscillators. Discoveries enabled by the project will enlarge the design
space and potentially lead to new technologies and devices. A new generation of
scientists will be trained in this research. In addition to their training in
traditional scientific disciplines, as a result of the international
collaboration, they will develop an understanding and appreciation of the
synergies of collaborative research that bridges geographical distances. The
project will also result in undergraduates inspired through meaningful
participation in research to excel in their studies and to pursue graduate
degrees in STEM. The researchers will be encouraged to consider transfer
technology developed from this research into existing or startup companies to
promote economic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve
physical experiments on optically self-excited micron- down to nanometer-size
scale devices, closely coupled to mathematical modeling and analysis. The
experiments and models will start with an optically excited single oscillator,
then build to pairs and arrays coupled through electrostatic or magnetic fields.
Specific goals include: demonstrating locking of oscillator pairs and arrays,
observing new phenomena, improving frequency stability, quantifying the relation
of system response to key parameters and developing, analyzing and validating
mathematical models that enhance understanding of observed phenomena and that
underlie the design of MEMS systems. Through the experimental work and
associated mathematical models the project will advance knowledge in the field
of dynamics of nonlinear oscillators by addressing questions on the feasibility
of and conditions for entrainment and locking of arrays of limit cycle
oscillators physically realized as micron scale devices. Spanning the needed
expertise in experimental mechanics, theory, design and fabrication, the project
brings together an experienced research team from Cornell University, Tel Aviv
University and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).