* 1634136
* EAGER:   Congestion Mitigation via Better Parking: New Fundamental Models and A Living Lab
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lillian Ratliff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2019
* USD 218,130.00

This EAGER project on Smart and Connected Communities focuses on developing new
fundamental models of urban parking in order to address issues of congestion
that negatively impact mobility and health. Traffic congestions are increasingly
becoming bottlenecks to sustainable urban growth as infrastructures are being
stretched to their limits. A significant amount-up to 40%-of all surface level
traffic in urban areas stems from drivers looking for parking. This project will
develop new parking management tools (algorithms for cities and apps for
drivers) that allow municipalities to achieve better congestion control and
enable drivers to act more efficiently. These tools are more targeted, robust
and accurate than the current control scheme of only using price to influence
the average occupancy rate over a city. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
result in fundamental advances in queuing theory and mechanism design.
Specifically, the models study circulating traffic at block level resolution and
the role of information plays in driver decisions. The three main thrusts of the
project are: 1) Develop a queue-flow network model of traffic informed by real
data that captures network topology and spatio-temporal behavior. 2) Impose a
game theoretic structure on the queue-flow network that captures the strategic
nature of heterogeneous users. 3) Create a living lab experimental platform in
collaboration with the city of Seattle and industry partners for validation of
our theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages with the City of
Seattle, industrial partners such as Sidewalk Labs, and undergraduate students.
Seattle will provide data and the opportunities to test and validate the results
developed, industrial partners will provide technical support, and students will
develop mobile apps and learn how a modern smart city can be managed. If
successful, this project provides a demonstration of how cities, academia, and
industry can partner to conduct rigorous research that will have short-term,
practical impact.