* 1634988
* Measurements and Models of Cell Nuclear Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Simon Mochrie, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Cells are subject to numerous types of mechanical stress, from forces exerted on
the skin to fluid shear within blood vessels. Because these forces can be
transmitted to the cell nucleus, which houses the genome, mechanisms to adapt to
and dissipate mechanical stress are necessary for cell survival, particularly
within the nucleus itself. Importantly, defects in the mechanical properties of
the nucleus can compromise cell survival during normal cellular processes, like
cell migration, sometimes leading to disease. In addition, a cell's mechanical
environment is defined by the tissue in which it resides, and is a key
determinant of cell and tissue development. Therefore, it is an essential
challenge to understand how a cell's external mechanical environment is
communicated to the nucleus, where cell fate is largely determined. Moreover,
the mechanical properties of the nucleus must be tuned to its tissue
environment, a process that is poorly understood. This project will address
these challenging questions through an interdisciplinary approach combining a
genetic model organism, live-cell imaging, and biophysical tools. In addition,
the supported graduate students will be trained to become the next generation of
researchers and educators, who both excel at quantitative approaches and possess
the biological sophistication to tackle cutting-edge biological problems.
Supported graduate students will participate in Yale's Integrated Graduate
Program in Physical and Engineering Biology (IGPPEB), for which the PIs serve on
the executive committee, mentor students, and teach program courses. IGPPEB
provides training in communication skills, outreach activities, and teaching.
Summer research opportunities will also be provided to high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will test and further develop a
physical model for cell nuclear mechanics by combining novel live-cell imaging
and force-spectroscopy tools capable of probing the mechanical properties of
nuclei at biologically-relevant temporal, spatial and force scales, taking
advantage of the genetic model system fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe).
First, it will elucidate how changing the heterochromatin-euchromatin balance
can alter the mechanics of the nucleus. Second, it will implement biosensors
that directly measure the tension on the chromatin-inner nuclear membrane
protein interface in living yeast cells in wild-type cells as well as cells with
perturbed nuclear mechanics and/or chromatin states. Third, it will exploit a
novel optical tweezers assay capable of applying calibrated force to nuclei in
living yeast cells, thereby enabling measurements of nuclear viscoelasticity and
chromatin flow in vivo. Throughout these experiments, the new information
gleaned will be fed back in to a developing mathematical model of nuclear
mechanics, ultimately leading to a comprehensive picture of the mechanisms that
define the mechanics of nuclei. Finally, this project will test the ability of
the models developed to explain nuclear blebbing, which can drive loss of
nuclear integrity in transformed mammalian cells.