* 1634179
* Functional diversity of the human dopamine system
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kimberlee D'Ardenne, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 524,223.00

Dopamine, a vital neuromodulator in the brain, is involved in many cognitive
processes and behaviors, such as how people make decisions and form memories.
Recent animal research suggests that dopamine function, namely how dopamine
neuron influence brain activity, is more diverse than previously thought. These
animal studies show that the diverse function of dopamine does not come just
from the existence of different types of dopamine neurons; instead, it comes
from variation in the anatomical structure of the dopamine system in the brain.
Different dopamine pathways support different cognitive processes and behaviors,
such as reward and punishment, which is significant because such pathways are
large enough to study with non-invasive techniques such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). This project will use MRI in human participants to achieve two
goals: (1) to map dopamine pathways in the human brain and (2) to measure
activity from brain regions where dopamine neurons are and brain regions that
receive dopamine input. This research is important because it employs non-
invasive neuroimaging methods in humans to test and expand ideas from animal
research. Studying humans has the promise to directly impact and improve
understanding of dopamine-mediated behaviors, which are broadly relevant to many
areas of psychology and social science. This research project therefore will
contribute to an improved understanding of the brain basis of decision-making,
enabling insight into how altered brain function, such as occurs with aging and
mental health disorders, influences behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dopamine
system is involved in many fundamental cognitive and behavioral processes. To
date, subclasses of dopamine neurons have been identified that respond to
rewards, aversive stimuli, or equally to reward and aversive stimuli.
Importantly, recent evidence from both rodent and nonhuman primate studies shows
that certain dopaminergic pathways support reward learning and conditioned place
preference, while other dopaminergic pathways support learned aversion and
conditioned place avoidance. Collectively this body of animal work, which spans
multiple labs and species, supports the idea that the dopamine system has
anatomically defined heterogeneity. This project proposes to test the hypothesis
that dopaminergic function itself is diverse and not consistent with uniform
transmission of reward prediction errors. The PIs will use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) combined with
probabilistic tractography methods to study functional and white matter
connectivity patterns of mesolimbic dopamine networks, which include the
brainstem substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area (SN/VTA), during learning
tasks mediated by rewarding and aversive outcomes. This endeavor is noteworthy
because it extends neuroimaging of the brainstem to include DWI, which enables
white matter connectivity measurements between the mesencephalon, striatum and
cortex, and because it has the potential to make a fundamental contribution to
how decision neuroscience understands dopamine-mediated behaviors. This research
contributes to the central aims of neuroeconomics, an evolving interdisciplinary
field that provides an exciting educational opportunity for undergraduate and
graduate students interested in neuroscience, decision-making, or the social
sciences. Education is a primary aim of the project; students will be directly
involved in the conduct of the studies, and data will be made publicly
available.