* 1634389
* Effects of internal waves on mixing and transport by gravity currents
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 348,379.00

Because of increased global water scarcity governments are increasingly
considering the contribution made by desalination as a primary source of
drinking water. Thus, the fate of dense brine effluent from coastal discharges
is becoming an increasingly acute issue. The areal extent over which brine
plumes from desalination facilities impact the coastal ocean remains a major
uncertainty, particularly because there are energetic internal wave fields which
can cause significant mixing in many coastal oceans where desalination
facilities are present or proposed. Fundamental understanding of the mixing of
the plume with the ambient receiving waters is thus critical to predicting the
concentrations of brine and chemical additives in the plume and surrounding
waters. In particular, determining the pathways and mechanisms in which the
mixing and dilution of dense gravity-current underflows down slopes are
influenced by oncoming internal waves is an outstanding question. Although our
understanding of how waves on slopes break and how gravity currents descend
through stratified environments have independently moved forward considerably in
recent years, surprisingly little work has been done on the increasingly
important coupling problem. This project will address this need using laboratory
experimentation in combination with complementary numerical simulations and
theoretical modeling. The experiments and theoretical approach extends gravity
current analysis to the important setting of breaking interfacial waves in the
environment. Understanding the influence of this kind of ambient motion on
dispersion in gravity currents is important to many industrial and scientific
fields. For example, the results of this work will enable industry and other
stakeholders to make better assessments of the environmental impacts of
desalination design alternatives, including the potential creation of GIS-based
tools. Summer research students will be engaged through the Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering?s Research Experience for Undergraduates Program
and the Stanford Summer Engineering Academy run by the School of Engineering.
This project will also directly support the training and education of a post-
doctoral researcher and one graduate student, who will both be involved in
teaching undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed laboratory
experiments and numerical simulations will establish what happens to a gravity
current that descends down a slope through an ambient that has a two-layer
density profile and internal gravity waves. Numerical simulations of the same
experimental setup will be validated against the laboratory observations, and
then used to further investigate parameter regimes unattainable in the
laboratory. A theoretical framework based on the potential energy required to
change the density profile within the current will be created to understand the
detrainment observations from first principles. The investigation will be
performed using internal wave tank and numerical modeling facilities, and will
examine the physics of how interfacial waves influence inclined gravity
currents. Shoaling internal waves have different regimes of breaking, including
non-breaking seiches on steep slopes; coherent boluses; less-coherent and more
turbulent boluses; and turbulent surges. Gravity currents descending through
two-layer ambients can either form intrusions at the pycnocline; form underflows
which penetrate beneath the lower layer; or split into an intruding and an under
flowing part. When gravity currents and internal waves are present at the same
time, however, much less is known. This project will lead to substantial new
insight in two ways: by identifying and systematically cataloging the ways that
internal waves can influence the physics of gravity currents, and by building
and validating mathematical models of the mechanisms by which they do so. Three
key parameters (the wave Froude number, the Iribarren number, and the density
Richardson number of the current) will be used to define the parameter space of
the investigation.