* 1634965
* Impacts of Gulf Stream Warm-Core Rings on Gulf of Maine Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 495,945.00

The Gulf of Maine is a marginal sea of critical ecological and economical
importance. Influenced by both local and remote forcing, the Gulf of Maine
physical and ecological system is currently experiencing rapid changes. The gulf
undergoes significant water exchanges with the slope sea and the Scotian Shelf
of distinct water masses. The slope waters are often found in the deep basins in
the gulf and display a wide range of variability. Through modifying density
distribution in the basins, the intruding slope waters can potentially alter the
near-shore circulation and affect the along-shelf transport of marine species.
Studying the water exchange between the Gulf of Maine and the slope sea is thus
crucial for understanding the varying physical and ecological environment in the
gulf, including the dynamics of reoccurring harmful algal blooms. This study
aims to address the fundamental dynamics and regional influences of the
interaction between the Gulf of Maine and Slope Sea on shorter time scales
associated with Gulf Stream warm core rings. The outcome of this project will
benefit coastal fisheries and public health and the work involves participation
of high school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Warm core rings
are major events in the continental slope region. They interact with the unique
topography at the Northeast Channel and affect the flow within the channel.
Three possible modes of interactions between warm core rings and the Gulf of
Maine are proposed: 1) A warm core ring drives outflow in the Northeast Channel
as part of the offshore flowing streamer on the northeast side of the ring; 2)
onshore motion of a ring limb causes intrusion of slope/ring waters into the
channel; 3) a warm core ring pushes the shelf-slope front shoreward and enhances
the generation of oscillatory exchange flows in the channel by along-shelf
propagating frontal meanders. The study is based on two general hypotheses: 1)
warm core rings activities in the adjacent slope sea induce strong flows in the
Northeast Channel, resulting in significant heat and salt exchange between the
Gulf of Maine and the slope sea; and 2) the warm core ring-induced inflow in the
channel brings in dense slope waters and modulates the characteristics of the
deep water masses and the coastal circulation in the Gulf of Maine. These
hypotheses will be tested through the analysis of available in situ
observations, satellite measurements, process-oriented idealized model
simulations, and realistic regional model hindcast simulations.