* 1634029
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Rail Infrastructure and the Emergence of National Identity and the Nation-State
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Dylan P Brady, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze the role of rail
infrastructure in the formation of territory at the scale of the nation. The
research will address how the structures of rail stations and carriages, along
with the practices and behaviors of travelers and personnel, contribute to the
production of national spaces and national communities and are used by the State
as a means of political unification. Railways have served to bind nations
together for more than a century and have contributed to the development of
nationalism in many countries. This was true for the United States in the past
and continues to be true for other developing states. This research project will
contribute to basic understanding of the nation, nation-building, and
nationalism by incorporating the role of material infrastructure like rail into
conceptualizations of the nation. Rail infrastructure is thus one important
means through which the nation becomes imaginable through the people and places
it connects. The specific process by which this is takes place and the
implications for national identity and state-making are the focus of this
research project.

The historical prominence of rail travel in China, combined with the system's
significant expansion in recent decades, makes China an ideal location to
examine the impact of rail on society. The increasing salience of nationalism in
China also makes this research timely. This research is driven by questions such
as: 1) How is the Chinese rail network constituted and reproduced through both
its material infrastructure and everyday practices of passengers and railway
personnel? 2) How have planners and users conceptualized the Chinese rail
network over time? How do these concepts manifest as representations materially
embedded in the rail spaces? 3) How do rail spaces contribute to materializing
the Chinese nation? The project will adopt a two-pronged approach coupling 'top-
down' geographic information systems (GIS) analysis of spatial integration and
population circulation, with a 'bottom-up' traveling ethnography of rail spaces
(trains and stations) and the people within them. This will allow the
investigators to identify the concrete mechanisms through which rail exerts a
nation-building force on territory and society without losing sight of rail as a
single coherent system. Geo-spatial analysis will show where and how the network
has served to integrate China's vast territory at the national scale, while also
identifying points of shear where some areas become relatively isolated. The
ethnography, which treats the whole rail system as a single dispersed,
infrastructural 'field site,' will show how rail spaces are designed,
structured, and maintained in standardized ways across the country, and also
investigate the myriad ways they are put into use by savvy rail travelers. This
research will produce a multi-scalar account of the impacts of rail
infrastructure on material processes of territory-making and nation-building in
today's China, which will contribute broadly to the theorization of nation and
infrastructure and methodologies for studying human/infrastructural assemblages.
Understanding the roots of contemporary Chinese nationalism may also inform U.S.
international policy.