* 1634824
* Non-Minimum Phase Zeros in the Dynamics of Flexure Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shorya Awtar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 316,000.00

Flexure mechanisms employ elastic deformation instead of rolling or sliding
joints to provide guided motion along certain compliant directions. They are
indispensable in several practical applications including precision motion
stages and scanners because of their joint-less simple construction, lack of
friction and backlash, and zero assembly and maintenance. In all these
applications, there is a desire to achieve large motion range as well as high
speed to improve throughput and productivity. But achieving large range and high
speed, simultaneously, remains a challenge due to a lack of adequate
understanding in dynamics of multi-axis flexure mechanisms. This research
project will generate the scientific knowledge needed to overcome this tradeoff,
leading to breakthroughs in various practical applications. In particular, this
scientific knowledge will be leveraged in realizing flexure-based precision
motion stages, with unprecedented performance, for the next-generation wafer
inspection tools. These tools, used in the semiconductor manufacturing industry,
can potentially help improve inspection process throughput by an order of
magnitude. Additionally, this project will help disseminate theoretical
knowledge and practical skills in dynamics, controls, and mechatronics, among
university students as well as industry engineers. Furthermore, a new
interactive exhibit will be created for a local science and technology museum to
excite and inspire K-12 children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several
challenges in simultaneously achieving large displacement and dynamic
performance in multi-axis flexure mechanisms. Large displacements result in
geometric nonlinearities that vary with the displacement. It is not clear which
nonlinearities are critical and which ones may be ignored. Multi-axis flexure
mechanisms also commonly employ symmetric or periodic topologies to enhance
quasi-static performance, which results in multiple closely spaced modes.
Furthermore, unavoidable manufacturing tolerances lead to parametric
uncertainty. Together, geometric nonlinearities that vary with displacement,
closely spaced modes due to topological symmetry, and parametric uncertainty due
to manufacturing tolerances give rise to complex non-minimum phase zeros in the
frequency response of flexure mechanisms under certain conditions. These complex
non-minimum phase zeros result in severe tradeoffs between large displacement
and dynamic performance. When and why do these complex non-minimum phase zeros
appear? Can these zeros be analytically predicted? Do they have a physical
meaning? Is there a way to suppress them or overcome their detrimental effects
via physical/control system design? All these questions are currently unanswered
and represent a gap in the knowledge on flexure dynamics that will be addressed
via this research project.