* 1634878
* High Dimensional Statistical Inference in Flexible Response Surface Models for Product Formulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Enrique Del Castillo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,568.00

Over the last few decades, multicomponent drugs have proved beneficial in the
treatment of the most severe of diseases, e.g., anti-Cancer agents or antiviral
agents. More generally, a multicomponent product formulation problem requires
the determination of not only the component proportions and their amounts (or
doses) but also the manufacturing process conditions that accompany the
production of such formulation. With the introduction of new regulations by the
Food and Drug Administration, pharmaceutical companies gained additional
flexibility to make changes in their formulations and process operations. A key
guideline in these regulations is that companies must specify a design space for
their product/process for approval, i.e., a region of formulation and process
operating conditions that guarantees quality. How to determine such design space
poses several statistical inference challenges and is the goal of this research.
This research also has important broader impacts in Biology. Experiments in
animals vary the components and amounts of diets and measure surrogates of
"fitness" and lifetime. These experiments have a similar structure as some of
the experiments in drug development and they too require flexible models.
Collaboration with researchers from the pharmaceutical sector and biologists in
academia will consider these broader impacts.

The overall goal of this research is to contribute new statistical methodology
for computing frequentist and bayesian regions for the location of optima of
flexible, supervised learning models that will aid in defining a design for
product formulation. The research will study methods for finding confidence
regions for optima of nonparametric models which are functions in a high-
dimensional space without recourse to any distributional assumption. A very
general Reproducible Kernel Hilbert Space construction will be adopted, which
will find design spaces based on many different models used in practice. This
research will also extend the theory of bootstrapping functions of parameters to
the vector function case. The research includes an investigation of the data
depth notion used to generate valid, unbiased, and small high dimensional
confidence regions for the parameters, which in turn will be used to find the
desired design region.