* 1634828
* Collaborative Research: Full-culm Bamboo as a Full-fledged Engineering Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Luis Suarez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 145,949.00

In its natural full-culm (hollow tube) state, bamboo has evolved to efficiently
resist a variety of environmental loads. Its high strength, light weight, fast
growth, and low energy and fertilizer requirements all recommend bamboo as a
sustainable replacement for conventional materials that are resource and energy
intensive. The primary objective of this project is to establish the framework
and tools required to standardize the evaluation of the material and mechanical
properties of full-culm bamboo and thereby place bamboo on the same footing as
timber as a conventional building material. Through such standardization of non-
conventional materials like bamboo, the triple bottom line of sustainable
development (social equity, ecology, and economy) is advanced in a variety of
international contexts, most notably in regard to social equity. In developing
regions, standardization of non-conventional building materials serves
technical, ecological and social goals empowering rural communities to directly
participate in construction of safe and reliable housing as well as to
sustainably develop local economies. In particular, this project will advance
these goals by leveraging local resources in Puerto Rico and Haiti to sponsor a
variety of training and educational activities for U.S.
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will consolidate and significantly
extend the extant body of knowledge and establish materials- and mechanics-based
constitutive models for the behavior of full-culm bamboo as a functionally
graded, fiber-reinforced material. Three representations of bamboo behavior will
be developed forming the framework and tools required to evaluate the material
and mechanical properties of bamboo for engineered applications. First, detailed
analytical modeling is key to understanding the engineering properties of bamboo
as a functionally graded material. An analytical model will be developed
informed by innovative experimental methods focused on establishing through-wall
and along-culm variation of fundamental mechanical properties. Second, surrogate
representation of difficult-to-obtain engineering properties suitable for field
test methods is necessary if broad adoption of full-culm bamboo is to be
reliable. The approach taken will leverage the analytical platform developed in
order to develop both empirical and mechanics-based representations of
engineering design properties that may be obtained from practical field tests.
Finally, a new framework for modeling uncertainty in bamboo material and
mechanical properties, which can be can be highly variable, will enable reliable
calibration of design equations. The approach will include stochastic generation
of probability spatial distributions of mechanical properties implemented into
the developed analytical model. The project will advance the science of modeling
both fiber reinforced and functionally graded materials. Indeed, a better
understanding of the naturally evolved optimal design of the bamboo material and
culm, including its nonhomogeneity and variability, will inspire optimization of
other structural engineering functionally graded materials.