* 1634592
* Control-Based Adaptive Characterization of Nano-scale Mechanical and Structural Properties of Biological Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Juan Ren, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2022
* USD 414,554.00

The goal of this project is to simultaneously map the mechanical properties, and
characterize the structure, of a biological sample using a scanning probe
microscope (SPM). The main part of the SPM is a cantilever, that may be
visualized as a miniature diving board with a sharp tip attached to the
underside of the free end. The fixed end of the cantilever is moved up and down
in a controlled way, as a sample is passed under the sharp tip. The challenge
addressed by this project is to infer both the surface topography and the
mechanical properties of the sample from the way the cantilever bends as it is
moved up and down, and the sample moves beneath it. Extracting this data is
challenging, because it can be difficult to separate the influences of the
different components of the forces exerted by the moving surface. Use of the SPM
on biological materials is further complicated by operational limits needed to
avoid damaging delicate samples, and by the need to sometimes characterize
samples in a liquid environment. This project considers how the excitation
motion may be adjusted based on the cantilever response to provide the best
possible measurement. Changes in mechanical properties of biological samples
have been related to the progression of numerous diseases, including fibrosis,
cancer initiation and metastasis. The ability to reliably measure these
properties will advance diagnostic tests for these conditions. The project
includes outreach to middle- and high-school students through tours and
presentations under well-established programs at Iowa State
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the performance
and build new functions of scanning probe microscopes (SPM) in poro- and visco-
elasticity mapping of a broad variety of biological materials, using control-
based approaches. The specific objectives are to (1) formulate a nanomechanical
characterization methodology with optimal excitation force design to enable
excitation of sample visco- and poro- elastic behavior; (2) build a new control-
based adaptive SPM imaging technique with sample deformation quantification and
real time force and speed optimization based on optimal output transition
design; (3) achieve high-speed nanomechanical property mapping through
formulating new data-driven inversion-based control approach to compensate for
dynamics coupling and system uncertainty; and (4) implement and evaluate the
nanomechanical property mapping scheme on SPM and then to develop an integrated
software platform to synchronize the SPM mapping with optical-based bio-
structure quantification.