* 1634103
* A Rotating Tiltmeter for Marine Geodesy: Development and Testing at Axial Seamount on the Ocean Observatories Initiative Cabled Array
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,844.00

Measurements of ground deformation due to the motion of the Earth's tectonic
plates are important for scientific research aimed at understanding volcanoes
and earthquakes. Tiltmeters are instruments that measure changes in the tilt or
slope of the ground that can occur for example, when a volcano inflates prior to
an eruption or when the stresses that cause earthquakes lift up one part of the
earth relative to another. A challenge with designing tiltmeters is that the
measurements tend to drift with time due to instability in the sensors ¡V this
limits their ability to measure tilt signals that are changing slowly. This
project will develop a new type of tiltmeter that will correct for instrument
drift by calibrating the sensor against the Earth's gravitational force, which
can be considered constant at any point on the Earth. The tiltmeter will be
deployed on a real-time cabled seafloor observatory at Axial Seamount, an active
volcano in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. This is a site of significant scientific
interest; the volcano has erupted three times in 20 years. It is also a site
where tilt is being measured by other methods which allows validation of the new
instrument. The data collected by this instrument will be made available to the
public and other scientists. In the future, the tiltmeter may contribute to
studies that seek to understand the geological processes that lead to great
subduction zone earthquakes or that cause hazardous volcanic eruptions. The
project will train a graduate student and provide field opportunities for
undergraduates to help deploy the instrument at
sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geodetic measurements of seafloor deformation are
essential to understand geodynamic processes at oceanic plate boundaries but are
quite challenging. The project will employ a novel approach to creating a short-
baseline tiltmeter. The tiltmeter is based on a high-resolution three-component
quartz crystal accelerometer. If the accelerometer is deployed on a stable
platform that is coupled to the seafloor, changes in tilt of the horizontal
channels of the accelerometer will lead to changes in the measured accelerations
with time but so will the drift of the sensors. The approach to correcting the
horizontal channels for sensor drift is to conduct a periodic calibration by
rotating (or "flipping") each horizontal channel into the vertical for a short
interval to measure the acceleration of gravity, g. Since g is to a high degree
of accuracy invariant at any location, changes in the measurement of g between
successive rotations can be attributed to sensor drift. This measurement of
drift can then be used to correct each horizontal accelerometer channel to
obtain a time series of true tilt changes between calibrations. The resulting
tiltmeter will have unique characteristics ¡V a high-dynamic range (it cannot go
off scale), high precision (~ a few nrads) and good long-term stability after
calibration (&lt;10 micro rads). At least a year of data will be collected at
the Ocean Observatories Initiative cabled observatory on Axial Seamount.