* 1634095
* Remotely Triggered Slope Failures and Turbidity Currents on the Cascadia Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 427,517.00

Convergence of the North American tectonic plate with the Juan de Fuca, Gorda,
and Explorer plates creates the Cascadia subduction zone, extending 1100 km from
northern California to Canada's Vancouver Island in the Pacific Northwest.
Offshore where the tectonic plates meet, a thick wedge of sediment develops. The
sediment wedge forms as a result of erosion on land and transport of the
sediment away from the coastline, and the wedge is thickened by the compression
resulting from the two plates sliding by each other. Recent great earthquakes
and tsunamis around the world have heightened the awareness of the natural
hazards posed by the processes occurring along the Cascadia margin. Many of
these processes are linked to the sediment wedge, particularly the failure of
sediment slopes that may lead to landslides and generate local tsunamis. This
project will help to identify the processes controlling the initiation of slope
failure on the sediment wedge at the Cascadia margin. Understanding the paths
and triggers for sediment slope failures is key to unraveling the history of
past earthquakes and assessing the associated earthquake, tsunami, and submarine
landslide hazards. The project supports the training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary examination
of recent temperature, pressure and seismic data returned from the Cascadia
Initiative program of Ocean Bottom Seismometer deployments off of the Cascadia
subduction zone has shown that slope failures and sediment flows can be
triggered not only by local great earthquakes, but also by the seismic waves
from distant earthquakes, including the 2012 Mw8.6 event off the coast of
Sumatra. If this interpretation is substantiated by further processing and
interpretation of the related data during this project, it will have a major
impact on several current scientific issues, including (1) identification of
megathrust earthquake recurrence intervals, (2) the amplification of surface
seismic shaking by the thick sediments in the accretionary margin wedge, and (3)
the transfer of organic carbon within sediment debris flows that originate on
the shallow continental shelf and end with burial in the abyssal plain, a key
marine component of the global carbon cycle. The end product of the project will
be a new model to identify sections of the Cascadia margin that may be prone to
slope failures.