* 1634938
* Collaborative Research:   Dual-droplet Electrohydrodynamic Printing of 2D Nanosheets
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Hong Zhao, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Atomically thin, 2D nanosheets are promising components for next-generation
electronics. However, there is a lack of scalable manufacturing processes to
fully showcase the superior properties of nanosheet materials. Specifically, no
currently available technique has the requisite placement accuracy and topology
control to build aligned stacks of unwrinkled nanosheets. This award supports
fundamental research on a novel dual-droplet electrohydrodynamic printing
process. Research results can enable the development of a unique additive
manufacturing platform for patterning nanosheets, as well as other anisotropic
colloidal particles (e.g., nanowires, and quantum dots). Such technology is
crucial for the US to stay competitive in manufacturing and bring forth novel
applications of nanosheets in high-performance printed electronics, sensors,
actuators, and energy devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new dual-droplet
electrohydrodynamic printing process involves first depositing a support droplet
which acts as a Langmuir-Blodgett trough, followed by a wetting droplet
containing colloidal 2D nanosheets. Assembly of the 2D nanosheets will occur as
the support droplet evaporates. The research objectives are (1) to understand
the effects of solvent surface tensionand volume ratio of the support and
wetting droplets on the spreading of the wetting droplet over the support
droplet; (2) to understand the effects of nanosheet size and concentration, and
substrate wetting properties on the alignment of nanosheets; and (3) to
establish the structure-property relationships of the deposited nanosheets.
Graphene and Molybdenum disulfide nanosheets will be used in this study. To
achieve the first objective, the dual-droplet printing experiments will be
conducted. Solvent surface tension will be varied between 30-50 mN/m by changing
solvent composition, and volume ratio will be varied from 1 to 100 by changing
the driving voltage and pulse width for both support and wetting droplets. The
temporal change of spreading area will be measured by high-speed photography
with a few tens of microseconds resolution. The second objective will be
achieved by both experimental study and computer simulation. For dual-droplet
printing experiments, nanosheet size will be varied between 0.2-10 µm in mean
diameter, nanosheet concentration in the wetting droplet between 0.01-1 mg/mL,
and the receding contact angle of the support droplet will be varied from about
0° with a pinned contact line up to ~90° with a depinned contact line. The
nanosheet alignment in the assembly will be analyzed by microscopy
characterization. A model of Lagrangian particle tracking will be created for
prediction of nanosheet alignment, where molecular dynamics simulation will
compute nanosheet dynamics under the evaporation-induced flow. Simulation
predictions will be verified by experimental results in terms of nanosheet
orientation and alignment. To achieve the third objective, the structure (in
terms of topological roughness, sheet-to-sheet alignment, gaps or overlaps
between nanosheets) of the deposited nanosheet assembly will be measured using
electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy, and the property (conductivity)
will be measured using four-point probe.