* 1634463
* Automated Instrumentation for Chemical Oceanography Based on Sequential Injection Lab-On-valve Technology
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Mariko Hatta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 534,389.00

The ability of oceanographers to investigate and understand chemical processes
in the ocean is only as good as the accuracy and precision of the techniques
available for making chemical measurements. This project seeks to upgrade an
existing analytical method (the micro-Sequential Injection Lab on Valve; uSI-LOV
methodology) for measurement of dissolved aluminum (Al) and phosphate (P) in
seawater. Aluminum is an abundant element used for tracking dust input to the
ocean from the atmosphere and the movement of water masses. Phosphate is an
essential nutrient for biological growth in the ocean, showing spatial and
temporal variability that affects the growth of phytoplankton. The novel uSI-LOV
methods would allow unattended and accurate measurement of Al and P together,
with direct benefit for oceanographic research on biogeochemical cycles and
ecosystem dynamics. Additionally, the uSI-LOV methodology includes an ingenious
"single standard" technique that greatly simplifies calibration of the system,
can be developed for analysis of many other elements beyond Al and P, and would
provide a procedure for improved inter-comparison between different studies. The
refined, modular uSI-LOV system produced by this proposal will be widely
applicable for use by the oceanographic community. The project will also fund an
excellent interdisciplinary PhD student thesis opportunity that incorporates
aspects of engineering, analytical chemistry, and oceanography.

The PIs on this project intend to adapt the micro-Sequential Injection Lab on
Valve (uSI-LOV) system to the measurement of seawater Al and P using fluorescent
and spectrophotometric detection with flow injection analysis. They will develop
and evaluate a novel "single standard" calibration process that uses the
precisely reproduced timing of the rising and falling edge of a single standard
injection peak as a pseudo-standard addition curve, potentially providing better
calibration of other seawater analytical systems designed for trace element and
nutrient concentrations in the ocean. The improved uSI-LOV methodology has
advantages of physical robustness, as well as lowered power, sample, and reagent
requirements. The project will field test the uSI-LOV system during an at-sea
intercalibration against established shipboard analytical methods for P and Al,
and deploy a small battery operated version in shallow water to test autonomous
operation. The work is directed at eventual use of the uSI-LOV technology on
existing and future remote platforms and autonomous vehicles. Successful
adaptation, integration into the chemical oceanography community, and future
deployments would provide greatly improved chemical data sets that would inform
biogeochemical models and promote significant advancements in our understanding
of marine biogeochemical cycles.