* 1634214
* 2016 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon Research Conference &amp; Gordon Research Seminar; June 26-July 1, 2016; Les Diablerets, Switzerland
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Richard Kriwacki, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon
Research Conference will address emerging themes at the intersection of
biophysics, structural biology and cell biology. Many proteins, the workhorse
molecules in cells, perform their functions because they adopt distinct three-
dimensional shapes, or structures. These are termed folded proteins. Knowledge
of protein structure informs on protein function. However, greater than 30% of
human proteins do not adopt single, folded structures but rather are highly
flexible and disordered. These are termed intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs). IDPs are involved in myriad biological functions throughout the
different compartments in cells and, importantly, are associated with a wide
variety of human diseases. However, because IDPs are always moving, they are
difficult to study using conventional scientific methods. This has created a
knowledge gap regarding how IDPs do their jobs in cells. To address this gap,
the conference will cover three main themes: 1) the molecular details of how
IDPs do their jobs in cells, 2) novel therapeutic strategies to counteract the
roles of IPDs in disease, and 3) the roles of IDPs in the formation of
structures in cells termed membrane-less organelles. In summary, this conference
will address emerging topics related to a prevalent but currently poorly
understood class of proteins in cells, the IDPs. Importantly, the conference
will provide opportunities for young scientists from the US, including women and
member of underrepresented groups, to learn about the latest developments and
build professional networks with world leaders in the IDP field. There will be
many professional opportunities for US scientists in the IDP field in the future
and the conference will be a gateway to these opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins (IDPs) Gordon Research
Conference will address important themes related to intrinsically disordered
proteins, which often remain flexible and disordered when performing their
biological functions and are prevalent in all life forms, including humans.
Major challenges in the IDP field include: i) understanding the diverse
biological roles of IDPs, ii) understanding the molecular mechanisms that
underlie these diverse biological functions, and iii) relating our physical
knowledge of IDPs gained in vitro to their behavior within cellular systems.
Addressing these challenges will provide explanations regarding how disorder
contributes to biological function so as to understand why they have evolved in
organisms across all branches of life. Speakers at the conference will address
these important challenges. Importantly, recent studies have established that
IDPs play central roles in mesoscale cellular assemblies termed membrane-less
organelles through their ability to undergo phase separation into liquid-like
bodies. The conference will also address this emerging area with lectures on
topics ranging from the physics of biomolecular phase separation to its roles in
diverse biological processes. Gaining fundamental molecular knowledge on how
IDPs perform their diverse functions will empower applications in the areas of
synthetic biology and biomaterials. From a professional development perspective,
the conference will provide opportunities for young scientists from the US,
including women and members of underrepresented groups, to learn about the
latest developments and build professional networks with world leaders in the
IDP field. There will be many professional opportunities for US scientists in
the IDP field in the future and the conference will be a gateway to these
opportunities.