* 1634483
* A New Interval Finite Element Approach for Structural System Identification and Damage Detection under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Rafi Muhanna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2020
* USD 455,747.00

Identifying material properties of existing structural systems is crucial for
monitoring their performance and ensuring their safety. Knowledge about these
properties allows the determination of the magnitudes and the locations of any
deterioration occurring in the system. Such knowledge will allow the proper
required actions to avoid any failures. The identification procedures require a
significant amount of measured data that typically are associated with
uncertainty. Accounting for uncertainty due to different factors is one of the
most challenging tasks in structural system identification and damage detection.
In this project, uncertainty in measurements due to device tolerances and field
conditions will be treated in terms of possible values expressed as intervals,
without any prior assumptions on their nature. The rigorous consideration of
uncertainty in system identification will lead to a more reliable and dependable
predictions of their behavior. Such reliable and dependable predictions are
crucial for the safety of civil infrastructure systems, and will contribute to
the reduction of life endangering failures and disasters. The research team will
offer research opportunities to high school students through summer camps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While interval-based methods and system identification are
both very powerful and well-developed techniques within their respective fields,
thus far they have scarcely been used together in the context of inverse
problems under uncertainty. By investigating the best ways of analytically,
numerically and computationally handling these two methodologies in conjunction
with each other, we shall develop a powerful class of techniques not only for
the problem at hand, but for a vast number of other inverse problems with
partial differential equation (PDE) constraints. In this research an emphasis
will be placed on the use of Interval Finite Element Methods (IFEM) in the
context of optimization to solve for inverse problems that arise in structural
system identification and damage detection under uncertainty without prior
assumptions on its nature. This is therefore expected to be the first step of a
long lasting research program which will be both broad in its scope of
applications across many fields and at the same time remain coherently focused
in its underlying computational and mathematical methodologies.