* 1634552
* Mechanics of Colloidal Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Thomas Powers, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2020
* USD 376,949.00

The goal of this project is to study the mechanics of colloidal membranes---
membranes comprised of colloidal particles such as filamentous viruses or DNA
origami bundles. These membranes have life-like abilities reminiscent of cell
membranes, such as the ability to heal themselves or assemble spontaneously into
complex and controllable shapes. Many of the technological advances of the
twentieth century were made possible by discoveries in materials engineering.
The development of corrosion-resistant stainless steel, synthetic polymers such
as nylon, semiconductors and integrated circuits, and liquid crystals used in
displays have all had a profound impact on society and our quality of life. Each
of these advances required the theoretical framework and experimental techniques
necessary to understand and control the material properties of inanimate matter.
Today we are at the beginning of a new era of bio-inspired materials
engineering, as it is now just becoming possible to create and control materials
consisting of biological components and with the distinctive properties of
living matter. The PIs will develop the theoretical and computational tools to
predict and control the mechanics of colloidal membranes and how colloidal
membrane shape depends on the experimental conditions. The research approach has
the potential to bridge the physics, math and engineering communities.
Educational YouTube videos related to the research will also be created for
outreach to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal membranes are promising
for their potential as highly reconfigurable microscopic structures, and as
analogs to biological materials such as lipid bilayer membranes. While colloidal
membranes share many properties with lipid bilayer membranes, such as their
fluidity, they also have their own unique aspects, including a low energy cost
for having edges. The study of the mechanics of these objects is still in its
infancy, and requires a multidisciplinary approach including elements from solid
mechanics, statistical mechanics, liquid crystal physics, and differential
geometry. The research team will carry out three specific tasks: (i) calculate
the entropy-driven or chirality-driven instability and subsequent nonlinear
evolution of flat disk-shaped membranes to rippled helical sheets and twisted
ribbons, (ii) calculate the force vs. extension relation for membrane disks and
helicoidal ribbons, and (iii) predict and classify the shapes of colloidal
membranes of more complex topology, such as catenoids and other observed
structures with multiple holes.