* 1634888
* Intracellular Force Generation Measured Through Nuclear Particle Tracking
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Kris Dahl, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 10/31/2020
* USD 387,385.00

Individual molecular motors generate very small forces within cells, but the
coordination and integration of these forces is responsible for large scale
movements of an organism. The study of forces that a cell can generate has been
of wide interest for decades but has been limited to visualizing how the
environment around the cell deforms in response to the cell pulling. However,
with proper image analysis tools for removing intrinsic movements of the cell
itself, fluctuations within the cell nucleus also provide a metric for
quantifying forces generated inside the cell. This methodology is in its infancy
and will require effort to fully characterize and compare to established
techniques. By determining the forces that cells generate, including if
neighboring cells generate different forces, it is possible to understand how
microscopic units of the body work together to form larger dynamic structures.
Specifically, this is important in tissue formation during early embryonic
development and in multicellular dysfunction associated with different disease
states including cancer and vascular disease. The project will integrate
undergraduate professional development with K-3 science outreach programs. The
PI will develop a program to teach ethics to undergraduate students focusing on
Comparative Ethics for Biomedical Engineers contrasting the different priorities
of the patient, science and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By removing intrinsic
cellular translocation and rotation using image analysis post-processing, it is
possible to correlate movements within the nucleus with force generation of the
actin-myosin cytoskeleton. Utilizing this newly developed technique of
intranuclear particle tracking it may be possible to measure how cells propagate
mechanical stimuli applied within a monolayer through cell structures on short
timescales before diffusion can occur and on long timescales as interconnected
cells begin to adapt cellular structures in response to stress. This
intracellular force transduction measurement within multicellular systems will
allow investigation of heterogeneous tissue systems where traction force
microscopy and other contemporary measurements have experimental limitations.
Specifically, this investigation will include examining force transduction
through a sheet of endothelial cells growing on smooth muscle cells in different
vascular states in and inside cells of C. elegans during embryo development.