* 1634856
* Hierarchical Assembly of Liposomes with Shape-Controlled Metal Nanoparticles for Multifunctional Theranostics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Rizia Bardhan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Multifunctional nanoparticles that simultaneously enable targeted diagnosis of a
disease and delivery of a therapeutic drug are of significant interest to
achieving highly specific disease detection and treatment in a single procedure.
In this work a single multifunctional nanoparticle, Lipo-Nanoantennas, will be
nanomanufactured for combined therapeutics and diagnostics (theranostics) in
cancer cells. Lipo-Nanoantennas will ultimately facilitate a clinically
applicable technology which can be translated from "bench to bedside" allowing
minimally invasive imaging of cancer biomarkers with high precision. Lipo-
Nanoantennas will also simultaneously deliver dose-controlled treatment
minimizing off-target toxicities associated with chemotherapy. Further, Lipo-
Nanoantennas may allow early detection and targeted treatment of multiple
diseases including cardiovascular and infectious diseases. Successful
implementation of the project goals will ultimately enable us to generate a
library of functional nanomaterial assemblies that will impact multiple
technologies including sensing, catalysis, and self-healing coatings. Notably,
this project also builds an interface between the PI's research and core
undergraduate chemical engineering curriculum where the PI teaches a drug
delivery laboratory. Further, this work will increase participation of
underrepresented minorities at the graduate and undergraduate level in the PI's
lab, and propel research-based outreach activities among K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to study the
hierarchical assembly of thermosensitive liposomes with gold nanoantennas (Lipo-
Nanoantennas) to enable multifunctional theranostics. This will leverage
directed self-assembly, a bottom-up nanomanufacturing approach, that offers
nanoscale control of material properties critical to enabling enhanced
theranostics. Liposomes are clinically-approved drug carriers and nanoantennas
are ideally suited for both imaging and converting near-infrared light to heat.
Heat generated by the nanoantennas is absorbed by the liposomes disrupting the
lipid bilayer and triggering drug release. Directed assembly of Lipo-
Nanoantennas provides a mechanistic design of a nanomanufactured construct that
can leverage intense photothermal response directly at the point of drug
release. This gives rise to highly efficient photothermal drug delivery with
minimal off-target toxicity and precise cellular imaging all with a single
nanoscale entity. By controlling the loading density and shape of gold
nanostructures within the liposomes, and their overall size and material
properties, the photothermal response of Lipo-Nanoantennas will be manipulated
to promote enhanced uptake, imaging, and drug release in cells. The Lipo-
Nanoantennas will then be utilized for surface-enhanced Raman imaging and
delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs in cancer cells. Our central hypothesis is
that understanding directed-assembly of Lipo-Nanoantennas will offer a
transformative approach relative to other methods that will simultaneously
enable superior biophysical properties, and theranostics.