* 1634641
* Integrated Stage-based Evacuation with Social Perception Analysis and Dynamic Population Estimation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ming-Hsiang Tsou, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 465,189.00

Effective evacuation during disastrous events is one of the most challenging
issues for many local government agencies in U.S. This research project will
develop a prototype integrated wildfire evacuation decision support system and
create analytic tools that will be evaluated with evacuation planers and
emergency resource managers. Our interdisciplinary research team will
collaborate with the Office of Emergency Services (OES) of San Diego County, the
San Diego/Imperial Counties Chapter of the American Red Cross, and 2-1-1 San
Diego to develop this web-based system. This research will help emergency
response agencies better understand public perceptions and needs during
disastrous events, and create more effective evacuation plans for local
communities. The research framework can be extended to other types of natural
disasters (e.g., tsunami, hurricanes, flood hazards) with some modifications to
cope with different needs of evacuation plans. The dynamic population density
model developed in this project can be applied in urban planning, elections,
business marketing, and facility management. The social perception analysis
model and public opinion monitors can help other research domains such as
traffic incident detection and public campaigns. One of the most valuable
components in this project is the establishment of a resident feedback network
by connecting registered local volunteers using a mobile phone application and
an online forum. The project will also include involvement of graduate students,
dissemination through various fora, including a project website and a discussion
forum to involve multidisciplinary researchers. Three summer workshop meetings
will be organized to facilitate future multidisciplinary collaborations among
researchers and government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Big Data-driven
techniques, this project will integrate multiple data sources including social
media, census survey, geographic information systems (GIS) data layers,
volunteer suggestions, and remote sensing data to develop an integrated wildfire
evacuation decision support system (IWEDSS). This system will provide key
functions for data collection, traffic demand modeling, evacuation operation,
and information dissemination. It will offer scientifically-based and data-
driven analytic tools for evacuation planers and government agencies to make
better decisions that can reduce the evacuation time and potential number of
injuries and deaths. The four main goals of this project are to (1) build a
dynamic estimated population distribution (density) model in urban areas by
integrating multiple data sources and GIS models; (2) design stage-based
evacuation plans with population density distributions and develop robust
optimization models to account for demand uncertainties; (3) create a public
opinion monitor and a resident feedback network to improve evacuation plans by
understanding social perception of the disasters in local communities through
the real-time analysis of social media and volunteer suggestions; (4) build a
web-based geospatial analytics platform and provide interactive decision support
tools for decision makers, emergency resource managers, and public officers.
This interdisciplinary project will rely upon a convergence among GIScience,
cartography, civil engineering, transportation, and social media analytics to
facilitate the transformation of traditional static evacuation planning
procedures into a dynamic, user-centered, easy-to-use, and data-driven spatial
decision support system.