* 1634300
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A Wide Area, Persistent Spectrum Monitoring System
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Mark McHenry, Shared Spectrum Company
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 04/30/2017
* USD 175,000.00

Radio frequency spectrum is finite and yet inefficiently used -- resulting from
prior policy regimes that dispensed spectrum via methods initially such as
administrative allocation and later via market mechanisms such as auctions.
Accordingly, a key imperative today is to enable Spectrum Sharing whereby new
services are allowed to operate in bands hitherto allocated to licensed
incumbents (primary users) under new sharing rules, driven by a Presidential
mandate directing 500 MHz currently held by various Federal networks to be re-
purposed by 2020 for civilian use. A key enabler of any engineering solution for
the above is deployment of (low cost) hardware in conjunction with appropriate
networking and storage resources and a software infrastructure that allows for
persistent monitoring of spectrum usage. This pilot project will produce the
first calibrated large-scale data sets (over frequency, time and region) of
spectrum usage archived for post-processing. Such a database will be a unique
national resource for any future spectrum engineering efforts; its impact will
extend well beyond the academic community. The data-driven research that it
enables will provide valuable inputs for spectrum policymakers charged with
formulation of new spectrum sharing rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
significantly extends the state-of-the art in spectrum monitoring: first and
foremost, it will result in the first wide-area, persistent and taskable
spectrum monitoring and data collection infrastructure without using expensive
high-end sensors, but still capable of gathering unprecedented amount of good
quality spectrum data that will be stored and made publicly available for
further investigations by research community. Further, the design will
constitute the first step towards future networked monitoring infrastructure
that can allow for distributed experimentation by researchers who will have the
ability to task desired sensor sub-sets simultaneously for data acquisition in
desired spectrum bands. This will enable data mining of spectrum usage patterns
as a function of both space and time, which is currently not possible.