* 1634250
* Collaborative Research: DOC Removal in the Ocean According to Polymer Gel Theory
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 253,380.00

Research on carbon cycling in the ocean has received much attention in recent
years due to the importance of carbon dynamics in terms of global climate
change. A significant portion of the marine carbon reservoir is made up of
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), yet much still needs to be learned about the
processes controlling its removal (sinks). Especially crucial is identifying how
DOC get incorporated into the microbial loop, or the cycling of carbon through
biological processes. This project aims to study the creation of microgels from
pools of DOC. Microgels are the product of DOC aggregating to form a particle-
type of a DOC conglomerate, which makes it more biologically accessible. About
10-30% of the DOC pool is estimated to form these microgels, so a significant
segment of the marine carbon cycle will be illuminated more clearly through this
research. A vast variety of processes could influence the development of these
microgels, so the researchers are including a study of various environmental
controls such as temperature and pH. With these parameters and more, the
investigators will potentially be able to not only develop and explain the
mechanisms of microgel formation, but also the effect which climate change
(warming and acidification of the ocean) will have on this process and how that
will affect marine biological processes. Additionally, a postdoctoral researcher
will be supported through this project, as well as the training of 20 high
school teachers, one undergraduate and two high school students. The
investigators will develop a high school curriculum that will focus on
connecting science to the students' local natural world, which has been shown to
improve student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of dissolved
organic carbon (DOC) in the microbial loop is overall still a mystery due to the
fact that DOC mechanics are poorly understood. The assembly of microgels from
dispersed DOC pools may be a critical factor in studying the bioreactivity of
DOC in the open ocean. This project aims to study the formation of DOC polymers
in the North Pacific and assess their bioreactivity under a variety of
environmental conditions (pH, temperature). Deep North Pacific water contains
very low DOC (35 ÂµM) yet has the oldest radiocarbon ages (up to 6000 years old)
known in the open oceans, which makes it an ideal test site due to the low
bioreactivity end member. The goal of this research is to develop mechanistic
models of the aggregation of DOC polymers into microgels under a variety of
environmental conditions and potentially use that information to describe the
potential climate change effects on these processes.