* 1634687
* Continuous and Scalable Manufacturing of Platinum-Nickel Nanocatalysts for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,002.00

Metal nanocrystals with controlled shapes are essential to a variety of
applications, including energy conversion, environmental protection, and
chemical/pharmaceutical manufacturing. Despite recent progress in their
synthesis, there still exists a major gap in transitioning the nanocrystals from
academic studies to industrial applications, primarily due to the lack of
ability to manufacture them at an industrially relevant scale without
compromising quality. Recent demonstrations indicate that continuous-flow
droplet reactors offer a practical platform for the scalable and cost-effective
production of metal nanocrystals with uniform sizes and controlled shapes. The
droplet-based platform offers a linearly scalable technology that can be
operated at both small and large quantities under essentially identical
conditions for the purposes of protocol optimization and manufacturing,
respectively. In addition to the scientific and technological advances, this
award will help forge links between different disciplines that include
nonmanufacturing, materials science, catalysis, colloidal science, and energy
technology. It also has immediate impacts on the society in the following two
aspects: manufacturing of nanocatalysts for fuel cells, a truly zero-emission
technology critical to environmental protection; and promotion of diversity in
higher education by engaging women, minorities, and other underrepresented
groups into this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In working with its collaborators
at Nissan, the team aims to develop a new technology for the scalable
manufacturing of octahedral platinum-nickel nanocrystals. Such bimetallic
nanocrystals have been produced in batch reactors and demonstrated with the
highest activity toward oxygen reduction, a key reaction occurring on the
cathodes of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). However, due to
the poor batch-to-batch reproducibility and inevitable variations between
syntheses, it has proven challenging to obtain an adequate amount of uniform
nanocrystals for device testing. Through this award, an optimal combination of
metal precursors and reductant will be identified based on kinetic measurements
to ensure that the reduction will not occur prematurely, and instead only when
the droplet reactors pass through a reaction zone held at an elevated
temperature. A similar protocol will also be developed to conformally coat the
surfaces of platinum-nickel octahedra with platinum shells of 1-2 atomic layers
thick to greatly enhance their catalytic activity. The catalysts will be tested
by engineers at Nissan and evaluated for commercial use in vehicles powered by
PEMFCs. This research will pave the way for future deployment of industrial
catalysts based on nanocrystals with controlled shapes.