* 1634719
* The Biological Pump During the Last Glacial Maximum and Early Deglaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,913.00

An important unanswered question in climate science is what caused the increase
of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations during the last deglaciation.
During the height of the last ice age, 20,000 years ago, climate was cold and
CO2 concentrations were low, around 180 parts per million (ppm). Subsequently
CO2 concentrations rose to about 280 ppm causing the climate to warm, ice sheets
to melt and sea levels to rise. The last deglaciation was the last time in
Earth's history when global climate warmed substantially, comparable to the
warming projected for the coming centuries. Currently interactions between
climate and the carbon cycle are not well understood, with possible implications
for the accuracy of future climate projections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project it will contribute to a better understanding of Earth's coupled climate-
carbon cycle system. Previous research suggests that the carbon that was missing
in the atmosphere during the ice age may have been stored somewhere in the
ocean, but at present it is not clear where it was, how it got there, or what
mechanisms may have controlled its outgassing from the ocean to the atmosphere
during the deglaciation. This project will synthesize carbon isotope data from
ocean sediments and combine them with detailed model simulations in order to
better understand the ocean's circulation and carbon cycle during the early part
of the last deglaciation from 20,000 to 13,000 years before the present. The
data synthesis will be accomplished through an international collaborative
project (OC3: Ocean Circulation and Carbon Cycling). A newly developed global
climate model that includes three-dimensional ocean physics, biogeochemical
cycles, isotopes of carbon and nitrogen, and sediments will be constrained by
the OC3 carbon isotope synthesis and other existing paleoceanographic datasets
such as a recent synthesis of nitrogen isotope data and an ongoing radiocarbon
compilation. The goal is to reconstruct quantitatively how ocean carbon storage
was affected by different processes, such as the biological pump, sea ice cover,
ocean circulation, stratification, iron fertilization, sea level and sediment
interactions. The project has the potential to improve our understanding of the
deglacial ocean circulation, its carbon cycling, and it may provide explanations
for the rise in atmospheric CO2. Funding supports a postdoctoral researcher, and
provides research opportunities for undergraduate students.