* 1634448
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Design of Ultrahigh Surface Area Conductive Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Peter Kroll, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/29/2020
* USD 309,207.00

Porous materials have great potential in a number of applications, but many
challenges exist in the synthesis and manufacturing of high surface-area porous
materials that can operate at high temperatures and conduct electricity. This
award supports research aiming to integrate theory, experiment, and
computational simulations to understand and enable a new class of high
temperature stable and ultrahigh surface area porous materials known as silicon
oxycarbides (SiOC). Such porous materials have exciting applications in
catalysis, gas separation, sensing, electrodes, molecular sieves, thermal
insulation, and micro-reactors. Their high thermal stability will enable new
applications under harsh conditions where traditional materials have failed. The
program integrates multi-layered education and outreach activities and will
provide training to multiple graduate and undergraduate students, in materials
experimental and simulation research and across two university
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at understanding the
relationship between the composition and structure of SiOC materials, and the
potential for synthesizing materials with high surface area, high temperature
stability, and high electrical conductivity. The team will create nanosized
pores and domains by tailoring polymer precursors, as well as tailoring
crosslinking and pyrolysis conditions. By selective removal of phase-separated
species, the approach will provide ultrahigh surface area and high temperature
stable materials with &lt;5 nm pores and much desired electrical conductivity.
Multi-scale atomistic modeling (ab-initio and large-scale molecular dynamics)
will couple to experiment and provide insight in bonding characteristics at
interfaces between different phases, driving forces for phase segregation, the
evolution of the graphitic substructure, as well as macroscopic properties
governed at the nanoscale. A coarse-grain model will combine experimental and
computational data and provide an unprecedented and unique platform to model and
design the polymer-to-ceramic transformation and post-pyrolysis treatment. This
research will establish a new paradigm in molecular design and processing of
ultrahigh surface area, high temperature materials with electrical conductivity
beyond SiOC, such as SiCN, SiOCN, SiBCN, SiOBC, SiAlCN, and SiAlOC.