* 1634630
* Collaborative Research: Creatine Cycling in  Marine Bacterial and Phytoplankton Assemblages
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Linda Atkinson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 501,814.00

High rates of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) production and utilization in
aquatic systems are typically attributed to microbial activity. Though it is
known that there is a tight coupling between the production and consumption of
biologically available DON, the composition, dynamics, and ecological
significance of this rapidly cycled DON pool are less well understood. This
proposal focuses on a component of the DON pool, creatine, which is historically
understood as a product of metazoan activity, but appears to be both produced by
phytoplankton and consumed by marine bacteria. Creatine is present in seawater
in measurable quantities, which led to the hypothesis that creatine may be
significant component of the marine DON cycle. DON cycling likely has a bearing
on fundamental marine ecosystem processes with large implications for carbon and
nitrogen turnover on a global scale. Broader impacts of this project will
include outreach that focuses on connecting scientists with K-12 students
through research experiences for teachers and lesson development in
collaboration with the K20 Center for Educational and Community Renewal, a
statewide education research and development center at the University of
Oklahoma. The project will integrate the research with inquiry-based teaching of
rural secondary science teachers through Authentic Research Experiences in
oceanographic science and microbial ecology. The K20 network includes 96% of
Oklahoma schools, providing a unique opportunity to impact STEM education in
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will help develop a
better understanding of DON cycling, the ecological context of creatine uptake
activity, and identify both creatine producing and consuming organisms in the
marine environment. The importance of creatine cycling will be assessed via 15N
tracer studies along the natural coastal-to-offshore productivity gradient
observed in the North Atlantic. Tracer and molecular approaches will be used to
investigate the importance of phytoplankton vs. bacteria in creatine uptake and,
the taxonomic identities of creatine utilizing bacteria will be interrogated via
molecular, stable isotope probing (SIP), and RT-qPCR approaches.