* 1634421
* Petrogenetic Studies of Young Volcanic Rocks
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Charles Langmuir, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 512,503.00

This is an Accomplishment Based Renewal by an outstanding scientist who is a
member of the US National Academy of Sciences and universally acknowledged by
members of the marine geology community as one of the leaders in the field. His
research, over the past few decades, has transformed our understanding of
magmatic process occurring at mid-ocean ridges and convergent margins like
Cascadia and the Aleutians in the US and Japan in Pacific. In both volcanic
environments, melts arising from the mantle come to the surface and produce the
volcanoes and lavas that form the floor of the oceans and island arc volcanic
chains. This renewal builds off the investigator's work over the last five years
in improving our understanding of seafloor volcanism, including the creation of
an internally consistent geochemical and geophysical database for which over
1,000 new high quality major and trace element analyses of seafloor volcanic
rocks were collected and then combined with thousands of other similar data
collected from the scientific literature. This has provided the essential data
needed to test global models of mantle temperature and composition. The new
research will allow determination of the relationship between basalt composition
and the physical properties and variables of mid-ocean ridges on a global scale;
determine the principles that control the extent of mantle melting,
compositional fractionation, and magma mixing; identify magma sources and source
heterogeneity; and determine the causes of the disconnect between mantle
temperatures and lava trace element geochemistry. This work will also involve
the creation of a similarly comprehensive geochemical database for ocean island
basalts, which can be used with geophysical information such as island size,
volume, height above the seafloor, and tectonic plate age and thickness to
illuminate the origin and evolution of ocean islands and identify commonalities
and global trends. Broader impacts of the work include support of an early
career collaborating scientist whose gender is under-represented in the
sciences, training of a graduate students, and building infrastructure for
science in terms of creating a new comprehensive community dataset that will be
publicly accessible and can be used to test and constrain models for the
formation and growth of ocean islands over time.