* 1634858
* Decision-making and Development of A 3D Printing-based Meniscus Transplantation System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Shiren Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 353,607.00

The meniscus is a wedge-shaped piece of cartilage that acts as a shock absorber
in the knee. Every year millions of people have surgery to treat meniscus tears,
for which meniscus transplantation is the favored treatment in the long term.
However, like other tissue/organ transplantations, this treatment suffers from
many fundamental limitations such as the shortage of donors and the risk of
shape mismatch. Moreover, managing the supply chain of the donor-based meniscus
transplantation system is difficult. An emerging manufacturing technology,
three-dimensional (3D) printing, is promising to conquer this problem by
fabricating artificial meniscus. However, critical problems exist to turn the
printer-based meniscus transplantation into reality including concerns on the
benefits of 3D printing and challenges in controlling the printing system to
produce qualified products. This research will evaluate the benefits of 3D
printing in meniscus transplantation to help the decision-making of medical
policy makers and patients and develop systematic methodologies for the control
of the printing system. If successful, research will lead to a meniscus printer
to satisfy the vast needs of patients with meniscus damage. Efforts will be made
to include students from underrepresented groups in this project and provide
them a diversified education background and interdisciplinary research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team consists of researchers in
biomedical engineering, manufacturing and systems informatics, aiming to find an
integrated, optimal solution to the current challenges. Specifically, the team
will focus on three tasks: (i) performing cost and risk analysis of the 3D
printing-based meniscus transplantation compared to the current donor-based
meniscus transplantation, (ii) developing data-driven methodologies for the
control of the 3D printing system, including material selection, quality
assessment, and quality prediction, and (iii) conducting patient survey to
collect information that will help to evaluate the strengths and gaps of the
meniscus printer toward personalized printing. This research will provide a
systematic, evidence-grounded, practically convenient framework for decision
making on meniscus printing, and shift the current trial-and-error approach in
3D printing into a model-based, knowledge-guided approach.