* 1634216
* Workshop: Fluid Power Advanced Manufacturing; Minneapolis, Minnesota; May 24-25, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Zongxuan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2017
* USD 21,797.00

This award supports a workshop on fluid power advanced manufacturing. Fluid
power is a unique method for power transfer and motion control. The two major
domains of fluid power are hydraulics and pneumatics. Fluid power is widely used
in industrial and mobile applications. For example, many off-road vehicles
including construction machines and agriculture equipment use fluid power to
propel the vehicle and conduct working functions. The amount of energy
transmitted through fluid power accounts for 2 to 2.9 Quads (or quadrillion
BTUs) per year. Advanced manufacturing, such as additive manufacturing, offers
new opportunities for improving performance and efficiency of fluid power
components and systems. The workshop will help to connect the manufacturing
innovations with model-based design and analysis to enable new fluid power
systems and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the workshop is
to identify the pre-competitive research needs and approaches of integrating
manufacturing innovations with model-based design and analysis for fluid power
components and systems. The workshop will be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Researchers in manufacturing, fluid power components and systems, system
modeling, analysis and control will be invited to attend the workshop. The
organizing committee will work with the industry advisory team to select plenary
speakers. The workshop will last two days and consists of both plenary sessions
and breakout sessions. The organizing committee will compile a comprehensive
report on the workshop outcomes that include a list of participants,
presentations, notes from the plenary session and breakout session discussions.
The report will outline the main challenges and approaches in integrating
advanced manufacturing with model based design and analysis for fluid power.