* 1634065
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Approaches To The Analysis Of Ethnic Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Matthew Biwer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 12,940.00

This research will examine the processes through which imperial colonists and
indigenous groups negotiated their identities within ancient borderlands and
colonies. Archaeology is particularly well suited for addressing issues of
colonialism because artifacts can often provide visibility to members of society
who may not be easily recognized in historical documents, such as low-status or
subjugated peoples. While previous scholarship viewed colonialism in the context
of indigenous groups adopting the culture of the colonizers, more recently they
are viewed as unique contested locations where both colonizing and indigenous
groups influence each other culturally through a complex exchange of ideas,
traditions, and material culture. This project fills an important research gap
by focusing on multiple socioeconomic within empires and how complex social
interactions between colonists and local groups were manifested in the past.
This research has particular relevance for the negotiation of cultural
differences in regions today where dissimilar ethnic groups come into contact as
a result of population movement due to conflict, politics, or economic
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One form of archaeological material that
provides an excellent medium for examining culture contact is cuisine. The study
of ancient food practices within colonial contexts will shed light on how
imperial colonists and indigenous groups modified or reaffirmed their food
preferences and identities within borderlands. The research will be conducted in
the central highlands of the Peru focusing on two sites from ancient Wari Empire
and an indigenous site located near one of the Wari colonies. The Wari Empire
expanded to cover much of modern-day Peru and incorporated a number of ethnic
groups into its administration, yet there are no written records to understand
who these people were. As a result, the carbonized plant data from these sites
will be compared to determine the cuisine of Wari colonists and indigenous
groups and examine the exchange of food preferences, production, and processing
strategies between Wari colonists and indigenous peoples to identify how these
different groups interacted and experienced colonization. The food preferences
of colonial and indigenous groups will be reconstructed and compared through
correlations between architectural space, material culture, and ancient plant
remains using plant remains to highlight the ways in which these groups shared
their cuisine, which will allow for a more dynamic view of colonialism in the
past. This project will generate new methods for the study of ancient cuisine
and culture contact and provide hands-on training and education opportunities
for students.