* 1634032
* The Origin of Abiotic Hydrocarbons in Seafloor Serpentinization Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Frieder Klein, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 398,731.00

The origin and synthesis of higher chain hydrocarbons on Earth that formed the
first components of life have been a major topic of research for decades.
Hydrothermal vents on the seafloor have been proposed as one of the most likely
places where life could have formed, but up to now, mechanisms by which long-
chain and complex hydrocarbons that would be required to build a cell or nurture
incipient life forms have only been speculated upon. This research builds off
intriguing preliminary data from ultra-mafic hydrothermal vents on the Cayman
Rise in the Caribbean Sea that indicate a significant proportion of the
hydrocarbons coming out of hydrothermal vents in this region is generated not by
biological processes, but abiotically (i.e., via water-rock interaction and
other physical processes that do not involve living organisms or their
byproducts). The research premise is that abiotic methane and longer chain
hydrocarbons found in vent fluids in hydrothermal systems, dominated by the
alteration reactions of ultramafic rocks, are formed in olivine-hosted secondary
fluid inclusions that are leached during subsequent alteration of the mineral
host. This is a startling, unconventional, and novel hypothesis that, if
validated, will transform how we understand organic carbon compound formation in
the subsurface of hydrothermal vent systems. To test this hypothesis, the
abundance and carbon isotopic composition of low molecular weight hydrocarbons
in secondary fluid inclusion in natural samples of basement rocks from a variety
of seafloor ultra-mafic hosted hydrothermal systems will be analyzed. The fluid
and gas contents of the fluid inclusions will be analyzed using gas
chromatography-isotope ratio mass spectrometry. Cutting-edge nanometer-scale
characterization of minerals formed in the fluid inclusions using X-ray
dispersive spectroscopy on a scanning electron microscope and Raman confocal
spectroscopy will allow constraints to be placed on fluid-rock interactions that
regulate the chemical environment during organic compound synthesis.
Thermodynamic models and calculations will be used to aid in the interpretation
of the fluid-mineral equilibria and organic synthesis in the fluid inclusions.
Broader impacts of the work include significant student training at the graduate
and undergraduate level, with undergraduate interns being invited from the
University of Puerto Rico to come work at the Woods Hole hydrothermal laboratory
of the principle investigators for three months during the summer. These
students will experience the full-bodied research experience from the selection
of a project through collecting analytical data using state-of-the-art
instrumentation to data analysis and presentation of results. Additional
educational outreach will be carried out in the local school system via visits
to K-12 classrooms and the development of a one-day short course on hydrothermal
vents to be given at a local independent high school.