* 1634995
* Testing eruption-triggering mechanisms at Axial Caldera using statistical data assimilation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Patricia Gregg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 272,587.00

Millions of people around the world live in the shadows of active volcanic
systems. In the United States, active volcanoes in California, the Pacific
Northwest, Alaska, and Hawaii are monitored both by ground based instruments and
satellite observations to provide early warning of potential eruptions and
hazards for local communities. On land, GPS and satellite observations can
detect volcano inflation and provide early warning of unrest. However, the link
between surface deformation and eruption remains unclear. This project will
address this link at the submarine Axial Volcano located on the Juan de Fuca
Ridge off of the coast of Oregon. Unlike volcanoes on land, deformation of Axial
Volcano appears to be closely linked to eruption. Still, the ultimate eruption
triggering mechanism at Axial Volcano remains unknown. Three decades of
observations spanning three eruption cycles will provide the data necessary to
'hind-cast' past eruptions at Axial and look for specific eruption precursors in
the deformation signal leading up to eruption. Axial Volcano is an ideal natural
laboratory to test hypotheses for eruption triggering mechanisms and the link
between deformation and eruption at active volcanoes. This project supports the
training of a Ph.D. student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project statistical
data assimilation techniques will be used to combine ground deformation
observations with finite element models of Axial Volcano to produce hind casts
of the 1998, 2011, and 2015 eruptions and investigate what mechanisms might have
triggered eruption of Axial. The first step in the investigation will test
eruption precursors and triggering mechanism. The second step will develop a
method for utilizing data from the Ocean Observatory Initiative Axial Regional
Node in near-real time to forecast future unrest at Axial Volcano. These
advancements will provide critical insight into the evolution of the Axial
volcanic system. Axial Volcano is the only system with a successful deformation
based eruption prediction and it could provide an important missing link for
understanding how eruptions are triggered at volcanoes.