* 1634433
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Enabling Risk-Aware Decision Making in Human-Guided Unmanned Surface Vehicle Teams
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/06/2016,08/31/2019
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 526,167.00

Over the last ten years, substantial progress has been made in the development
of small low-cost unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). There are a number of
civilian applications where deploying a human-robot team consisting of several
small USVs and one or more human supervisors can significantly reduce costs,
improve safety, and increase operational efficiencies. Representative
applications include remote/persistent ocean sensing, marine search and rescue,
maritime operations in congested port environments, and industrial offshore
supply and support. USVs face unique challenges that are not experienced by
robots operating indoors, such as: the need to adhere to marine navigation rules
(COLREGs); local current, wave and wind conditions that can severely reduce the
dynamic range of sensors and actuators; frequent communication interruptions;
and risk and urgency due to rapidly changing situations during outdoor on-water
operations. This research aims to develop decision making foundations for
enabling teams of humans and USVs to perform complex collaborative tasks.
Advances in this area could be extremely important from both a regulatory and
practical standpoint for the future deployment of USV systems. Results from this
research will enable leveraging the tremendous potential of USVs by reducing the
cost of deployment and operational risks in civilian applications. The
integration of the research with graduate and undergraduate courses will enhance
the robotics and ocean engineering curricula and enrich learning experiences of
the participating students. Outreach activities will educate and inform K-12
students about career opportunities in marine robotics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed effort is to make advances in risk-
informed decision making so that teams of USVs and human supervisors can work
cooperatively on a wide variety of missions. The proposed work will develop a
comprehensive distributed decision making approach by leveraging the latest
advances in task coordination and assignment, planning, reactive behaviors, and
control to enable the deployment of human-guided USV teams in civilian
applications. Progress in these constituent components will be pursued to ensure
that they are consistent with each other and to explicitly account for risk
during decision making. This research will develop methodologies to model team
missions to ensure that all phases of decision making will have the required
information for making informed decisions. Decision making methodologies will be
developed for sparse advisory control of USV teams to mitigate risks and for
coordinating and assigning tasks to different USVs in the team. Algorithms will
also be developed for risk-aware deliberative trajectory planning and generating
and executing reactive behaviors for mitigating risks. The methods developed
will be validated through on-water field experiments.