* 1634053
* Autonomous holographic imaging system for long term in situ studies of marine particle dynamics.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Fraser Dalgleish, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 949,883.00

A myriad of particles with vastly varying shapes and sizes, ranging from
suspended organic/inorganic material to single celled, colonial, and multi-
cellular plankton, densely populate the world's oceans. They are major drivers
in fields as diverse as sediment transport, remote sensing/ocean optics,
ecological studies of marine food webs, and carbon sequestration. Thus,
instruments that can directly quantify particle characteristics, distribution,
and concentration are critical to numerous science disciplines. Digital
holography is an ideal tool to study particles, providing 3-D information within
free stream sampling volumes that vastly exceed the 2-D cross sections sampled
by conventional imaging instruments. Holographic images of undisturbed particles
and their related flow fields can provide data critical to science questions
requiring an understanding of particle motions and interactions, particle size,
shape, fine-scale distribution, and spatial-temporal dynamics. The instrument
being developed through this project could encourage interdisciplinary studies
at the intersection of ocean optics, marine biology, biogeochemical cycles, and
small-scale fluid dynamics, and lead to significant advancements in each of
these areas.

The objective of this project is to design, fabricate and rigorously
test/validate an autonomous digital holographic camera system capable of
quantifying the characteristics of in situ particles within a size range of ~ 1
micron to 2 cm. The instrument will be designed to sample an undisturbed volume
of water and quantify particle number, size and shape (e.g. cross-sectional
area, surface area, aspect ratio, sphericity), the 3-D spatial structure of the
particle field (e.g. nearest neighbor distances), and the local fluid flows at
the scale of the particles (via holographic PIV of the imaged volume).
Identification of particles with unique shape characteristics (e.g. bubbles, oil
droplets, phytoplankton and zooplankton) and particle orientation will be
achievable. The instrument will be compact, submersible, biofouling resistant,
fully autonomous with self-contained data logging and power, with adjustable
resolution and sampling volume, and will be adaptable for use on vertical
profilers, AUVs, tow-bodies, and long-term deployment on moorings. The device
will be designed with the goal of science versatility and future
commercialization for routine use by the scientific community.