* 1634513
* 2016 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C2016); National Harbor, Maryland; June 29 - July 2, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Ozan Akkus, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

The proposed activity will support the 2016 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport
and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C2016). The SBC meetings are generally
considered the premiere annual meetings for biomechanics. The primary purpose of
the meeting is to promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and
international scientific discourse in the broad field of bioengineering with
focus on biomechanics, biotechnology, biotransport, biomaterials, tissue
engineering, rehabilitation and design. The organizing committee for SB3C2015 is
drawn from individuals in academia and the industry with significant experience
in running the previous summer meetings. The meeting and its precursor meetings
have traditionally provided a high-quality, multidisciplinary biomedical
engineering event since early 90's and contributed to training of many
generations of academics and researchers. Notably, the summer meetings series
has, since its inception, prioritized the integration of students into the
meeting to support their professional development and future connection to the
biomechanics, biotransport and bioengineering research community; for many
years, students have made up more than 50% of attendees and presenters. The
theme of this year's meeting is "Impact of Biomechanics on Healthcare". In
addition to the direct impact this conference will have on the mainstream
bioengineering community, it serves an important cross-fertilization role, since
attendees are drawn from a very broad range of disciplines beyond the
biomechanics community. The aims of the project is to sponsor travel fellowships
and a mentoring/advancement workshop for females and under-represented
minorities; and, to sponsor the prestigious Student Paper Competition by
covering the meeting attendance costs of the 36 Ph.D. finalists. Finalists and
winners in the student paper competition can add this information to their
resumes, and the competition provides an opportunity for students to develop as
researchers and is a significant career boost, enhancing retention of the most
talented students and providing role models for all student attendees. Through
the technical proceedings and conference web site, information presented at the
meeting will be available to multiple societies and to the public at large.
Further, the conference has historically had, and is expected to continue to
have more than 50% of the attendees being students and postdoctoral fellows and
more than 25% female attendees. For the first time, the organization committee
has been extended to include a Diversity Chair. Though the travel fellowships
and workshops, the PI plans to establish this meeting as the "go to" conference
for female and under-represented minority attendees.