* 1634857
* Remediation of Contaminated Sediments with Ultrasound and Ozone Nano-bubbles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jay Meegoda, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 476,577.00

The Passaic River, New Jersey, is the second most polluted river in the USA and
a declared Superfund site with over one hundred industrial facilities
discharging a number of contaminants. On March 3, 2016, the USEPA announced the
record of decision (ROD) to dredge 3.5 million cubic yards of the contaminated
sediments from the river, bank-to-bank at a cost $1.36 billion over six years.
The remediation plan not only has a high price tag, but also has the potential
to cause significant disruptions to the economic and social growth of the region
over the six years of dredging by transferring the dredged sediments via barges
to a large dewatering facility close to Newark, New Jersey, and then
transporting dewatered sediments via rail out of New Jersey. This research will
investigate an innovative alternative approach to clean contaminated sediments,
using the Passaic River as a test case. Three innovative technologies will be
used, namely, ultrasound, ozone and nano bubbles, to provide a cost effective
and environmentally sustainable on-site treatment technology, with expected
lower total cost over shorter time span. This alternative methodology is also
expected to have minimal adverse impact on the environment, and the socio-
economic health of the region. The ultrasound energy provides agitation and soil
decontamination. The ozone reacts with desorbed contaminants to help removal of
them from the river. The nano bubbles help dissolution of ozone gas in water.
Once the treatment is completed, any remaining dissolved ozone will break into
oxygen, and will help to revitalize microbes and the eco-system. In addition to
the societal benefits, the project will accord the opportunity for the
continuous training of several underrepresented graduate and undergraduate
students to acquire deep appreciation for multidisciplinary research and to
broaden participation and enhance diversity of NSF funded research.

This research will evaluate the feasibility of the in-situ sediment
decontamination procedure with ultrasound energy in the presence of ozone nano-
bubbles. Three emerging technologies, namely ultrasound, ozone treatment and
nano bubbles are combined in this research to address a major problem, in-situ
decontamination of sediments. The purpose of the ultrasound energy is to provide
agitation that will maintain the sediments in a suspended state, detach
contaminants form the surface of sediments and release them to the bulk
solution. The ultrasound energy will also generate bulk motion to enhance
uniform application of the ozone to all contaminated particles and to facilitate
desorption of contaminants from sediments. The role of ozone is to degrade
desorbed organic contaminants in the sediment into intermediate products that
are soluble in the aqueous phase and also to oxidize the desorbed heavy metals
from sediments into soluble ions for enhanced removal by filtration. The ozone
gas is to be delivered as nano bubbles to increase the ozone gas dissolution in
water and to enhance the ozone gas stability in the liquid phase. In order to
validate and to optimize the technology bench scale tests will be performed
followed by statistical analysis. The key factors that contribute to the removal
efficiency will be identified in bench scale tests and full factorial design
will be performed to generate removal efficiency data for statistical analysis.
In addition, stability of nano bubbles will be investigated to prolong the
residence time in water as possible new technology to treat contaminated soils
and ground water. Also the cleaning mechanism of ultrasound will be investigated
using the theory of shock wave. Overall this research will provide a cheaper and
efficient way to clean rivers contaminated with hazardous sediments.