* 1634559
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the biological, chemical, and physical linkages between chemosynthetic communities and the surrounding deep sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Christopher Roman, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2021
* USD 213,493.00

The deep ocean supplies food, energy, novel drugs and materials, and plays
essential roles in the global cycling of carbon, the nutrient replenishment for
shallow waters, and the maintenance of biodiversity. Despite the crucial
contribution of the deep sea to the larger functioning of global marine
ecosystems, there is only a cursory understanding of this vast region and the
connectivity among its communities and the rest of the oceans. Cold seeps,
active areas of the seafloor where methane and other chemicals are released, are
key features along the continental margins worldwide. To characterize how
methane seep communities interact with the surrounding ecosystems and vice
versa, the research team will study the sphere of influence around methane seeps
off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica, a region of the ocean with extremely active
methane release and low oxygen levels. This project will map the structure and
chemistry surrounding these habitats using a novel 3-dimensional framework,
combining biological surveys and transplant experiments along the seafloor with
vertical characterizations of the water column. This will include measurements
of methane flux into the water column and changes in the overlying carbonate
chemistry and oxygen levels that are critical to understanding the effects of
warming, oxygen loss and ocean acidification on marine communities. Together,
these studies will help evaluate the size of the seep sphere of influence, and
also demonstrate the role of these seeps within the deep sea and the greater,
global, marine ecosystem. The researchers will share this information with a
group of teachers during a series of workshops in the San Diego area, at an
interactive exhibit at the Birch Aquarium, and through the work of an artist,
Lily Simonson, who will participate in the cruises and share her impressions of
these environments in a traveling exhibit of her work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemosynthetic ecosystems are inextricably linked to the
broader world-ocean biome and global biogeochemical cycles in ways that
scientists are just beginning to understand. This research will identify the
form, extent, and nature of the physical, chemical, and biological linkages
between methane seeps and the surrounding deep-sea ecosystem. The research
builds critical understanding of the structural and functional processes that
underpin the ecosystem services provided by chemosynthetic ecosystems. This
study will be conducted on the Pacific continental margin of Costa Rica where
methane fates and dynamics play a significant role in the regional oceanographic
setting. The researchers will use quantitative sampling and manipulative studies
within a 3-dimensional oceanographic framework to address the following
questions: (1) What are the shapes of the diversity and density functions for
organisms of different size classes and trophic position over the transition
from the seep habitat through the ecotone to the background deep sea? (2) How do
depth, dissolved oxygen concentrations, pH and carbonate ion availability,
relative rates of fluid flux, and substrate (biogenic, authigenic carbonate,
sediments) alter these linkages and interactions with the surrounding deep sea.
Evidence for distinct transitional communities and biotic patterns in density
and alpha and beta diversity will be quantified and placed in a global
biogeographic context. All of these investigations will occur across biological
size spectra: for microorganisms (archaea, bacteria, microeukaryotes), the
macrofauna, and the megafauna that form biogenic habitats. Research results will
be interpreted in the context of potential effects of global ocean change in the
equatorial Pacific to determine how the linkages with the surrounding deep sea
will be altered as anthropogenic impacts proceed in the future. The researchers
will communicate their results in three distinct ways. First, the team will
collaborate with the Center for Research on Educational Equity, Assessment and
Teaching Excellence (CREATE) to help middle and high school teachers develop
tools and strategies for teaching the science practices of the national Next
Generation Science Standards. The principal investigators will work with science
communication specialists at Birch Aquarium at Scripps to showcase their
research cruise in the new Expedition! exhibit. This exhibit will introduce the
public to the planning, preparation, thrill of discovery, and process of sample
analysis associated with deep-sea scientific cruises and research, while
training graduate students in science communication. Finally, artist Lily
Simonson will paint the science of methane seeps and their transition to
background systems at sea (and on land), engage with K-12 students through
social media and in-class presentations and exhibits.