* 1634492
* Topological Design of Tough Multi-functional 2D Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Huajian Gao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/29/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports the development of methods to tailor the mechanical and
physical properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials through topological
design. 2D materials are crystalline materials consisting of a single layer of
atoms. These materials come in a wide array of chemical compositions, crystal
phases, and physical forms, and are anticipated to enable a host of future
technologies in areas that include electronics, sensors, coatings, barriers,
energy storage and conversion, water purification and biomedicine. While each of
these promising applications emphasizes a different aspect of 2D materials, they
all require structural reliability and resistance to failure of the materials.
Recently, it has become clear that, while 2D materials can achieve ultra-high
strength with nearly perfect atomic structures, they are typically very fragile
against fracture. This is an important concern as large scale fabrication will
inevitably introduce cracks in 2D materials. The intrinsically brittle nature,
inevitable cracks and corrosive environment make fracture one of the most
prominent concerns in industrial applications of 2D materials. Results from this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society, as the global market for 2D
materials is expected to approach billions of dollars in the coming decades. The
multi-disciplinary approach of the research will positively impact engineering
education and outreach activities at Brown University.

The research will address the following two questions: To what extent can the
toughness of 2D materials be enhanced through topological design? What thermal-
mechanical-electrical properties could the topologically toughened 2D materials
hope to achieve? The problems under study will be tackled via a multi-scale
approach based on phase field crystal method, atomistic simulations, DFT
calculations and continuum theories. The technical approach will be based on the
experience and theoretical/simulation capabilities developed by the PI. The work
will include the development of a general methodology for topological design of
2D materials and investigation of mechanical properties such as stretching,
bending, wrinkling, tearing, fracture, penetration, as well as thermal and
electrical properties of designed structures via atomistic simulation, DFT
calculation, and continuum modeling/simulations. Design phase diagrams with
targeted properties will be developed to inspire experimental synthesis. The
ultra-large scale simulations in the work will be performed on the National
Institute for Computational Sciences, and the rest of the computational work
will be performed at the Center for Computing and Visualization at Brown
University.