* 1634094
* The Northwestern North Atlantic: a Retrospective Analysis of Observations from the CV Oleander on the Shelf and Slope
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ke Chen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 477,879.00

This study examines the long-term variability in the northwestern North Atlantic
over the continental shelf and slope using long-duration observations collected
by a ship of opportunity and output from a regional high-resolution numerical
model. This area has been highlighted as a hotspot of sea level rise and ocean
warming with the trends superimposed on strong interannual to decadal
variability. This study will investigate the processes driving the low-frequency
variability of shelf temperature and sea level, with a focus on the physical
mechanisms underlying the recent changes. The project also includes the
development of observation-based coastal temperature indexes from profiles
collected by the CV Oleander, a commercial vessel that operates weekly round-
trip transits between New Jersey and Bermuda, and investigation of potential
predictors of interannual variability of these temperature indexes relating to
sea level and atmospheric pressure. The processes to be studied have important
implications for both climate and commercial fisheries. Results will be
presented in both climate and continental shelf workshops. The PIs will provide
the data products derived from the observations to the science community via
existing Oleander Program websites. The PIs will also continue public
communication and outreach efforts including visits to a local 8th grade
classroom, building on a long-term outreach effort with the middle school
science teacher and outreach directed to commercial fishermen through the
Commercial Fisheries Research Foundation in Rhode Island, which has strong links
to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. This project will support and train a
graduate student who has already published a peer-reviewed paper on this data
set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The temperature sections (spanning 37 years) and
velocity sections (spanning 22 years) have been collected with expendable
bathythermographs (XBTs) and a shipboard acoustic Doppler current profiler
(ADCP) via the CV Oleander. This data set is unique in terms of its high
resolution, extended duration over multiple decades, and co-located temperature
and velocity observations. Temperature data collected by the CV Oleander can
resolve the interannual to decadal signals embedded in the region's annual
cycle. Further, the exceptional duration of the temperature records amassed
along a constant ship route, and their combination with velocity and surface
salinity measurements from the ship and complementary data sets (e.g., satellite
altimetry, reanalysis winds, and tide gauge data) will allow this study to
characterize the variability and to explore mechanisms driving the changes such
as shifts in Gulf Stream position, changes in large scale wind forcing, and
changes in along-shelf advection. The study will also capitalize on existing
output from a high-resolution numerical model that captures variability in the
region with fidelity. This region has been identified as having a very high rate
of ocean warming relative to the global mean rate. Variability in this region
links open-ocean phenomena (Gulf Stream, Deep Western Boundary Current, and
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, AMOC) to shelf phenomena (Middle
Atlantic Bight shelf circulation, shelfbreak jet dynamics, and ecosystem
dynamics).