* 1634277
* Monitoring the Health of Structural Systems from the Geometry of Sensor Traces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dionisio Bernal, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 193,774.00

Deterioration from the passage of time and from exposure to large loading events
can reduce the safety of structural systems. The effectiveness and efficiency of
interventions to maintain adequate reliability depend on the available
information, and the objective of structural monitoring is to provide it.
Attempts to characterize deterioration by tracking resonant frequencies has had
limited success due to small sensitivity of the features relative to their
irreducible variability. This award supports research on an entirely different
paradigm: one where monitoring is carried out not by inspection of resonant
frequencies, but by examination of a geometric object built from measurements
obtained in closed-loop operation. Gains, over the path so far pursued, come
from the ability to "tune" the monitored object by selection of the control
laws. The results from this research will open a new path for developing
structural health monitoring systems. This new path, and the progress that will
come from it, will benefit the US economy by reducing the cost of inspections,
by advancing the practice of condition based maintenance, and, ultimately, by
reducing the life cycle cost of structural systems. The research in this project
sits at the intersection of several disciplines and this aspect is exploited in
an educational component designed to inspire students and young researchers from
various fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this award casts the
monitoring problem as that of tracking the geometry of an object generated by
trajectories that are traversed as the system operates autonomously under
nonlinear feedback. In contrast with linear feedback, which retains the
classical monitoring structure, and thus infers about changes from eigenvalues,
nonlinear feedback attempts to map the reference state to the geometry of an
attractor and focuses on how system changes affect the resulting manifold.
Theory to guide how to specify the nonlinear control so the system has a stable
attractor, with a predictable basin of attraction, is currently lacking. The
simulation-guided, theoretical research that is central to this work is intended
to contribute in filling this knowledge gap. The research tackles also the
question of how to select the state from where the system is "launched" so the
demands on the necessary actuation is minimized; minimization of the infinity
norm of the actuation being important to the practicality of the investigated
paradigm. Albeit the optimal sensor and actuator placement problems are not
explicitly included in the scope of the project, exploratory work in both of
these issues is planned.