* 1634108
* Facility Support: The AfricaArray Geophysical and Meteorological Network
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 195,716.00

Pennsylvania State University and its African partners operate and maintain the
53-station AfricaArray (AA) network for geophysical and meteorological
observations. The AA fills a critical gap in the global seismic network and GPS
networks. The AA seismic and GPS data are being used to improve assessments of
seismic hazards and risks in seismically active regions of Africa. The AA's GPS
and weather data fill in critical observation gaps in weather and climate
observing systems for parts of Africa. The AA education and outreach activities
bring opportunities for students at minority-serving institutions in the U.S. to
participate in AA research and it provides training for undergraduate and
graduate students, postdocs and technicians in Africa.

This project funds Pennsylvania State University's continuing operation of the
53-station AfricaArray (AA). Each station is equipped with a combination of
seismic, GPS and weather sensors. The AA addresses fundamental questions about
the nature and evolution of continental rifting, cratons, hotspot volcanism,
plateau uplift, and basin formation. The AA GPS data are greatly improving the
ability to capture crustal movement caused by groundwater or soil moisture
changes. The AA project sponsors underrepresented U.S. students and African
undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs and technicians to study in a wide
range of disciplines that benefit from AA observations.