* 1634261
* GOALI: Novel Computational Approaches to Address Key Design Optimization Issues for Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Albert To, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

The additive manufacturing (AM), also called 3D printing, process is now capable
of manufacturing complex-shaped metal components strong enough for structural
applications. The capability of AM to fabricate complex geometries removes many
conventional manufacturing constraints and largely expands the design space.
However, there are key current issues that are impeding the marriage between AM
and topology optimization: 1) Difficulty in machining topology optimized AM
components due to their highly complex shapes, and 2) Inability to optimize AM
part design for residual stress and distortion. This Grant Opportunity for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project aims at establishing a
robust topology optimization technology capable of accounting for residual
distortion, residual stress, and post-machining requirements for additive
manufactured (AM) components. The technology developed will significantly
shorten the design phase during new AM product development, which will
potentially lead to wider adoption of AM by the manufacturing base in the US.
The skills and knowledge the students gain through this project will prepare
them for active roles in securing U.S. leadership in engineering design and
advanced manufacturing for future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this GOALI project is to address the aforementioned critical design issues by
proposing and investigating two novel approaches. The first approach is an
ultra-fast computational method based on the inherent strain theory for
predicting residual stress and distortion in an AM part. The second approach is
a level set feature-based topology optimization method capable of generating
designs with both freeform surfaces and machining-friendly surfaces. These
approaches will be developed and tested using real parts and design requirements
provided by our industrial partner Aerotech. Utilizing this approach, a robust
topology optimization method will be developed to optimize AM designs for
residual stress, residual distortion, and post-machining requirements.