* 1634480
* Dynamics of Well-Mixed Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 669,987.00

Mixing between fresh and salt water is the fundamental process that is common to
all estuaries. However well-mixed estuaries present an intriguing paradox: how
can mixing occur if the estuary is already mixed? This project addresses that
paradox and how it relates to the broader problem of estuarine dispersion in the
examination of two well-mixed estuaries with similar tidal and freshwater
forcing but highly contrasting geometries, one a narrow estuary with a single,
uniform channel and the other a broad lagoon-type estuary with a complex,
dendritic channel network. The study will address the coupled momentum and salt
balances of these two estuaries with a combination of intensive field
measurements and high-resolution numerical modeling. The mixing and exchange
processes affecting well-mixed estuaries are fundamentally important to the
ecology and life histories of nearshore organisms, to the biogeochemistry
(including the carbon budget) of coastal environments, and to the morphodynamic
stability of coastal embayments. The results of this study will thus inform
research and management related to marine resource management, carbon
sequestration, and coastal sustainability. The project will focus a large
fraction of its resources on the training of a graduate student. It also
includes support for a field methods short-course to provide training for
students from different graduate programs in advanced estuarine field
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas the dynamics of partially mixed and highly
stratified estuaries have a firm theoretical framework, well-mixed estuaries are
subject to a wide range of hypothesized regimes, such as lateral shear
dispersion, chaotic advection and tidal-asymmetry-induced circulation, but with
no consistent synthesis or scaling of these different processes. In the case of
the narrow estuary, mixing is hypothesized to result from brief, episodic
restratification events localized in space and time. For the broad estuary
mixing may exhibit a much more complex spatial structure, dominated by lateral
fronts at the edges of the channels and intensified at channel junctions. This
study will examine the roles of these different mechanisms in well mixed
estuaries with strongly contrasting geometries, using observations and realistic
simulations to identify the processes, and using model sensitivity studies with
varying geometries to parameterize the scaling of the different mechanisms and
to generalize the results.