* 1634460
* ABR: A Deeper Investigation of Oceanic Spreading Center Magmatic Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Dunn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 411,270.00

Oceanic crust comprises two-thirds of our planet?s surface and, in contrast to
the much older continental crust, is being continually created at mid-ocean
ridges and then recycled back into the deep earth at ocean trenches at what are
called subduction zones. This formation and recycling system of Earth?s oceanic
crust continually replenishes life-sustaining heat and elements to the
biosphere. Documenting these processes and fluxes is central to our
understanding of the Earth?s physical and chemical evolution, with profound
impacts on ocean and atmospheric composition, and the sustainability of
ecosystems. Of significant importance is the composition and construction of the
oceanic crust itself, which is uniquely difficult to study given its location
under the oceans. The project will use marine geophysical tools, in particular
modern seismic methods that image Earth?s interior, to investigate ocean crust
formation and structure of a high quality seismic dataset collected during prior
oceanographic expeditions, to reveal the properties of both the plate-boundary
magmatic system where ocean crust forms and the seafloor hydrothermal systems
that cool the magmatic systems. The project will support a junior female
researcher and train and mentor a female Ph.D. student in seismic imaging and
interpretation techniques as well as professional development. University of
Hawaii undergraduate students will work with the PI to learn the basics of
geophysical data collection and how to make their own tomographic images of the
Earth?s interior. Outreach will take advantage of the School of Ocean and Earth
Science and Technology open house.

One of the least understood and most controversial topics of oceanic spreading
center science is the formation of lower oceanic crust. While the upper crust is
typically emplaced via diking and eruption, there is no general agreement how
the lower crust forms. For over two decades there have been many attempts to
reconcile geophysical observations from active spreading centers with petrologic
and structural observations from tectonic windows into the lower crust. This
work has led to a variety of competing models on lower crustal formation.
Central to this debate are the amount and distribution of melt in the lower
crust and uppermost mantle, the temperature structure of those areas, and the
extent of off-axis cooling that could assist the in situ crystallization of the
lower crust. The relative lack of modern seismic measurements impedes progress.
Most previous seismic studies of the lower crust at active spreading centers
were largely performed many years ago with data and methods that are now
outdated. Recent high-resolution active-source and co-located broadband seismic
experiments along the Eastern Lau Spreading Center present an excellent
opportunity to re-examine melt supply and lower crustal formation. Using a large
dataset of over 500,000 observations of P and S waveforms, we will perform
seismic tomography and full waveform analyses, including full three-dimensional
anisotropic imaging of the magmatic system and surrounding crust and mantle. The
proposed research will image the lower crust and upper mantle, and provide much-
needed constraints on melt distribution and thermal structure within the sub-
axial magmatic system. This project will address fundamental questions of melt
supply to, and storage within, the crustal magmatic system, as well as inform
our understanding of the cooling of the ridge axis and the extraction of heat
from the lower crust. The high resolution imaging will allow us to place
quantitative constraints on melt fraction, melt distribution, and the thermal
structure of the lower crust and mantle. With the new results we will test
predictions of specific hypotheses related to crustal genesis along spreading
centers.