* 1634193
* Using Computational Geometry to Solve Hard Mathematical Optimization Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* John Carlsson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 290,813.00

The purpose of this project is to use algorithms from computational geometry to
solve problems in mathematical optimization and to apply concepts from
optimization to solve problems in computational geometry. Although the fields of
geometry and optimization have enjoyed a long history of cross-pollination, this
project will specifically focus on infinite-dimensional optimization, which has
not historically benefited from geometric analysis. The research problems that
are the focus of this study can be applied to a variety of problems across many
domains, such as geospatial analysis, transportation theory, ecological
conservation, mechanism design, and political science. This project includes an
extensive outreach program that leverages existing relationships with industry,
government, and underrepresented groups as a basis for hands-on activities with
students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. By involving
these collaborators, this project will allow students to understand the concerns
of practitioners in addition to those of academics, thus ensuring that our work
will have both an intellectual and social benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
theme of this research is the use of knowledge in one field, namely
computational geometry or infinite-dimensional optimization, to solve a problem
in the other. For example, an infinite-dimensional optimization problem might
have an infinite-dimensional variable space, an infinite-dimensional constraint
space, or both. When one of these spaces has an appropriate geometric structure
associated with it, we have shown that it is sometimes possible to reduce an
infinite-dimensional set to one that is finite; one might use convexity or
monotonicity properties of the Euclidean distance function to identify a finite
set of "bottleneck points" that are sufficient for feasibility of the entire
problem, thereby reducing its complexity. As a second example, many problems in
computational geometry are concerned with the construction of "equitable"
shapes, meaning shapes that have (for example) equal area, mass, perimeter, or
volume. We have identified problem attributes in which certain "equity"
constraints are actually equivalent to the optimality conditions of a convex
optimization problem, which again reduces the complexity of the original
problem. The problems and methods introduced in this research are therefore
representative of a new set of tools that complement the arsenal of modern
operations researchers and computational geometers, synthesizing elements from
both fields.