* 1634055
* Community Workshop: COCONet - Results, Sustainability, and Capacity Building
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Karl Feaux, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 99,123.00

1634055&lt;br/&gt;Mattioli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a scientific
workshop to be held in May 2016. NSF Geosciences previously supported the
design, construction and initial operations of COCONet (Continuously Operating
Caribbean GPS Observational Network) to promote advances in in tectonic and
weather hazards research in the pan-Caribbean region (EAR-1042906). COCOnet
development represents a partnership with 28 sovereign nation and 41 distinct
administrative entities in the circum-Caribbean region. A network of over 80
continuously operating Global Positioning System and meteorological observation
stations (GPS/Met) that were procured and deployed or refurbished with support
from the COCONet construction awards is now nearly complete. In addition, the
managing institution, UNAVCO, was able to negotiate with Caribbean partners for
the ingestion of an additional 62 GPS data streams engaging Caribbean country
regional data centers in the process. All data are publically accessible via the
UNAVCO Data archive. Most recently over 80% of all COCONet sites were delivering
data to the UNAVCO archive and 45 of those stations deliver in near real time
and at high rate (1 Hz). The COCONet data support: 1) constraints on the
tectonics of the entire Caribbean region; 2) the enhancement of atmospheric
observations that can be used to test and extend climate models; 3) improvement
of the analysis of local geodetic measurements by providing access to an
integrated backbone of reference stations; and 4) improved likelihood of
forecasting natural hazards that pose such a significant threat to the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the workshop presentations and
discussions will be on the scientific results, current status and operational
requirements, identification of possible pathways to sustain operations into the
future, and international capacity building opportunities afforded by the
COCONet GPS/Met network. The proposed workshop will bring together scientists,
government agency and emergency management officials to discuss the scientific
achievements and operational success of COCONet to date, this will include
scientists and students from several Caribbean region countries including
representatives that are now in charge of established regional COCONet data
centers. The workshop will address issues such as hardware and software
standardization and will have focused talks highlighting regional partner
experiences on the status of the network in their country and how they are
planning to maintain and operate COCONet systems. Regional Data Center (RDC)
directors from Colombia, Nicaragua, and Barbados will present the status of the
data centers in their country and ideas about how to maintain these regional
centers for the long-term. The workshop will engage student participation from
Caribbean and U.S. academic institutions. This grant is made with support from
multiple Programs in the Geosciences Directorate and the Office of International
Science and Engineering. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity
and welfare given the importance of advancing understanding of geohazards that
routinely impact the interests of the U.S. as well the training of students in
geoscience research and research methods with potential downstream workforce
benefits to earth science, meteorology, engineering and emergency management
sectors.