* 1634625
* Formation and evolution of upper oceanic crust from seismic data acquired over mature oceanic crust near the Sumatra and Alaska subduction zones
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Anne Becel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 310,514.00

The upper oceanic crust and its physical properties are well known near the mid-
ocean ridge axis where the crust is formed. However, little is known about how
the properties of the upper oceanic crust change as the crust ages, primarily
because of the lack of the appropriate datasets over older crust. An important
question that remains unanswered is whether or not hydrothermal circulation
continues as the crust spreads away from the ridge axis. Heat flow measurements
suggest that hydrothermal circulation persists, but it has been impossible to
clarify from existing datasets the effects and the controls on this late stage
circulation. This project will use recently collected marine seismic data over
mature oceanic crust (>50 Myr) offshore the Sumatra and Alaska subduction zones
to address these problems. These two datasets are very high quality and unique
in that they allow imaging of the upper part of the oceanic crust. Understanding
hydrothermal circulation in older crust is important because we do not know the
extent of the chemical exchanges that occur between the earth and oceans in
these vast regions that represent about 70% of the surface of the earth. The
study supports the training of a Ph.D. graduate student. The project also
involves an international collaboration with French colleagues.

This project will examine 2-D marine seismic data acquired over mature oceanic
crust (>50 Myr) offshore the Sumatra and Alaska subduction zones. These data
were acquired in 2011 on the R/V Marcus Langseth and in 2009 on the M/V Geowave
Champion during the TIDES Program (IPG-Paris). The main objective of this study
is to provide new insights on the seismic heterogeneity of the uppermost crust
and the dominant processes that control the aging of upper oceanic crust. The
long-streamer MCS data will provide seismic imaging of the upper crust including
post-critical reflections seen at large offsets. The MCS imaging will also allow
the characterization of variations in the sediment thickness, topography of the
upper crust, and abundance of faulting within the sediments and upper crust. The
downward continuation followed by travel time modeling of the streamer data will
provide the thickness and P-wave velocity of the two layers that constitute the
upper crust. Synthetic computation will generate further information on S-wave
velocities and attenuation. Together the two datasets will allow the comparison
between sections of oceanic crust formed at different spreading rates and of
slightly different ages.