* 1634867
* Data-driven Modeling and Optimization for Energy-Smart Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yili Hong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The concept of energy-smart manufacturing is to deliver customized products
while simultaneously optimizing energy consumption, product performance (e.g.,
product functionality, quality and process variability) and equipment
maintenance cost. Many previous attempts with similar goals focus on one
objective at a time. In reality, because energy consumption, product
performance, and equipment maintenance are correlated, decisions related to one
aspect will often affect other aspects. This award will support fundamental
research to discover the interactions among energy efficiency, product
performance, and equipment maintenance. The knowledge thus gained will be used
to optimize the manufacturing processes and maintenance operations for high
energy efficiency and low cost. The methodology is intended to be widely
applicable to many different types of manufacturing operations. The research
results will be broadly disseminated to equip the current and future
manufacturing engineers with the new methodologies through joint workshops with
an industrial collaborator, technical training sessions, and case studies.
Summer outreach workshops will be organized to engage high school students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to customize data-driven modeling and optimization methodology to achieve
high energy efficiency, excellent product performance, and low maintenance cost
in manufacturing. A data-driven decision-making framework will be developed with
the following intellectual merits: (1) dynamic models will be developed to
quantify the product performance by considering equipment degradation effects
and the change of product types; (2) a degradation index will be constructed
from multivariate degradation measurements and a cumulative damage model will be
used to predict equipment degradation; and (3) energy efficiency and maintenance
cost will be optimized through customization of optimization algorithms at both
the manufacturing system and the enterprise levels. These methodologies will be
validated in a plasma spray coating process in the aero-engine manufacturing
industry, and it will be designed to be broadly applicable to other high-energy-
consumption manufacturing operations.