* 1634440
* Recalibration of OBSIP Instrument Orientations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* M. Gabrielle Laske, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2017
* USD 67,392.00

Ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs) sit on the seafloor and record earthquakes.
They are deployed from a research vessel. The instrument is released on the
ocean surface, the OBS sinks and lands on the seafloor. How it lands and how the
instruments are aligned with the geographic coordinate system is unknown. A
gimbal system surrounding the seismometer makes sure that it is upright, but no
check is made on which direction the instrument is facing. Seismometers on land
can be oriented using a compass, but this is not currently possible on the
seafloor. The analysis of seismic data, however, is dependent on knowing the
orientation of the instrument. To address this problem, a standardized,
automated tool will be developed to provide the best possible estimates for OBS
instrument orientations. The tool is based on arrival angle measurements on
seismic surface waves from shallow earthquakes around the globe. After
development of the new automated tool it will be validated by comparing results
to older high-precision, but hands-on and time consuming measurements that have
been made. The resulting code will be released publically and become a community
tool.

Many seismic data analyses, such as receiver functions, shear-wave splitting and
Love wave dispersion, rely on the processing of a complete 3-component
seismogram. For these analyses, knowledge of the alignment of the horizontal
components with respect to the geographic coordinate system is a prerequisite.
On land, this information is easy and routinely obtained through cross-check
with a compass. In the oceans, free-fall ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs) sink
with unknown orientation. Acoustic surveys of the instrument are cost-
prohibitive, and the determination of the orientation of seismometer components
is usually left to the individual data end user. Reorientation is done
concurrently with the intended data analysis, often without detailed assessment
of biases from uneven event coverage and wave propagation in complex media. This
project will develop a standardized automated tool to provide optimal estimates
for OBS instrument orientations. Long-period Rayleigh waves likely remain the
best tool to determine instrument orientations given the restrictions and noise
levels of an ocean environment. The new toolbox will be carefully bench marked
against an older, well-established interactive-screen tool. The latter has
proven impractical to be used by others because it contains old, non-compliant
legacy code. The new tool will consist of a combination of Python and Fortran
codes and will provide automated access to data at the IRIS Data Management
Center.