* 1634041
* Monitoring Global Ocean Heat Content Changes by Internal Tide Oceanic Tomography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Zhongxiang Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 279,155.00

Ocean Heat Content (OHC) is a key indicator of global climate variability and
change. However, it is a great challenge to observe OHC on a global scale.
Observations with good coverage in space and time are only available in the last
10 years with the maturing of the Argo profiling float array. This study will
obtain a 20-year-long record of global OHC changes from 1995-2014 with a method
called Internal tide oceanic tomography (ITOT), in which the satellite altimetry
data are used to precisely measure travel times for long-range internal tides.
Just like in acoustic tomography, these travel times are analyzed to infer
changes in OHC. This analysis will double the 10 years of time series available
from Argo floats. More importantly, ITOT will provide an independent long-term,
low-cost, environmentally-friendly observing system for global OHC changes.
Since ocean warming contributes significantly to sea level rise, which has
significant consequences to low-lying coastal regions, these observations have
the potential for direct societal benefits. The project will communicate some of
its results directly to the public. The team will make an educational animation
showing how ocean warming is measured and how the novel ITOT technique works
from the vantage point of space. This animation will be played for students
visiting the lab, and in science talks and festivals in local K-12 schools. In
addition, three summer undergraduate students will be trained in data analysis
and interpretation, and poster presentation.

The analysis technique to be applied over the global ocean in this project is
based on the preliminary regional analysis already conducted by this team. About
60 satellite-years of altimeter data from 1995-2014 will be analyzed.
Specifically, it will (1) quantify annual variability, interannual variability,
and bidecadal trend in global M2 and K1 internal tides, (2) construct the
conversion function from the internal tide's travel time changes to OHC changes,
and (3) construct a record of 20-year-long global OHC changes, and assess
uncertainties using Argo measurements. The ultimate goal for this project is to
develop the ITOT technique for future global OHC monitoring. This will improve
our understanding of the temporal and spatial variability of global OHC,
particularly in combination with in situ measurements from Argo floats, XBTs,
and WOCE full-depth hydrography. The ITOT observations will provide useful
constraints to ECCO2. The internal tide models may be used to correct internal
tide noise in the Argo and XBT measurements. In addition, the monthly and yearly
internal tide fields produced will provide constraints to global high-
resolution, eddy-permitting numerical models of internal tides.