* 1634467
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Investigating Gas Exchange Processes using Noble Gases in a Controlled Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Rachel Stanley, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,958.00

An exact description of gas exchange between the atmosphere and the ocean is not
fully developed, yet it is a critical process for understanding climate change
and ecosystem dynamics. This is particularly problematic when evaluating the
important role of bubbles in air-sea gas exchange, especially in remote ocean
locations where high winds and waves make direct measurements extremely
difficult. This project seeks to provide needed fundamental, high wind/wave gas-
exchange measurements by using a large, state-of-the-art, wind-wave tank. Here
the PIs can apply their novel measurements of noble gases (neon, argon, krypton,
and xenon) to calculate overall gas fluxes under precisely controlled
conditions. This tank setting allows a systematic approach to define the
physical and chemical parameters (temperature, salinity, pH, wind speed,
turbulence, bubble size distribution, etc.) required to construct more accurate
models without the great uncertainties inherent in making similar measurements
from a ship in storm conditions. A significant outcome of this study, beyond
improved understanding of air-sea gas exchange, could be greatly improved
estimates of the critical ecological balance between photosynthesis and
respiration. Current methods use carbon dioxide and oxygen dissolved in seawater
as an indication of biological activity, but cannot distinguish between
biological processes and atmospheric exchange, and estimates are especially
inaccurate under high wind and wave conditions with strong bubble injection.
This study will improve our ability to separate biological and physical
processes in evaluation of dissolved gasses in seawater.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also, this project will provide 15 female undergraduate
students at Wellesley College with an exciting, on-site research experience
using a state-of-the-art tank facility at the University of Miami, and results
will be incorporated into general and advanced chemistry classes. The production
of student-created, short format videos, and other public outreach activities
will also be supported to disseminate information on the importance of marine
gas exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of gas exchange processes between
the ocean and the atmosphere has been hindered by the lack of data required to
define quantitative relationships that account for bubble processes under a
variety of wind, wave, and temperature conditions. Current gas exchange models
tend to be highly unreliable in their parameterization of bubble processes. In
large part, this is due to the difficulty of making traditional measurements at
sea in remote locations within well-defined conditions, especially with high
winds and waves. By using the large SUSTAIN wind-wave tank (23 m x 6 m x 2 m),
the researchers in this project plan to greatly advance our understanding of the
effect of wind, wave, and temperature variability on gas transfer. The use of a
recently developed, field-portable equilibrator mass spectrometer that allows
nearly continuous measurements of noble gas ratios (Ne, Ar, Kr, and Xe) will
result in these SUSTAIN tank experiments providing precisely characterized gas
flux data under varying wind speeds from 10 to 40 m/s. In addition, an
underwater shadowgraph system will image bubbles, allowing the researchers to
quantify bubble size distributions, a key factor missing from bubble models.
Current models use a greatly simplified, two size-class representation of
bubbles; an approach that this research will re-evaluate in hopes of creating
better parameterizations of the role of bubble size on gas flux, and
consequently improved air-sea gas exchange models for oceanic and climatic
applications.