* 1634182
* Collaborative Research: Study of Convectively-Breaking Internal Solitary Waves of Depression: High Accuracy/Resolution Modeling and Observational Data Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ren-Chieh Lien, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 229,684.00

Internal solitary waves (ISWs) are ubiquitous oceanic phenomena found on
continental slopes and shelves, in submarine canyons, and over oceanic
topographic features. They can carry energy over long distances while
maintaining their shapes, are efficient suppliers of nutrients into the upper
ocean, and can impact primary production and marine ecology through the exchange
of heat, salt, nutrient, and water masses between the open ocean and coastal
waters. For example, recent measurements of internal solitary waves shoaling on
the continental shelf of New Jersey indicate that waves linked to shear
instability in their interior are responsible for 50% of the total heat flux
across the pycnocline and drive horizontal particle transport over a few
kilometers, thereby exerting a critically important role for the shelf
energetics and ecology. On account of the massive overturns in their interior,
the turbulent diffusivities and particulate transport in convectively-breaking
ISWs are expected to be as much as a hundred times larger than those in shear-
unstable ISWs. Existing in-situ observations of convectively unstable ISWs are
limited in their resolution of the associated turbulence due to the transient
nature of these instabilities and instrument limitations. This project will
enable the robust determination of the mechanisms and preferred locations of
convective (and shear) instability of shoaling ISWs. The implications of
convective breaking will be addressed through quantifying the associated
turbulent fluxes and particle transport as a function of parameter space. A more
reliable assessment of whether convectively-breaking ISWs are a critically
important feature of most environments rich in high-amplitude waves will be
possible. The improved understanding and quantification of the convective
breaking process in shoaling ISWs, in terms of preferred locations of
occurrence, underlying physics, turbulent fluxes and onshore particulate
transport, will facilitate the reliable parameterization of such processes in
larger-scale models. The parameterizations of ISW breaking and resulting
turbulence, phenomena focused on the continental slope and shelf, might be
fundamentally different from those typically used for internal tides, internal
lee waves and stratified turbulence in the open ocean. One Ph.D. student, a
native of Puerto Rico and member of a under-represented minority, will be
trained in stratified ocean physics and high performance computing. The findings
of this study will be integrated in relevant coursework in Environmental Fluid
Mechanics at Cornell and in on-going outreach efforts at Ithaca High School and
the Applied Physics Laboratory at the University of Washington's Space Grant
Summer Undergraduate Research Program. Analysis codes, post-processed results
and select raw data will be made available to the broader community through a
dedicated online database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
the breaking, due to primarily convective (but also shear) instability, of
internal solitary waves (ISWs) shoaling over gently sloping realistic (and
idealized) bathymetries. High-accuracy/resolution Large Eddy Simulations (LES)
will be integrated with analysis of an extensive dataset of convectively
breaking ISWs over the continental slope in the South China Sea. Previous
analysis of these observations has revealed convectively unstable, large-
amplitude ISWs with recirculating turbulent cores in their interior associated
with order 100 meter overturns and intensified dissipation and mixing, roughly a
thousand times greater than in the open ocean. The mechanisms leading to the
convective instability and the associated turbulence mixing remain unknown. Two-
dimensional simulations will first investigate the mechanisms and preferred
locations of ISW breaking due to convective instability as a function of bottom
slope, initial wave steepness and background baroclinic tidal current. Focusing
on convective breaking, a range of computation/data intensive parallel three-
dimensional LES, equipped with Lagrangian particle tracking, will then provide
enhanced spatiotemporal resolution of the breaking process and will quantify the
dependence of the resulting turbulent fluxes and wave-scale horizontal energy
fluxes on the above parameters. Beyond providing bathymetric and
stratification/current forcing to the LES, the existing SCS observations, and
further analysis thereof, will serve as a basis for consistency checks and
exploration of common trends in parameter space between LES and field data.
Analysis of data from, actual and model, Lagrangian floats will examine and
quantify particle entrainment, transport and detrainment by convectively-
breaking ISWs, namely waves with recirculating cores. Alternative Lagrangian
estimates of turbulent fluxes and dissipation rates will enable the computation
of associated eddy diffusivities. These results will determine how ISW-driven
turbulence relates to the regimes of weak wave-wave interaction and stratified
turbulence and the transition between them.