* 1634997
* Ultrafast Laser Micromachining to Form Capillary-Sized Networks within Bioprinted Constructs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Pranav Soman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2018
* USD 115,845.00

Bioprinting has emerged as a promising approach to generate functional tissues
and organs, as well as tissue analogs for regenerative medicine, pharmacology,
toxicology, and disease modeling. Bioprinting technologies generally involve the
encapsulation of living cells within biocompatible bioinks (such as hydrogels).
However, with current technologies, capillary-sized networks cannot be printed
within bioprinted constructs. These capillary-sized networks are critical for
maintaining viability of tissue constructs and, therefore, are at the center of
establishing the widespread application of current technologies. Ultrafast
pulsed lasers are uniquely capable of machining capillary-sized networks within
bioprinted constructs, however the impact of ultrafast laser machining on
biological constructs is not known. This award supports fundamental research on
effects of ultrafast laser micromachining on cellular damage. Research results
will be useful for the development of a novel hybrid process combining laser
micromachining and stereolithography bioprinting to produce bioprinted
constructs that contains capillary-sized networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is to establish the relationship between ultrafast laser
variables and cellular damage within cell-laden gelatin-based hydrogel
biomaterials. To achieve this research objective, hydrogel constructs will be
prepared by encapsulating mesenchymal progenitor cells within gelatin
methacrylate hydrogel via ultraviolet crosslinking. Femtosecond laser
multiphoton absorption process will be used to micromachine channels (about 10
microns in diameter) within the cell-laden hydrogel constructs. These constructs
will have different cell densities (10,000 - 10,000,000 cells/mL), hydrogel
concentration (7-18% w/v), and photoinitiator concentration (0.05-0.5% w/v).
Experiments will be conducted under different ultrafast laser parameters: laser
fluency from 0 to 25 J/cm^2, pulse energy from 0 to 100 nJ, and scanning speed
from 0.1 to 10 mm/s. Cellular damage within hydrogel constructs will be
evaluated by the following parameters: radial zones of cellular viability
measured by confocal imaging of calcein AM-ethidium homodimer biomarkers, DNA
damage measured using Comet assay, and function (ability to proliferate and
produce extracellular matrix) measured using confocal imaging of EdU and Movat's
fluorescent biomarkers.