* 1634150
* Enhancements to the OOI Cabled Array at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 178,060.00

Part of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) is a cabled observatory in the
northeast Pacific Ocean that extends offshore to Axial Seamount, an active
submarine volcano that has frequent eruptions, hydrothermal vent fields, and
unique deep-sea ecosystems. Because it is so active and accessible, Axial
Seamount has been a long-term study site and monitoring has revealed a cycle of
volcano inflation and deflation that has been used to forecast eruptions with
increasing accuracy. This project will enhance the OOI Cabled Array at Axial
Seamount by adding instruments with the capability to detect changes in
hydrothermal output in the summit caldera, and to ground movements at the
volcano, which will in turn improve eruption forecasts. These enhancements to
the monitoring effort at Axial Seamount will help to increase our understanding
of magma storage systems at active volcanoes, the processes that lead to and
trigger eruptions, and the impacts of submarine eruptions on hydrothermal
systems and the deep-sea ecosystems they sustain. A teacher will participate on
the research cruise to deploy the instruments, and the teacher will interact
with classrooms before, during, and after the research cruise. Public lectures
at the Hatfield Marine Science Visitor Center in Newport, OR will include
results from this project.

The 2015 eruption at Axial Seamount was the first detected in real time by the
OOI Cabled Array. Although it captured the event in unprecedented detail, it
also showed that there are some key observations missing from the instrument
network that limited understanding of the eruption and its consequences. This
project will make the following targeted and timely additions to the cabled
observatory: (1) one new seafloor CTD (Conductivity, Temperature, Depth)
instrument to add critical salinity measurements, which are currently lacking
but are needed to test the hypothesis that hydrothermal brine is released from
the crust during seafloor eruptions, and (2) one bottom pressure/tilt instrument
that has already been built and paid for. In addition, four autonomous (non-
cabled) miniature pressure recorders will be built and an acoustic release
transducer will be purchased to be used on an existing autonomous bottom
pressure recording mooring. These instruments will enhance the spatial and
temporal monitoring of volcanic deformation of the seafloor and the modeling of
its causes in the subsurface.