* 1634167
* Collaborative Research: Does ocean acidification induce a methylation response that affects the fitness of the next generation in oysters?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Steven Roberts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2021
* USD 429,674.00

Marine ecosystems worldwide are threatened by ocean acidification, a process
caused by the unprecedented rate at which carbon dioxide is increasing in the
atmosphere. Since ocean change is predicted to be rapid, extreme, and
widespread, marine species may face an "adapt-or-die" scenario. However,
modifications to the DNA sequence may be induced in response to a stress like
ocean acidification and then inherited. Such "epigenetic" modifications may hold
the key to population viability under global climate change, but they have been
understudied. The aim of this research is to characterize the role of DNA
methylation, a heritable epigenetic system, in the response of Eastern oysters
(Crassostrea virginica) to ocean acidification. The intellectual merit lies in
the integrative approach, which will characterize the role of DNA methylation in
the intergenerational response of oysters to ocean acidification. These
interdisciplinary data, spanning from molecular to organismal levels, will
provide insight into mechanisms that underlie the capacity of marine
invertebrates to respond to ocean acidification and lay the foundation for
future transgenerational studies. Ocean acidification currently threatens marine
species worldwide and has already caused significant losses in aquaculture,
especially in Crassostrea species. This research has broader impacts for
breeding, aquaculture, and the economy. Under the investigators' "Epigenetics to
Ocean" (E2O) training program, the investigators will build STEM talent in
bioinformatics and biogeochemistry, expose girls in low-income school districts
to careers in genomics, and advance the field through open science and
reproducibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will specifically test if
intermittent exposure to low pH induces a methylation response with downstream
beneficial effects for biomineralization. These methylation states could be
inherited and confer a fitness advantage to larvae that possess them. Phase 1 of
the project will use an exposure experiment to determine the degree to which DNA
methylation is altered and regulates the response to OA. Data from this
experiment will be used to test the hypotheses that (i) DNA methylation, induced
in the tissue of shell formation (i.e., mantle tissue), is correlated with
changes in transcription and regulation of pallial fluid pH (calcifying fluid
pH, measured by microelectrode), and (ii) that methylation changes induced in
the mantle tissue are also induced in the germline --indicating that such
changes are potentially heritable. Phase 2 of the project will use a pair-mated
cross experiment to test the hypothesis that parental exposure to OA alters
larval traits (calcification rate, shell structure, and polymorph mineralogy).
Larvae will be generated from parents exposed to OA or control seawater, and
then raised under control or OA conditions. Results will be used to (i)
characterize inheritance of induced methylation states, (ii) estimate the
variance in larval traits explained by genotype, non-genetic maternal/paternal
effects, adult OA exposure, larval OA exposure, and parental methylome, and
(iii) test the hypothesis that adult exposure alters the heritability (a
quantity that predicts evolutionary response) of larval traits. Since the
effects of epigenetic phenomena on estimates of heritability are highly debated,
the results would advance understanding of this important issue. Because the
investigators could discover that DNA methylation is a mechanism for heritable
plastic responses to OA, knowledge of this mechanism would significantly improve
and potentially transform predictive models for how organisms respond to global
change.