* 1634975
* Optimizing Green Infrastructure Investment to Improve Urban Storm Water System Resilience under Environmental Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Xueping Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 435,421.00

This research will develop an approach to optimize investment decisions to
improve urban storm water system resilience to forecasted extreme weather
events. Many cities already struggle with storm water pipes that are in poor
condition and are undersized relative to changing weather patterns. Green
infrastructure is recommended as a "low regret" strategy to reduce flooding
while also providing co-benefits to freshwater provision, ecological processes,
and freshwater fish populations. The question remains, however, as to how to
allocate investments under environmental uncertainty. This research will
formulate approaches that allow decision-makers to evaluate trade-offs in storm
water infrastructure investment. The research team aims to increase gender and
ethnic diversity in STEM by collaborating with various campus-wide student
chapters of minority organizations, such as the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation, to recruit underrepresented students to pursue
degrees in engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although more frequent and intense
weather events are projected for many locations, the exact timing and effects of
such events are uncertain. This research will provide a scientifically informed
approach to evaluate the consequences of making infrastructure planning
decisions under this uncertainty, and showcases the power of this approach to
obtain and evaluate optimal green infrastructure placement. Here, the team will:
(1) develop a novel framework that can incorporate predictions from a variety of
weather prediction models, (2) use a semi-distributed, well calibrated,
hydrologic model to evaluate the response of a storm water system to these
scenarios by identifying the vulnerability of the system to flooding, (3) adopt
sophisticated mathematical methodologies, including stochastic programming and
robust optimization, to account for the uncertainties in weather patterns over a
long planning horizon, and (4) optimize green infrastructure placement within
the storm water system to maximize flood resiliency under climate uncertainties,
subject to various economic, physical, and social constraints.