* 1634540
* Nanomanufacturing of Activated Carbon Nanosphere-Based Supercapacitors from Industrial Biomass Waste
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Fuqian Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2021
* USD 308,000.00

There is a strong need for energy storage devices with high capacitance, high
energy and high power density. These energy storage devices are required in the
development of electric-based transportation and bioengineering for reducing the
emissions of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous
oxide. Electrochemical supercapacitors, which are mostly based on carbon
materials, can have much faster charging rates and longer life-times than
lithium-ion batteries and can deliver clean and efficient power. The energy
density of electrochemical supercapacitors can be increased significantly via
the increase in the contact of active materials with electrolyte. This project
involve researches in several disciplines, including nanomanufacturing, energy
storage, electrochemistry, modeling and simulation. It will lead to the
advancement of the processing technology for the fabrication of a class of
energy materials with significantly improved electrical-chemical-mechanical
properties, help grow the engineering workforce, and enhance U.S.
competitiveness and leadership in the areas of energy and transportation. The
research results will also provide a better understanding of the effects of
electrochemical cycling on the mechanical behavior of materials on the
microscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to produce high performance energy
storage devices promises to have a significant impact on various applications,
including automobiles, portable electronics, photonics, and bioengineering. This
research will synthesize activated carbon nanospheres (ACNs) and carbon
nanosphere-based composites from industrial biomass waste derivatives (e.g.
bourbon stillage) for applications in electrochemical double layer capacitors,
and investigate the effect of electrochemical cycling on the characteristics of
the ACNs, including microstructure, surface morphology, and chemical
composition. Electrochemical indentation system will be developed for in situ
characterization of the mechanical behavior of the ACNs during electrochemical
cycling. Numerical modeling of the mechanical response of the ACNs under the
action of electrochemical cycling will be developed to investigate the coupling
effect between electrokinetic flow and the diffusion of ions on the structural
durability of electrochemical double layer capacitors to help design better ACN-
based supercapacitors with higher energy capacity and longer durability.