* 1634319
* Benthic Biogeochemical Exchange Dynamics on the Oregon Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Clare Reimers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 848,385.00

The longstanding theory regarding the formation of low oxygen zones in coastal
shelf regions at the eastern boundaries of the oceans has pointed to the
upwelling of oxygen-depleted waters from off of the shelf. In other words, dense
water from beyond the shelf break that is depleted in dissolved oxygen is drawn
along the seafloor upwards onto the shelf, mixing with the oxygenated water
there, and creating low oxygen (hypoxic) zones. This is a paradigm that the
researcher in this project seeks to shift by analyzing the added effects of
respiration in shelf sediments. The investigator hypothesizes that changes in
the biological activity of sediments due to seasonal changes in organic matter
input from overlying waters are a major factor in the changes in dissolved
oxygen content of deep shelf water, perhaps being the leading variable in the
creation of hypoxic zones. Though the field analysis will be confined to the
Oregon margin, there is a great deal of applicability for this research in other
coastal regions where hypoxic zones form. In addition to the potential for
unraveling complex local feedbacks between physical and biogeochemical
processes, the researcher plans to work with a small business called Analytical
Instrument Systems to build a new oxygen sensor, called a rotating disc
microelectrode (RDME), that does not intrude on the environment it is testing
and that can be deployed for much longer periods of time than currently popular
sensors, micro-optodes. Her RDME will be deployed with micro-optodes for
comparison and to validate the necessity for the RDME in the study of coastal
ecosystems. This project will provide a unique experience for a postdoctoral
researcher as well as a graduate and three undergraduate students. A public
database will be created which will greatly help with accessibility and
archiving of data for anyone who is interested in similar research. The database
will be connected with a variety of other ocean observing data products, which
will allow the research community and the public to make connections outside of
this particular field of study. This investigator has a strong track record of
including Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) students in her
research, and she will continue to do so in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher aims to challenge the paradigm that hypoxic
zones on the Oregon shelf are created by upwelling of offshelf oxygen-depleted
water and that most of the local primary productivity is exported off the shelf
during downwelling periods. Preliminary data suggests the possibility that
seasonal benthic respiration may be a major factor in hypoxic water formation on
the shelf. With the use of eddy covariance measurements, sediment core
incubations, and near seabed particulate organic matter (POM) collections, the
biogeochemical fluxes of the Oregon margin will be characterized for every
season. This work is ambitious on its own, but the investigator also plans to
incorporate the development of a new oxygen sensor called a rotating disc
microelectrode (RDME) that will be compared to currently popular micro-optodes
when making eddy covariance measurements. The RDME will be small enough as not
to interfere with the physical properties being measured in situ; it will be
insensitive to flow and deployable for longer periods of time. Not only does
this project contain the possibility of completely overturning the current best
theory of hypoxic zone formation on shelf margins, but the use of eddy
covariance is new to the study of dynamic coastal ecosystems and will yield
great insights into the biogeochemical processes of shelf benthos.