* 1634736
* Development and Field Testing of a Lift-Assisted Moored Profiler: LAMP
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 896,699.00

Ocean water properties (such as temperature and salinity) as well as ocean
currents vary with depth and time. Traditionally, long-term ocean observations
of a year duration or longer have been made using bottom-anchored moorings that
supported an array of instruments distributed along the mooring line and held
upright by a surface buoy or subsurface floats. Finite resources usually limit
the number of depth levels that can be sampled using such moorings. The WHOI
Moored Profiler (MP) instrument was developed 20 years ago (in part with
National Science Foundation support) to sample water properties over (near) full
ocean depth at high-vertical resolution for time periods of a year or longer.
What emerged from the initial engineering work was a streamlined vehicle that
employed a traction drive wheel system to propel itself vertically along a
conventional subsurface mooring cable of arbitrary length. The prototype
profiling vehicle was fitted with a suite of sensors to sample the water
properties and currents at sub-1-meter vertical resolution and store the data
onboard until recovery. The MP technology was subsequently licensed to McLane
Research Laboratories, Inc. for commercial production; those operational
instruments (McLane Moored Profilers, MMPs) are presently in use by various
groups in support of scientific investigations into ocean processes ranging from
basin scale variability to eddies to internal waves, including by the Ocean
Observatory Initiative program. While able to return unique and valuable
observations, the MMP has only modest endurance (something less than 1000 km of
total vertical profiling per deployment) and an uneven track record for
profiling reliability (i.e., regular ability to fully span its programmed
sampling depth range, particularly at times of strong incident ocean flow).
Building on the principal investigators extensive past experience, this project
will develop a new moored, profiling instrument that will extract hydrodynamic
lift from incident ocean currents to assist with vertical profiling and employ a
more capable instrument controller to simplify sensor integration and enhance
command and control functionality. A prototype Lift-Assisted Moored Profiler
(LAMP) instrument will be designed, constructed and field tested during a
6-month ocean trial. The researchers will subsequently analyze the resulting
data and report the results in a peer-reviewed article. It is expected that the
new instrument design will attract a manufacturer interested in producing the
device under license for broad community use. Engineering student summer interns
will be recruited to assist in the design, testing and evaluation of the device.
In addition, the research program represents the first opportunity for a young
engineer to serve as a co-principal investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition expense of an oceanographic instrument is only part of the
cost/benefit equation. While the outlay for a piece of reusable equipment may be
amortized over the number of successful deployments of that device, from a
scientific standpoint, a failed or only partially successful deployment means
loss of information that likely can never be reacquired. It is therefore
imperative that oceanographic instruments be designed to be as robust and
reliable as is practical. The goal of this project is to improve on the present
Moored Profiler design to enhance reliability and operability and thus create an
instrument better able to support the oceanographic research programs envisioned
for the next decade(s). The technical goals of the project are to (1) improve
profiling reliability, particularly in stronger flows, (2) increase profiling
endurance relative to presently-available technology, and (3) design and
implement an advanced electronics system for the instrument. The development
program will have two major thrusts: electronic (design and implement a more
capable instrument controller to streamline sensor interfacing, improve the
operator interface, enhance the flexibility of the data logging, and collect
more and better diagnostics of system performance) and mechanical (design and
build a streamlined, low-drag vehicle able to orient relative to the three-
dimensional incident flow and extract lift from the ocean currents to assist the
drive motor with vertical profiling). The controller will consist of a low-power
microprocessor mated with a Linux processor; real-time functionality will be
governed by the microprocessor while the Linux subsystem will be activated for
higher level processing such as data compression. Lift will derive from wings
extending laterally from the vehicle body, with the angle of attack to the
incident flow set by an adjustable tail fin (aileron). Preliminary calculations
for a wing of total area .387 m2 appears capable of producing a lift force of 21
N for a relative flow of 42 cm/s during profiling (4 times the along-wire drag
typically experienced by the McLane Moored Profiler in these conditions). Full
scale tests will determine if this conceptual design can achieve significantly
greater endurance, or if additional battery capacity will be needed. The program
timeline is built around a planned, 6-month trial deployment (spring to fall,
2018) of the LAMP southeast of Woods Hole at 38° N, 68° 40' W in 4100 m water
depth. This site periodically experiences upper ocean currents well in excess of
1 m/s associated with northward meanders of the Gulf Stream and associated Warm
Core Rings. This test will present significant challenges to the LAMP, and
hopefully demonstrate its viability for sustained ocean observation in a wide
variety of environments.