* 1634919
* Workshop on cyber-physical systems applications to power grid, Boston, MA, July 16-17, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Siddharth Suryanarayanan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2016
* USD 45,254.00

The electricity grid of the 21st century is transforming into a complex cyber-
physical system (CPS) with unprecedented innovations in architectures,
technologies, participants and assets, controls, communications, and market
mechanisms. While the benefits of the application of CPS technologies and
philosophy to the emerging Smart Grid are self-evident, there are rising
concerns of: a) associated cybersecurity; b) integration of renewable energy
sources; c) the validation and verification of results from research before
incorporating them in a critical infrastructure domain such as the electricity
grid; and, d) the preparation and education of the next generation workforce in
the power and energy area. These are new topics of research interest in the area
of electric power systems engineering and elicits attention from academia,
government, and industry alike. The participants will include experts in the
power and energy area from the industry, government, and academia that are
attending the IEEE PES conference as well as some selected experts general areas
of CPS. This workshop is expected to generate synergistic research interests
among researchers, while helping identify newer themes for future research
funding this area. The workshop will also explicitly address the integration of
current and best practices in the area into the education of the future
workforce. The benefits of this workshop are germane to the strengthening of a
critical infrastructure, i.e., the grid, and the preparation of an educated
workforce.

The goal and scope of this workshop includes the exchange of information on best
practices, current trends, and topics for future research and education in the
application of CPS technologies to power and energy systems. The physical and
cyber security of the future electricity grid of the future is paramount. The
future grid is also expected to be powered by cleaner sources of generation than
in the past, such as renewable energy source that may exhibit inherent
stochasticity. It is imperative to develop tools and techniques for assessing
the impact of these new technologies on the power grid. The wide acceptance of
academic research in these areas is dependent on the validation of the results
using realistic environments. One of the enablers for conducting such validation
studies and presenting highly reliable results to the industry is the use of
testbeds. Lastly, all of the above themes relate to the preparation of a highly-
trained workforce that will face the challenges of operating and managing the
complex grid of the future.