* 1634895
* GOALI: Mitigating Chemical Wear in Diamond Cutting Tools Using Novel Cutting Fluid Additives
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yunfeng Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Diamond tools are ill-suited for machining ferrous alloys (e.g. steel) because
of the iron-induced chemical wear of diamond. The wear mitigation techniques
identified to-date have received limited industrial acceptance because they
involve either extensive modifications to the machining process or compositional
modifications to the ferrous alloys. This award supports fundamental research
that enables the development of novel cutting fluid additives to mitigate
chemical wear in diamond tools when machining ferrous alloys. The successful
mitigation of this tool wear will extend the benefits of using diamond tools
(namely, realizing aggressive machining conditions and generating mirror-finish
surfaces) to ferrous alloys. These alloys are used widely by the multi-billion
dollar manufacturing industry spanning key application sectors such as
aerospace, defense, automotive, and biomedicine. Research results will also
benefit the cutting fluids industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective is to understand the influence of 2D materials on the diamond tool
wear mitigation efficacy when machining ferrous alloys using colloidal
suspensions of the 2D materials. The candidate 2D materials include graphene,
graphene oxide, hexagonal boron nitride, molybdenum disulfide, and tungsten
disulfide. Upon synthesis, the geometry of the 2D materials will be
characterized using scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy,
whereas their chemistry will be characterized using the X-ray diffraction
technique. Single point diamond turning experiments will be conducted on
cylindrical ferrous workpieces. The ferrous materials of interest include iron
(99.99 % purity) and steel with varying carbon concentrations, since carbon
content in the alloy is known to influence the chemical wear of diamond tools.
The wear mitigation efficacy of the colloidal suspensions will be quantified by
measuring the volumetric tool wear (using optical profilometry), cutting
temperature/forces (using in-situ sensing), carbon diffusion into the workpiece
(using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy), and surface roughness (using optical
profilometry).