* 1634996
* Origins of prolonged ocean temperature extremes in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Emanuele Di Lorenzo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 386,879.00

During the winters of 2013/14 and 2014/15 the Northeast Pacific experienced the
warmest ocean temperatures ever recorded in this region. The warm water mass
anomaly spread initially throughout the Gulf of Alaska region and later reached
the North American coast, covering an area larger than the size of the
continental United States. This prolonged multi-year ocean extreme caused
dramatic changes in the marine ecosystems including bird and mammal die offs,
and harmful algal blooms that contaminated shellfish across Washington, Oregon,
and California. The atmospheric changes associated with this extreme event were
also implicated in the 2014/2015 strong drought conditions over western North
America. The research proposed here is to diagnose the mechanisms underlying the
generation and persistence of ocean temperature extremes ('ocean heat waves') in
the Northeast Pacific, and to investigate whether these events will become more
intense under greenhouse forcing. This proejct will provide a broad range of
interdisciplinary scientists with new understandings of the dynamics controlling
the 2014/15 North Pacific warming, and of its possible links to climate change.
Project investigator Di Lorenzo has acted and will continue to act as
interdisciplinary communicator to bridge the climate, physical and biological
oceanography communities by making the results of this research available to
marine ecosystem scientists through his ties to the California Current Ecosystem
LTER (long-Term Ecological Research) and the PICES (North Pacific Marine Science
Organization) community. Given the strong interest of resource managers and
public in the 2014/15 North Pacific extreme, the principal investigator will
compile a set of outreach videos to explain the findings of this research to a
broader non-scientific audience. These videos will be posted on the project
website and advertised through social media. The model and analyses data will be
made available through the Georgia Tech data server and the project website. The
project will support the training of female graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By diagnosing the basin- and regional-scale
forcing dynamics of multi-year ocean temperature extremes, this project will
develop a mechanistic framework to understand the generation, persistence, and
evolution of ocean extremes in the Northeast Pacific. This mechanistic framework
will not only allow us to interpret the dynamics of recent climate extremes in
the Northeast Pacific, but will also provide a physical basis for understanding
how such climate extremes will evolve under greenhouse forcing. This proposal
aims at (1) diagnosing the basin- and regional-scale mechanisms underlying the
generation and persistence of ocean temperature extremes in the Northeast
Pacific, including the role of tropical/extratropical climate teleconnections
and Pacific decadal variability, and (2) investigating whether there are
physical links between these multi-year ocean extremes and greenhouse forcing.
The primary tools for this investigation will be observational reanalysis
datasets from operational meteorological centers like National Center for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the European Centre for Medium-range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF), sensitivity simulations with the NCAR Community Earth System
Model (CESM), and the CESM Large Ensemble (LE) data. The CESM ensemble will
allow us to clearly separate the internal vs. the anthropogenic-forced changes
in North Pacific climate variance, and quantify its significance. Guided by our
diagnostic understanding of North Pacific climate in the CESM-LE analyses, we
will explore whether our findings are robust across a select set of climate
models used for the fifth assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), using both control and carbon-forced simulations available in the
Climate Modeling Inter-comparison Project 5 (CMIP5) archive.