* 1634328
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Experimental/Computational Study of the Mechanics of Nanofiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Catalin Picu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 272,987.00

This award supports research to characterize the effective mechanical strength
and ductility of polymer nanofiber networks for nanofilamentous materials such
as gels, rubber, tissue scaffolds, cellulose products and non-wovens. Although
macroscale fiber networks are quite well understood, nanofibers behave
differently from their macroscale counterparts due to the coupled effect of
their outstanding ductility and strength that are not observed in microscale
fibers, and the relatively strong adhesion between nanofibers. These two
distinguishing features lead to currently unexplored opportunities for
controlling and vastly improving the effective mechanical strength and ductility
of polymer nanofiber networks. Ordered and random networks of nanofilaments
composed of polymeric or biological materials are omnipresent in biological
tissues, tissue scaffolds, biomedical implants, electrospun air filtration
systems, cellulose products, etc. Undergraduate researchers will work with the
faculty and graduate students to develop web-based, interactive educational
classroom modules to introduce students to the concepts of fiber networks and
design.

The research focuses on regular and random quasi-2D nanofiber networks with
bonded and non-bonded (cohesive) interactions between polymeric nanofibers, to
identify ways for constructing networks with exceptional strength and toughness.
To this effect, a tightly integrated experimental/computational research program
will be followed in which the mechanical response of polystyrene (PS) and
polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofibers (100-500 nm diameter), and the strength of
bonded fiber interactions and adhesive PS-PS and PAN-PAN fiber contacts will be
determined using novel experiments. The data will be employed to calibrate a
computational model for the network mechanics, which will account for bonded,
adhesive and topological interactions of nanofibers and will be used to
determine the relative importance of these interactions in the overall
mechanical behavior of networks with various network architectures and parameter
sets. The model will be validated based on targeted experiments performed on
regular and random fiber networks, and will be applied to perform optimization
of the network structure for enhanced strength and toughness.