* 1634578
* Upper Ocean Turbulence in Non-Equilibrium Conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Tobias Kukulka, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 314,322.00

Turbulent processes near the surface of the ocean play a key role in weather and
climate systems by coupling the ocean with the atmosphere and by distributing
nutrients, pollutants, plankton, and bubbles. Wind and waves drive this
turbulence, often through complex interactions. Our current conceptual and
theoretical framework of these dynamics is based on an equilibrium assumption,
in which waves and turbulence are in equilibrium with the wind forcing. However,
recent investigations highlight that typical ocean conditions are rarely in
equilibrium, but rather are characterized by swell and variable wind waves in
terms of frequencies and directions. This study will integrate recent
observational, theoretical, and computational progress to systematically assess
the influence of non-equilibrium conditions on turbulence near the ocean surface
and on the exchange of momentum and heat with the atmosphere. Improving the
representation of air-sea interaction and ocean turbulence, will advance coupled
ocean-atmosphere models of weather and climate. The ability to predict the
distribution of ocean pollutants as well as seasonal fluctuations and secular
climate change has important environmental, societal, and economical impacts.
The knowledge developed in this study will be incorporated into courses at the
University of Delaware. The project will uniquely foster training of students in
a collaborative environment with computational and observational experts in
oceanography. The PI will participate in public outreach events, such as the
annual Coast Day, an open house day for the general public sponsored by the
University of Delaware's College of Earth, Ocean and Environment. This occasion
provides an opportunity for scientists to inform the general public of the
scientific issues that influence the environment and to expose children of all
ages to careers in the sciences and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
critically evaluating traditional equilibrium assumptions, the proposed research
promises to advance our basic conceptual understanding of ocean surface boundary
layer (OSBL) dynamics. Specifically, the study will test the following
hypotheses: (1) The evolution of the OSBL depends on complex, non-equilibrium
sea states, so that for the same surface fluxes OSBL dynamics vary
significantly. (2) A turbulence-resolving model based on the wave-averaged
Navier-Stokes equations accurately captures the observed sea state dependent
evolution of the turbulent OSBL. (3) The relative importance of breaking wave
and Langmuir circulation (LC) effects depends on sea state and OSBL conditions,
such as OSBL depth. (4) Extending the existing theoretical and conceptual
framework of planetary boundary layers by including wave effects explicitly will
provide a more physical description of realistic OSBLs. These hypotheses will be
addressed by analyzing observations from recent field experiments in the coastal
and open ocean in collaboration with the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
Those rare data sets include collocated measurements of waves, surface fluxes,
and upper ocean structure, including unique observations of LC characteristics.
Observations will be compared to large-eddy simulation (LES) results based on
the wave-averaged Navier-Stokes equations. The LES model resolves turbulence and
captures both LC and breaking waves. The breaking wave input to the model will
be enhanced based on recent progress on wind-wave coupling theory that takes sea
state effects into account in collaboration with the National Center for
Atmospheric Research. In collaboration with the Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea
Research, the researchers will evaluate common OSBL turbulence models employed
in regional and global ocean models. The combined analyses of OSBL observations
and process-based LES will provide the needed insights for developing novel,
accurate physics-based OSBL models. Thus, the research will contribute to
improving the next-generation ocean models and to enhancing our understanding of
the coupled ocean-atmosphere system.