* 1634234
* Characterizing School Recovery After Disasters: Can We Optimize Academic Recovery?
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ann-Margaret Esnard, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 05/31/2019
* USD 367,793.00

Schools have significant impacts on large sectors of the population in disaster
situations. During and immediately after any kind of disaster affecting the
greater public, schools provide communities with access to shelter, food,
medical resources, and psychological resources. However, despite the important
role that schools play, very little research has been conducted to understand
how and why disaster-affected schools differ in their post-disaster recovery
patterns. This work will identify factors that may hinder or support school
academic recovery after disasters. Findings from this research will position us
to advise stakeholders (e.g., school administrators, teachers, policy makers) on
the potential trajectory of schools, particularly in areas vulnerable to extreme
events. Pre-disaster preparedness and response planning initiatives can in turn
be customized to minimize the effects of natural disasters on school academic
functioning. The project's interdisciplinary team will disseminate study
findings through multiple outlets (e.g., webinars targeted to superintendents in
the study area, lectures to pre-service teachers, scholarly papers and
presentations). To increase the educational impact of this work, the research
team will actively involve and mentor undergraduate and graduate students in
research and integrate study findings into multiple courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two specific aims: (1) to identify
patterns of school recovery after Hurricane Ike and (2) to examine potential
risk factors associated with school recovery patterns. To address Aim 1, we will
examine patterns of academic recovery among approximately 400 Texas public
schools in the path of Hurricane Ike (2008) by examining the pre-/post-Ike
periods from 2003-2011. Growth mixture modeling techniques will be used to
examine a rich dataset of public school performance outcomes in Texas in order
to obtain empirical insights into the landscape of school recovery after
disasters. To address Aim 2, we will examine potential risk factors and their
associations with school recovery patterns, utilizing a vulnerability
perspective. Specifically, we will test the relationship between school
institutional infrastructure and socioeconomic and demographic factors and
school recovery patterns. We will then examine the role of physical
vulnerability in school recovery by mapping spatial clusters of school recovery
patterns in relation to location (e.g., school district and county location,
coastal location, evacuation zone, urbanized/non-urbanized area) and exposure
(e.g., storm surge and flood-zone areas). The methodological approach developed
here may be generalized for use after other disasters in other locations. The
outcomes of the research are expected to transform future studies of disaster
impacts on school functioning and improve cross-study and cross-model
examinations of disaster impacts.