* 1634973
* Stable Matching of Service Tours to Design Cooperative Policies for Transport Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Joseph Chow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,782.00

Transportation technologies have reached a point where they can no longer be
evaluated as systems in isolation. Urban travel options have become increasingly
abundant in today's age of ubiquitous data and information and communications
technologies: e.g. ridesharing, vehicle/bike sharing, and demand-responsive
transit. Coordination of mobility solutions between multiple agencies during
disasters and large scale incidents is increasingly more challenging. The
solution in this study involves a careful reexamination of the supply-demand
assignment models for transportation networks. It combines stable matching
theory with network analysis for transformative impacts on transportation
planning and game theory as applied to infrastructure systems. Policy-makers
will be able to design cooperative policies with different transport operators,
such as fare bundling, service leasing, asset co-location, to further encourage
partnerships like that of Kansas City and Bridj. The same methodology can be
used for risk pooling of resources in planning for disasters. The project will
support training of a number of graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 STEM students
from under-represented minorities in transportation systems and game theory. It
will drive innovation and entrepreneurship by defining new functional roles in
transportation planning that would engage with startup companies and
incubators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is split into two research thrusts.
The first focuses on development of the core theory, which includes model
formulation and algorithm development for traffic assignment as a many-to-one
stable matching assignment game. Doing so would no longer assume that the
transportation supply is fixed as in current methods. The model is then expanded
to a many-to-many game to involve multiple operators so that cooperative
policies between them can be evaluated. The second thrust focuses on
applications of the theory, two of which are shared mobility systems and risk
pooling strategies in disaster management. Customizations of the model to handle
shared mobility services allow policymakers to evaluate specific shared mobility
services like bike sharing or shared taxis. When the model is considered under
uncertainty, cooperative strategies between multiple operators can be designed
to pool risks together to minimize their impacts on individual operators. The
study challenges over 60 years of research in transport modeling as an
alternative theory of supply-demand interaction that considers both traveler and
operator behavior.