* 1634080
* Methane, Ethylene, and Dissolved Organic Phosphorus Cycling in the Western North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 717,000.00

The "marine methane paradox" refers to observations of high concentrations of
methane in surface waters of the ocean, even though these waters are well-
oxygenated and high in sulfate, both features which generally do not favor the
production of methane. This project aims to elucidate on the cause of this
paradox. Based on preliminary results, the investigator identified the potential
for methane production stimulated by microbial cycling of dissolved organic
matter. Polysaccharides (carbonates such as starch) are a major component of
high molecular weight dissolved organic matter (HMWDOM) and they can incorporate
esters of methylphosphonate, which may be allowing for the production of methane
in surface waters. When these HMWDOM polysaccharides were introduced to seawater
samples, the researchers saw production of methane with an anomalous stable
carbon isotope ratio comparable to what is seen in the paradoxical surface
waters enriched in methane. By making measurements of trace gases, HMWDOM
phosphonate, and stable carbon isotope measurements in the western North
Atlantic Ocean, the investigator and his collaborators will reassess the
preliminary data and the implications of these results for the entire
oceanographic cycling of methane. Both educational and outreach efforts have
been included. For the educational component, a postdoc, a graduate student, and
summer undergraduate students will be work on the project, whereas for the
outreach activities, the proponent plans to develop curricula on basic science
and oceanography for high school students, include a high school teacher in the
research cruise, and integrate results into an organic geochemistry course, the
lectures of which will be publically available online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to evaluate the possibility that the
"marine methane paradox", or the super-saturation of methane in high sulfate,
well-oxygenated surface waters, is caused by microbial cycling of dissolved
organic matter (DOM). There has been a great deal of preliminary evidence to
support this theory. For example, samples from station ALOHA were amended with
purified high molecular weight DOM (HMWDOM) polysaccharides, and methane,
ethylene, and propylene productions were stimulated. HMWDOM polysaccharides
incorporate esters of methylphosphonate (MPn), 2-hydroxyethylphosphonates
(2-HEP), and other minor phosphonates, which are likely facilitating the
production of methane, ethylene, and propylene. Carbon isotope data supports
that this theory is the process behind the marine methane paradox; the d13C
value of methane produced from HMWDOM polysaccharide enriched samples agrees
well with the anomalous value associated with the super-saturated surface water.
Only a small fraction of HMWDOM polysaccharides can easily explain the marine
methane paradox, and this process could just as easily fully revise the current
understanding of large scale methane cycling between the ocean and atmosphere.
The researchers will assess the preliminary evidence and evaluate the microbial
DOM cycling theory by making paired trace gas and HMWDOM phosphonate, as well as
stable carbon isotope measurements in the western North Atlantic Ocean.