* 1634753
* I-Corps: RoadsInDB: Customer Discovery in the Logistics, Delivery, Ride Sharing, Location-based Services and Analytics Verticals
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses logistics issues related to managing the deployment of
large fleets of vehicles ranging from: Cab sharing services like Uber, Lyft, and
Ola; food delivery services like Hub Grub; and retail delivery services like
Google Shopping and Amazon, involving managing and optimizing the operation of
hundreds and thousands of vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delivery networks were
once dominated by a few large players and many small players. However, new
models are evolving. For example, with 14k taxis on the streets of New York City
(NYC), Uber is now is the single largest taxi service in NYC. Such companies
must perform near real-time and rely on historical analytics on vehicles on road
networks to keep their operations running efficiently. In particular, companies
constantly compute network distances on road networks as they perform real time
matchmaking between supply and demand. The technology involved in this project
enables computing hundreds of thousands of network distances on road network at
a very high throughput rate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's technology is
different from Google Maps, Here Maps, and other online map services in the
sense that they provide APIs to compute the shortest path between a source and
destination vertex. This project's technology only focuses on computing network
distances at a very high throughput inside a database, which makes this
technology essential for companies that perform extensive analytical queries on
road networks. This approach will be attractive to food delivery companies,
package delivery companies (UPS, FedEx, USPS), taxi/limousine services, and ride
sharing services (Uber, Lyft, Ola Cabs). Companies that provide map services
such as Google, Microsoft, or ESRI may also find this technology attractive
since using it they can improve their local search service by providing network
distances instead of resorting to "as the crow flies" distances which is
currently the case. The team's current business model would be to customize the
system for each customer, requiring the purchase of licenses on a per-machine or
per-site basis. This team's plan is to concentrate on several verticals (i.e.,
niche markets with specific, compelling needs) and understand their
requirements. The team will develop applications to cater to each of the
verticals.