* 1634431
* NRI: A Proactive Approach to Managing Contingencies during Human Robot Collaboration in Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2020
* USD 639,076.00

Recent advances in human-safe industrial robots present an opportunity for
creating hybrid work cells, where humans and robots can collaborate in close
physical proximities. This capability enables realizing systems that utilize
complementary strengths of humans and robots. Several new low-cost robots have
been introduced in the market over the last few years, making them attractive in
many new manufacturing applications. This makes the idea of hybrid cells
economically viable for small and medium manufacturers, which represent a very
important segment of the manufacturing sector in the United States. Both humans
and robots can make errors in a hybrid cell, hence creating contingency
situations. Unless handled promptly, a contingency situation may lead to
significant operational inefficiencies. Hence, hybrid cells are not likely to
cost-effective unless contingency situations are proactively detected and
managed. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) award supports fundamental
research to enable proactive management of contingencies arising during human-
robot collaboration in hybrid work cells in small production volume
manufacturing operations. Results from this research will enable introduction of
industrial robots in small production volume operations and are expected to make
US manufacturing industry cost competitive in the global market. The integration
of the research with graduate and undergraduate courses will enhance the
robotics and manufacturing curricula and enrich learning experiences of the
participating students. Outreach activities will educate and inform K-12
students about career opportunities in robotics and manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental advances are needed in automated planning,
cell monitoring, replanning, and human-robot interaction to endow hybrid cells
with effective contingency handling capabilities. This research will investigate
computational foundations for the design of task planning and resource
allocation algorithms that explicitly account for managing contingencies.
Algorithms will be developed for real-time monitoring of the task progress to
ensure that tasks are completed in a safe and efficient manner. Real-time
replanning algorithms will be designed to handle contingencies and refine plans
based on the observed task execution performance. This research will also
explore and characterize methods for effective information exchange between
humans and robots to deal with contingencies.