* 1634680
* Role of Collagen In Hierarchical Structure, Composition, And Biomechanics Of Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kenneth Kozloff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,929.00

Bone is a complex tissue composed of mineral and collagen. Bone fragility
represents a significant societal burden, and is commonly, but incompletely
diagnosed through changes in bone mass and structure. Understanding the
contributions and interactions of collagen and mineral at the nanostructural
level is critical for understanding how factors beyond bone mass govern bone
fragility. Collagen formation and incorporation into bone is highly regulated,
and changes in collagen or collagen-related proteins leads to the bone disease
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), exemplified by extremely high bone brittleness and
fragility. Understanding how changes in collagen and mineral interactions lead
to bone brittleness will provide a greater understanding of how bone content,
structure, and mechanical properties interact at multiple length scales. This
project introduces a novel use of atomic force microscopy-based infrared
spectroscopy (AFMIR) and positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) to
detect changes in collagen-mineral interactions in bone. By understanding how
these processes break down in models of OI, this research will have a broader
impact by identifying key factors that are most closely correlated with bone
brittleness and fragility in more common diseases such as
osteoporosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine how collagen
governs bone material properties across multiple size scales. We hypothesize
that bone brittleness is regulated through changes across the hierarchical
organization of bone originating at the level of the collagen-mineral
interaction. To test the hypothesis, mice with defects in collagen helical
structure, pro-collagen processing, or post-translational hydroxylation will be
studied by AFM-IR and PALS imaging. Hierarchical phenotype analysis will be
performed across multiple length scales and will identity factors most closely
correlated with the mild, moderate, and severe bone brittleness found in these
mice. Collagen fibril structure will be directly visualized in the context of
its surrounding matrix chemistry, tissue stiffness, and local fibril
organization by AFM-IR. PALS will describe void size and distribution at this
same size scale. Together, these techniques will be integrated with higher order
contextual information including tissue organization (woven-lamellar patterns),
porosity (of vascular and cellular origin), tissue mineral, and stiffness
through histologic, nanoCT, and nanoindentation techniques. The intellectual
significance of this project arises from understanding how collagen governs bone
material properties across multiple size scales and will provide foundational
understanding regarding the basic biological principles behind bone formation,
growth, and maturation.