* 1634237
* Understanding the Hoosick Falls Water Crisis
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2017
* David Bond, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2017
* USD 107,772.00

The Village of Hoosick Falls in New York recently discovered unsafe
concentrations of Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) in its public water system.
Faculty members at Bennington College will offer a new course, "Hoosick Falls
Water Crisis," to provide undergraduate students with key analytic skills and
field research experience in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields related to this real-time disaster. The course will be co-taught
by a social scientist, a chemist, and a geoscientist and will draw on
methodologies and concepts within anthropology, chemistry, and geology to equip
undergraduates to conduct urgent environmental research in times of crisis. This
project will also produce a dataset for the community of Hoosick Falls, NY.
Three wide-ranging broader impacts are anticipated. First, the students and
researchers will collect independent data on PFOA concentrations in residential
wells, resulting in a dataset that will help characterize the origin, extent,
and trajectory of PFOA. Second, students will assist faculty members in
preparing presentations of the findings to the community, which will not only
serve to inform the public, but will also help strengthen students'
communication skills and help them better connect their scientific knowledge to
societal outcomes. Finally, the faculty researchers plan to develop and
distribute teaching and learning materials on PFOA for inclusion in
postsecondary STEM curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the Hoosick
Falls Water Crisis seeks to effect engaged student learning around the Hoosick
Falls water crisis in order to provide students with robust training and
experience in monitoring groundwater contamination and generate preliminary
independent data that will help characterize the origin, extent, and trajectory
of the PFOA groundwater plume around Hoosick Falls, NY. The guiding educational
research question is: How can environmental research on a local public crisis
enhance the STEM curriculum for undergraduate students? Specifically, the
researchers are studying how training students in environmental chemistry and
hydrogeology and equipping them to apply those discipline-based skills to help
produce key data on a local crisis will influence student enrollment and
retention in STEM fields. The researchers hypothesize that hands-on experience
in meaningful environmental research will demonstrate the value of STEM fields
in a liberal arts education and enhance student outcomes within STEM for both
STEM and non-STEM majors. Evaluation will occur using (1) pre- and post-
assessments that will measure student attitudes towards and aptitude in
environmental chemistry and hydrology, (2) enrollment and course performance
data, and (3) student reflections.