* 1634282
* Collaborative Research: Automated Knowledge Discovery in Reliability and Healthcare from Complex Data with Covariates
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Neng Fan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2020
* USD 198,915.00

Collecting and analyzing data with covariates such as temperature, humidity, and
radiation level are everyday activities in science and engineering. An important
example is accelerated life testing data used in the design of products such as
lithium-ion batteries. Such data are collected by exposing test units to
harsher-than-normal conditions to expedite the failure process. The resulting
failure times are modeled by a probability distribution and a life-stress
relationship. However, if the probability distribution and/or the life-stress
relationship selected cannot adequately describe the underlying failure process,
the resulting reliability prediction may be misleading. A similar example is
also encountered in healthcare systems, where it is crucial to quantify
probability distributions of important measures such as the length-of-stay,
waiting time, and disease progression, and the effects of influential covariates
on these measures. This award supports fundamental research on automated
knowledge discovery from complex data in reliability and healthcare with
potential impacts in the areas of manufacturing, healthcare, energy,
transportation, and aerospace industries. The research team will strive to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups and minorities, and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to investigate a new methodology for automated knowledge discovery
from complex data with covariates using matrix-analytic models. Statistical
tools and optimization algorithms will be developed for efficiently collecting
such data or selecting the useful subsets from massive data for quick
implementation. The research findings will help create a new avenue for modeling
and interpreting such data in situations in which the data-generating mechanisms
are unknown or difficult to analyze using existing statistical tools. To this
end, an automated modeling methodology to construct general phase-type
distributions incorporating covariates will be explored via mathematical
optimization. To improve the statistical efficiency of data collection, an
optimal experimental design methodology will be investigated, and viable
computational tools for planning accelerated testing experiment with phase-type
models will be studied. In addition, a data-selection approach based on the
optimal experimental design methodology will be developed to maximize the
utilization of healthcare data. The research findings will be validated by
conducting accelerated tests of lithium-ion battery in the laboratory and
collaborating with biomedical informatics services on targeted healthcare
applications.