* 1634999
* Collaborative Research:   Do Cyanobacteria Drive Marine Hydrocarbon Biogeochemistry?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Swarthout, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,859.00

While the release of petroleum hydrocarbons into the ocean is recognized as an
environmental and human hazard, a recent study has estimated that on an annual
basis, the release of natural hydrocarbons by a single phytoplankton group
(cyanobacteria) contributes at least ten times more total hydrocarbon to the
surface ocean. This project will be the first in-depth study of the latent
biogeochemical cycling of this huge pool of biogenic hydrocarbons. Using field
studies, laboratory incubations of cyanobacteria, and state-of-the art chemical
analysis, the researchers will examine the molecular structures, rates and
mechanisms of production and removal, and the environmental conditions that
control the cycling of this major pool of oceanic hydrocarbons. The results of
this study will reveal significant new knowledge for improved understanding of a
major carbon cycle in the ocean. Additionally, data could indicate a role for
cyanobacterial hydrocarbons in preparing natural marine bacteria to respond to,
and degrade petroleum spills, as well as a possible atmospheric impact (e.g.
cloud formation) resulting from air-sea exchange of certain components of the
hydrocarbon pool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support undergraduate
and graduate students, a postdoctoral investigator, and a new faculty member,
and will engage participants from minority-serving institutions in California
and North Carolina. Plans are also included to establish links with oil spill
and biofuel researchers in order to evaluate additional practical applications
for the data resulting from this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual
production of 308,000,000 - 771,000,000 tons of hydrocarbons by cyanobacteria
has recently been reported and is a factor of 10 larger than marine petroleum
hydrocarbon input from spills and natural seeps. Consequently, these biogenic
hydrocarbons almost certainly have significant implications for the carbon cycle
and the bacterial community composition in the ocean but have never been the
subject of rigorous study. This project will investigate the distribution,
partitioning, and cycling of biogenic hydrocarbons in the ocean, focusing on the
abundance and molecular diversity of biogenic hydrocarbons in relation to
cyanobacterial populations; the extent to which volatilization to the atmosphere
acts as a sink for biogenic hydrocarbons; and the rate at which hydrocarbons are
produced by cyanobacteria and consumed by hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria. Field
studies across natural gradients in phytoplankton community structure and
abundance will employ state of the art chemical analysis to evaluate the
distribution of biogenic hydrocarbons, and together with incubation experiments
will determine quantitative rates for biogenic hydrocarbons cycling in the
surface ocean. Laboratory studies will augment field studies by assessing
hydrocarbon production and loss mechanisms under carefully controlled laboratory
conditions. Together, the project will obtain a quantitative understanding of
this important component of the oceanic carbon cycle.