* 1634544
* Coupled-physics imaging methods and geodesic X-ray transforms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Francois Monard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lora Billings
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,115.00

Improving feature detection is a constant challenge in medical and geophysical
imaging, with tremendous benefits to society such as the adequate monitoring of
medical conditions or natural resources, and the imaging of previously
"invisible" features. This project presents two approaches leading to such
improvements. A first approach is the design and theoretical analysis of imaging
methods exploiting physical phenomena in new ways, leading to imaging strategies
with both improved contrast and resolution, and providing access to new features
such as anisotropic properties of muscle fibers. A second approach is to provide
distortion-free reconstructions and accurately located inclusions in human
bodies or the Earth's crust. This is achieved by using more realistic
descriptions (specifically, spatially varying) of the propagation speed of the
waves used to probe the medium of interest. The model considered becomes
augmented with new technicalities, where additional phenomena (e.g., caustics)
can occur and open mathematical questions abound. The present project provides
theoretical and practical imaging answers to some of these new problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the theoretical and mathematical
understanding of: (i) coupled-physics inverse problems, which often consist of
parameter identification problems in partial differential equations (PDE) using
internal measurements; and (ii) geodesic X-ray transforms (a generalization of
the famous Radon transform, in two dimensions), with applications to X-Ray
Tomography in media with variable index of refraction. In the former topic,
methods from analysis and PDEs are used to derive reconstruction algorithms for
various models of increasing complexity, including additional constitutive
parameters relevant for medical imaging, and including a transition from scalar
to systems of PDEs. In the latter topic, the investigator uses tools of integral
geometry, Fourier analysis, and PDEs to provide statements about
injectivity/stability (or lack thereof), reconstruction formulas and their
numerical validation, for the tensor tomography problem on Riemannian surfaces.
Generalizations to higher dimensions, attenuated transforms and other types of
flows (e.g., magnetic and thermostat flows) are also considered.