* 1634204
* Collaborative Research:  A Resilience-based Seismic Design Methodology for Tall Wood Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Berman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 302,099.00

As the U.S. population continues to grow in urban communities, the demand for
tall residential and mixed-use buildings in the range of eight to twenty stories
continues to increase. Buildings in this height range are commonly built using
concrete or steel. A recent new timber structural innovation, known as cross
laminated timber (CLT), was developed in western Europe and is now being
implemented around the world as a sustainable and low carbon-footprint
alternative to conventional structural materials for tall buildings. However, an
accepted and validated design method for tall CLT buildings to resist
earthquakes has not yet been developed, and therefore construction of these tall
wood buildings in the United States has been limited. This research will break
this barrier by investigating a seismic design methodology for resilient tall
wood buildings that can be immediately re-occupied following a design level
earthquake and quickly repaired (compared to current building systems) after a
large earthquake. Using the seismic design methodology developed in this
project, the research team will work with practitioners across the engineering
and architectural communities to design, build, and validate the performance of
a ten-story wood building by conducting full-scale sub-assembly system testing
at the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) experimental facility at Lehigh University,
followed by full-scale tests at the NSF-supported NHERI outdoor shake table at
the University of California at San Diego. This research will enable a new
sustainable construction practice that is also cost-competitive, thereby
increasing demands for engineered wood production, providing added value for
forest resources, and enhancing job growth in the construction and forestry
sectors. As part of the research, the experimental programs will serve to
provide outreach to the public and stakeholders on issues related to seismic
hazard mitigation, modern timber engineering, and resilient building
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate and
validate a seismic design methodology for tall wood buildings that incorporates
high performance structural and non-structural systems. The methodology will
quantitatively account for building resilience. This will be accomplished
through a series of research tasks planned over a four-year period. These tasks
will include mechanistic modeling of tall wood buildings with several variants
of post-tensioned rocking CLT wall systems, fragility modeling of structural and
non-structural building components that affect resilience, full-scale bi-
directional testing of building sub-assembly systems, development of a
resilience-based seismic design methodology, and finally a series of full-scale
shake table tests of a ten-story CLT building specimen to validate the
investigated design. The structural systems investigated will include post-
tensioned CLT rocking walls in both monolithic and segmental rocking
configurations. Implementing segmental rocking walls in a full building system
will be a transformative concept that has yet to be realized physically. The
rocking wall systems will be investigated under the context of holistic building
behavior, including gravity systems and non-structural components. The research
team will further push the boundary of existing performance-based seismic design
by developing a design procedure that explicitly considers the time needed for
the building to resume functionality after an earthquake. With the large-scale
testing capacity provided by the NHERI experimental facilities, the design
methodology will be experimentally validated, which will at the same time
generate a landmark data set for tall wood buildings under dynamic loading that
will be available to the broader research and practitioner community through the
NHERI DesignSafe-ci.org Data Depot. The project will facilitate implementation
of this new structural archetype by interfacing closely with practitioners in
the Pacific Northwest interested in tall CLT buildings as a cost-competitive
design option. Graduate and undergraduate students, including community college
students, will actively participate in this research and gain valuable knowledge
and experience, which will prepare them to become leaders in sustainable
building practices using modern engineered wood materials.