* 1634586
* The energetic assembly of biological communities: a test with deep-sea woodfalls
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Craig McClain, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 747,825.00

Changes in both terrestrial and marine carbon production under climate change
necessitate an understanding of how ecological communities are structured by
carbon availability, which has long been recognized as a predictor of
biodiversity. Recent research indicates global marine phytoplankton production
may have declined at a rate of ~1% of the global median per year. Regional-scale
changes have been more heterogeneous; with the equatorial Pacific Ocean
experiencing overall declines of over 50% the last decade and Polar Regions
experiencing increases of comparable magnitude. Clearly, there is a strong need
for a more complete understanding of the relationship between biodiversity and
carbon availability to better predict the consequences of current and
forthcoming climate change on marine ecosystems. One challenge is that
determinants of available carbon in natural systems are diverse and often
unidentifiable. Wood-fall communities in the deep sea are an ideal experimental
system for testing many theories about carbon availability and biodiversity.
First, the amount of carbon available to the community can be precisely
manipulated in the form of wood mass. Second, flows of carbon from wood through
the community can be easily tracked because animals supported by wood have
distinct chemical signatures that can be traced with stable isotope analysis.
Finally, the entire community associated with a wood fall can be sampled,
allowing for accurate estimates of biodiversity, biomass, and energy flow. For
these reasons, study of deep-sea wood falls provides accurate and simultaneous
quantification of standing stock, diversity, and trophic structure as a function
of energy availability. Through the use of ROV/submersible-deployed wood falls,
the project will test how changes in carbon availability impact marine
biodiversity. The results of this project will be beneficial to science in
several ways. First, the project contributes significantly to climate change and
biodiversity research and specifically to knowledge of the underexplored deep
oceans. The project also creates abundant opportunities for public outreach. The
multifaceted approach includes: employing web podcasts and blogs; sharing
results through photographic exhibitions; and actively recruiting from minority-
serving institutions while also providing visiting lectureships. Further, the
project will recruit and train young scientists in underrepresented groups, and
impact multiple audiences from primary education students, science instructors,
and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
identify the interactions in energetic processes that regulate community
structure, using ROV/submersible-deployed wood falls. Wood will be deployed in
varying sizes to control the amount of chemical energy added to the community,
and of different wood densities to examine assembly rules while examining total
quantity and concentration of resources. This approach will allow the
investigators to examining energetic tradeoffs is that multiple impacts,
hypotheses, and theories of varying carbon availability on biodiversity can be
evaluated simultaneously. The amount of carbon in the community can be precisely
manipulated, an improvement over prior studies. The impact of the rate of carbon
uptake on ecological processes will also be examined here, but has been rarely
evaluated. This research will also reveal much about wood-fall biomes in the
deep sea, one of the least studied systems in the ocean. For example, the
project will reveal the relative importance different carbon pathways in
exporting wood energy and controlling biodiversity.