* 1634070
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Simulating Compositional and Structural Change in a Near Boreal Forest
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Kurt Kipfmueller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,966.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research will investigate the influences of competing factors such
as climate conditions, land use, and fire that drive structural and
compositional change in the near Boreal forests of the Upper Great Lakes region.
The research will provide an improved understanding of the response of
vegetation to these impacts in order to promote long-term forest sustainability
and resilience. Enhanced forest landscape simulation modeling will provide new
insights regarding vegetation and environmental dynamics, and a more holistic
understanding of the impacts of disturbances on the ecosystem. Outcomes from
this research will provide land resources managers and stakeholders with
potential future forest conditions scenarios enabling them to make informed,
outcome-based environmental management decisions. Better management efforts will
not only protect the ecosystem but also enhance recreational and economic
activities in the region. The project includes education and training
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented populations to
enrich their research experiences. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student
to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The near
boreal forests of the Upper Great Lakes have undergone profound compositional,
structural, and functional changes during the century following Euro-American
settlement. The historical dominance of red pine in the region is representative
of fire's imprint on the landscape, however, 20th century land-use modification
has generally excluded fire across the landscape, reducing dominance of
resilient species and potentially increasing susceptibility of the regional
forests to future environmental change. The research supported by this award
will focus on three core questions: (1) Are there an adequate number lightning
fires to maintain red pine stands in the Upper Great Lakes region? (2) How would
the modern-day landscape composition and structure differ in the absence of 20th
century landscape modification? (3) How will environmental changes influence
fire regimes and subsequent vegetation patterns in the future? The doctoral
student will use the landscape disturbance and succession model, LANDIS-II to
simulate forest compositional and structural change. Four scenarios will be
simulated, ranging temporally from pre-settlement times to AD 2300, to model
forest changes in response to varying fire, climate, and land scenarios.