* 1634396
* Increasing the Efficiency of Wind Turbines through Understanding of Their Transient Responses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kim Stelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 295,957.00

Global demand for renewable energy is increasing, and wind power is the fastest
growing source of renewable energy. Current control methods for wind turbines
are designed for steady-state wind and are unable to capture the extra energy
from turbulence. To capture more energy from unsteady wind, the complex flow
over a pitching blade needs to be understood. This award supports fundamental
research to understand wind turbine response to time-varying wind and blade
pitch facilitating the creation of new control laws for wind
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
understand the transient response of wind turbines to control law and time
varying wind and blade pitch. In turbulent flow, the wind turbine response and
the control law are inter-connected and must be treated as a complete nonlinear,
time-varying system. For this reason, understanding how the control law affects
the overall system response is included in the research objective. To achieve
the research objective, load cell measurements of lift force, drag force, and
moment of wind turbine blades under unsteady wind and blade pitch conditions
will be collected at the large closed return wind tunnel facility at the
University of Minnesota. A fan driven by a variable frequency drive producing a
maximum wind velocity of 38 m/s controls the wind speed. The pitch blade angle
will be controlled by an electric motor in the range of -2 to +4 degrees. The
frequency content of the time-varying wind and blade pitch motion inputs will
cover the range of interest in the wind spectrum. Control laws to be
investigated include torque-based control and state-based control.