* 1634594
* Collaborative Research: Design of Optimal Bimetallic Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Chrysanthos Gounaris, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,605.00

The scientific field of computational chemistry uses computer simulations to
calculate the structures, properties, as well as, reactions of molecules and
materials. These simulations can be envisioned as virtual experiments that
generate rich information about the materials behavior with a great level of
accuracy. Elucidating the mathematical functions that describe how the materials
properties depend on their structural characteristics allows us to design
optimal materials for targeted applications (structures that maximize a desired
property). This methodology significantly reduces the need to perform numerous,
time-consuming, and costly experiments in the lab, which are often based on
extensive trial and error. This Design of Engineering Material Systems (DEMS)
award supports fundamental research to design nanoparticles that consist of two
different metals and are able to capture carbon dioxide, a molecule contributing
to the greenhouse effect. The predictions from the computational research will
be validated with targeted experiments in the lab. Since metal nanoparticles
find a wide range of applications, it is expected that results from this
research will affect the U.S. economy, society and the environment. A website
will be developed to allow free access to a library of simulated structures. The
multidisciplinary nature of this research, involving computational chemistry,
materials design, optimization, scientific computation, materials synthesis and
catalysis, will help broaden engineering education and attract underrepresented
students to research. In addition, animation modules will be generated for
incorporation in high school classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
creatively integrates first-principles calculations with rigorous engineering
design methods, in order to develop a systematic framework to optimize
nanoparticles in light of a performance metric (demonstrated via carbon dioxide
adsorption), while also taking into account nanoparticle stability aspects. A
novel design of experiments approach, tailored to the intricacies of this
specific materials class, will be developed, while the computational predictions
will be validated experimentally through targeted nanoparticle synthesis,
characterization, and carbon dioxide adsorption experiments. Developing the
capability to computationally identify nanoparticles that maximize their
performance for a given application in a multi-dimensional composition-
morphology space is crucial to guide future research efforts and accelerate
nanomaterials discovery. However, efforts to-date have been focused entirely on
one-dimensional optimizations (almost exclusively focused on metal composition).
The present project will demonstrate the first strategy that truly explores the
vast parameter space and hence enables true design of functional nanoparticles.
In addition, this research advances the state-of-the-art in the study of
bimetallic nanoparticles by developing structure-property relationships that
will be applicable to any nanoparticle morphology. Finally, this project
advances environmental science by designing bimetallic nanostructures for
capturing and activating carbon dioxide, a key greenhouse gas.