* 1634709
* A Diagnostic Modeling Methodology for Dual Retrospective Cost Adaptive Control of Combustion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Mirko Gamba, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,250,000.00

Control technology makes it possible to use robotics for manufacturing and
autopilots for autonomous vehicles. Control technology enhances productivity,
efficiency, and safety. Applications that are especially challenging require
computer algorithms that can adapt to unpredictable changes in the system and
its environment. This project will use adaptive control to improve the
performance of engines that burn fuel in combustion processes. These engines are
used worldwide to generate energy for the electrical grid. The challenging
problem is to burn the fuel more efficiently and reduce pollution despite
changes in the demand for electricity. The technology developed under this
project will enhance the operation and reliability of the electrical grid while
reducing the emission of greenhouse gases and soot particles. The project will
involve students from multiple engineering disciplines and will enhance the
diversity of future professionals working in this area of technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge and understanding in the theory
and practice of feedback control by developing diagnostic modeling techniques
for retrospective cost adaptive control (RCAC). The modeling information
required by RCAC concerns the presence of specific features (such as right-half-
plane zeros and nonlinearities) as well as the accuracy with which those
features must be known (locations of the right-half-plane zeros and details of
the nonlinearities). As an extension of RCAC, adaptation and closed-loop
identification are performed concurrently as dual RCAC (DRCAC). This technique
depends on efficient algorithms for biquadratic optimization. If identification
with DRCAC using feedback sensors fails to reveal the essential modeling
details, then non-feedback sensors with more in-depth diagnostic capability will
be used to probe the system to obtain data for calibrating reduced-fidelity
models. These models will be used by DRCAC for online analysis and closed-loop
simulation, and, if necessary, the feedback sensing and actuation strategy will
be modified. The intellectual objective of this project is a deeper
understanding of dual control and the development of the diagnostic methodology
in order to facilitate adaptive control of complex systems in theory and
practice.