* 1634092
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Neurobiology of Cognition, Newry, Maine,   July 23-29, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Tatiana Pasternak, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

All human experiences of the world - our perceptions, actions, emotions, and
decisions - are products of the brain. Neurobiologists attempt to comprehend
this fact by studying the brain's anatomical and functional organizing
principles. As a community, they investigate the brain at multiple levels
simultaneously, with different subgroups focusing on the chemical communication
between single cells, or cell-type specificity within neural pathways, or the
temporal coordination of activity among brain-wide networks. The knowledge that
results from these and many other lines of inquiry must then be integrated and
shared throughout the community, which requires meeting opportunities to
explain, inquire, discuss, and offer healthy skepticism. Neuroscientific
findings are most useful when they shed light on aspects of human behavior, as
this is the most immediate and familiar measure of brain function. In the long
run, this is particularly important, because a central goal of neuroscience
research is to identify mechanisms underlying behavioral deficits in
neurological and psychiatric illness. Technical advances in the past decade,
including multi-electrode technology, optical methods, and functional magnetic
resonance imaging, have enabled researchers to rapidly extract new and expanded
information from the brain of humans and animal models. The Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on the Neurobiology of Cognition was established in 2010 to
provide a forum through which top researchers are able to report unpublished
data, receive feedback from colleagues inside and outside their immediate field,
and hold rich and substantive discussions. The 2016 GRC will feature work from
top scientists, as well as the most promising young scientists and trainees, who
study core aspects of human cognition, including memory, attention, and social
perception. In fitting with the spirit of the GRC organization, the aim is
catalyze discussion and debate and to share information across partially
overlapping fields of neurobiology. Importantly, the conference is arranged to
invite young and underrepresented scientists to participate fully in the
discussion and establish connections in the field of neurobiology. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will take place over five days, beginning the first
evening with two keynote lectures presenting perspectives on the human brain
provided by functional imaging and studies of brain damaged patients. Eight
half-day sessions will then explore topics related to the neurobiology of
cognition that have shown particular progress in the last years. Among these are
sessions dedicated to cognitive influences on sensory processing, the
neurobiology of social interaction, prefrontal cortex function, and the brain's
production and maintenance of consciousness. Speakers contributing to each
session are selected to provide a mix of results from experimental animals and
those from human volunteers and patients in an effort to promote the sharing of
ideas between groups using different methodologies. As the infusion of new
scientists and new ideas is central to the mission of the GRC conferences, an
important theme of the meeting is the inclusion of early career investigators
and trainees, as well as women and minorities. Diversity is the key to the
success of the meeting, which aims to capture and integrate unique perspectives
on the neurobiology of cognition. In addition to the sessions, the format
includes scheduled periods of open discussion, as well as many opportunities for
small groups or one-on-one discussions. This format is particularly conducive to
the fostering of new collaborations that cut across established planes of
neuroscientific inquiry, promoting discussion between theorists,
experimentalists, and clinicians. It is only through such active efforts to
share and integrate information that the field of neuroscience as a whole can
harness and integrate the many new results and insights that together shape our
understanding of the neurobiology of cognition.