* 1634829
* Interannual variability of the Gulf Stream position: The role of atmospheric forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Sultan Hameed, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,629.00

The position of the Gulf Stream has a substantial impact on the regional climate
of the northeastern United States and the marine environment of the Mid-Atlantic
Bight. The northern edge of the Gulf Stream is marked by a sharp temperature
front called the North Wall. While the point where the Gulf Stream diverges from
the coast is remarkably stable, the latitude of the North Wall varies on a wide
range of time scales east of Cape Hatteras. The proposed study will diagnose the
dynamical processes linking interannual fluctuations in North Wall position to
atmospheric forcing using observational products, high-resolution ocean
reanalyses, and an eddy-resolving regional model of the Atlantic Ocean subjected
to atmospheric forcing perturbations. Each of these tools will complement each
other: the analysis of the observations will guide the selection of forcing
perturbations applied to the regional model, the evolution of the regional model
will inform the analysis of the observations by highlighting fields and regions
of possible interest, and finally, the ocean reanalysis products will allow the
evolution of the flow to be examined in a level of detail not available from
observations alone. The proposed research will result in an improved
understanding of the dynamical processes that contribute to the predictability
of North Wall and form the basis for dynamical predictions of its position. This
information could have significant utility for fisheries managers and local
governments involved with planning responses to severe weather events. In
addition, the graduate student involved in the project will be trained in
oceanic and atmospheric dynamics, modern approaches to the numerical modeling of
oceanic flows, and the statistical analysis of data; publications associated
with this research will form the core of a doctoral
thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interannual variations in North Wall position have
been linked to changes in the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), with low (high)
NAO phases preceding southward (northward) shifts of the Gulf Stream by several
years, although there is uncertainty concerning the time lag between the two
systems. Correlations between North Wall position and the NAO are significantly
enhanced when the NAO is decomposed into its component centers of action (CoAs),
the Icelandic Low and the Azores High. Each of these CoAs has its own dynamics
and evolution which can be characterized by pressure, latitude, and longitude.
The NAO represents just one possible linear combination of these
characteristics. Several mechanisms linking the North Wall's position and the
NAO or its component CoAs have been proposed, including changes in the Eastern
Atlantic wind regime communicated by baroclinic Rossby waves, variations of deep
western boundary current transport due to changes in deep water production, and
fluctuations in Labrador Current transport which alter the transport and
composition of the Slope Sea. There is currently no consensus on which
mechanisms are significant in the latitudinal movement of the Gulf Stream North
Wall. The proposed research seeks address this gap in our knowledge.