* 1634577
* Structural Metamaterials with Saint-Venant Edge Effect Reversal for Static Load Pattern Modification and Recognition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Eduard Karpov, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 243,185.00

This award supports fundamental research leading to a new class of mechanical
metamaterials that, unlike the traditional materials, respond stronger to finer
spatial fluctuations in loads than to coarser ones. The notion of metamaterials
refers to an exciting class of material systems with engineered internal
structure. Specially designed interactions among individual elements of the
internal structure lead to a reversal of certain basic properties observed in
natural materials. These new properties unveil practical opportunities that can
be highly beneficial to the society. For example, photonic metamaterials may be
used to fabricate ultrathin lenses for medical applications, and acoustic
metamaterials can provide highly efficient sound insulation and earthquake
hazard mitigation systems. They will also potentially enable in-situ
identification of unsafe loading conditions in structures and building
foundations. The paradigm changing aspects of this work will help to inspire
undergraduate students and underrepresented groups to participate in the
research activities through undergraduate research experiences and the
submission of manuscripts in the ASEE Journal of Engineering Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create a sufficient base of knowledge
to enable design and fabrication of these novel metamaterials. The concept of
deformation decay spectrum will be introduced on the basis of transfer matrix
eigenanalysis of a discrete nonlocal elastic medium in the Fourier domain. Based
on the decay spectrum and density of states analyses, phase diagrams will be
constructed in the design space of interesting candidate structures to show what
combinations of structural parameters are suitable for an actual metamaterial.
Availability of asymptotic bandgaps in the decay spectrum will indicate that the
metamaterial behavior is achievable for a given nonlocal medium. Mathematically,
these bandgaps will require complex-valued decay parameters, as a nonlinear
function of the Fourier mode index in a fundamental solution to the governing
equation of equilibrium of the nonlocal medium. A complex decay parameter will
point out on certain anomalies in the behavior of static Fourier modes in the
material, including phase shift and inversion, and mode blockage at surfaces
accompanied by the Saint-Venant edge effect reversal. These basic phenomena will
be shown to create opportunities for static deformation cloaking, filtering and
inversion. More broadly, they will lead to functional metamaterials for
qualitative modification and recognition of surface load patterns.