* 1634188
* Shockwave Propagation and Dynamic Fracture of Hydrogels via Integrated Computational and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Ghatu Subhash, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2020
* USD 446,762.00

This award supports experimental and computational research to study the high
deformation rate behavior of hydrogels. Hydrogels consist of a polymer network
absorbed in water. Hydrogels are an important class of materials because their
properties may be customized to mimic the behavior of many biological tissues.
Accordingly, hydrogels are commonly used as tissue simulants for skin, muscles
and human organs (lungs, heart, brain, etc.) in experiments to study traumatic
injuries. Most prior research has focused on the behavior of hydrogels at low
deformation rates. Unfortunately, such experiments do not mimic the conditions
associated with tissue injuries caused by high rate deformation (e.g., sudden
falls, skiing injuries, automobile accidents) and the effects of shockwave
propagation (non-contact blast injuries to lungs, tissue and brain). The results
of this research will provide the knowledge necessary to better understand
shockwave propagation and related damage in biological tissues. Thus, this
research will benefit military veterans and other citizens with traumatic soft
tissue injuries. Furthermore, workforce development activities will contribute
to the training of graduate and undergraduate students in experimental and
simulation techniques.

This research will provide an understanding of the fundamental physical
mechanisms related to the dynamic behavior of hydrogels, such as variation in
wave velocity as a function of propagation distance and water volume fraction.
Further, this research will provide a first understanding of high rate viscosity
in hydrogels as a function of water content, atomic scale stresses and strains
during high rate shearing deformation, and the rate of crack growth in hydrogel
samples. Experiments will be conducted using a unique polymer split Hopkinson
pressure bar customized to study shockwave propagation and dynamic fracture in
hydrogel materials. Molecular dynamics simulations will be conducted to study
shockwave propagation and viscosity with atomic resolution. Combined, data from
experiments and simulation will be used to improve hyperelastic constitutive
models for the dynamic mechanical behavior of hydrogels. Experimental
measurement and simulation of the high strain rate viscosity of hydrogels will
be used to develop novel rate dependent cohesive zone models for predictive
simulation of crack propagation in hydrogels.