* 1634786
* Next-generation 3D imaging of the on- and off-axis mantle and crustal magmatic systems at the Endeavour segment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 181,069.00

Next-generation 3D imaging of the on- and off-axis mantle and crustal magmatic
systems at the Endeavour segment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global mid-ocean ridge
seafloor spreading system accounts for ~85% of Earth's annual magma budget,
dominating the mass and energy exchange between the solid earth and its
hydrosphere. Magmatic systems beneath spreading centers drive high- and low-
temperature hydrothermal activity that modulates the long-term chemistry of the
oceans, hydrates the crust and mantle, supports novel ecosystems whose study has
altered our view of the origin of life on Earth, and deposits valuable mineral
resources. The fundamental unit of the global mid-ocean ridge system is a ridge
segment. Within a single ridge segment there are systematic variations in
tectonic, volcanic and hydrothermal processes. Ridge segments vary
systematically with spreading rate with three basic types: fast-, intermediate-
and slow-spreading. Understanding what governs spreading-center segmentation is
to understand the fundamental unit of a globe encircling system. The broader
significance and importance of the project will be to use next-generation
seismic imaging methods to constrain the structure of the magmatic system
beneath a well-studied mid-ocean ridge segment. The study site is located off
the west coast of the US and is a focus area for international research with a
seafloor observing node as part of Neptune Canada, which is allied with the US
Ocean Observatory Initiative. The project will support a junior female
researcher and a graduate student as part of the research. There is also
significant international collaboration with United Kingdom researchers on
innovative new seismic data analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding mass and energy transfer at mid-
ocean ridges requires mapping mantle and crustal magmatic systems and their
relationship to hydrothermal and tectonic processes. The location, size, shape,
and longevity of magmatic systems depend on factors such as the patterns of melt
delivery from the mantle to the crust, melt ascent pathways, and perhaps most
importantly, the efficiency of heat removal. Hydrothermal flow patterns are in
turn determined by the distribution of heat sources and crustal permeability. To
understand these linkages, the project will more accurately map mantle and
crustal magmatic systems at the Endeavour segment both on- and off-axis. The
primary objectives are to determine (i) what controls the characteristics and
distribution of crustal magma bodies both on- and off-axis, and (ii) how
hydrothermal heat transfer interacts with and shapes crustal magmatic systems.
These objectives will be accomplished by applying 3D anisotropic travel time
tomography and 3D full-waveform inversion (FWI) to wide-angle seismic data from
a seismic tomography experiment (ETOMO) at the Endeavour. Segment-scale
compressional wave velocity images will be generated to map the distribution of
crustal magma bodies, the pattern of melt transport from the shallow mantle
through the lower crust, and to infer spatial variations in crustal temperature
and melt fraction. The study is sited at the Endeavour Ridge where a wealth of
previous results, high-quality seismic data, and recent advances in seismic
imaging methods can be brought together at a segment where there are strong
contrasts between the segment center and ends.