* 1634128
* Why is there a meridional overturning circulation in the Atlantic Ocean but not in the Pacific?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Paola Cessi, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 523,574.00

In the current climate system, deep water is formed in the North Atlantic, but
not in the North Pacific, resulting in a meridional overturning circulation
(MOC) which transports heat everywhere northward in the Atlantic. Higher surface
salinity in the North Atlantic relative to the North Pacific controls the
position of the sinking branch of the MOC. Enhanced Atlantic salinity is
partially due to the northward advection of salt by the Atlantic MOC (AMOC). In
principle, this oceanic salt-advection feedback should allow a Pacific MOC
(PMOC), but this is not observed in the present geometrical configuration of the
global ocean. Moreover, the current generation of climate models do not
accurately reproduce the MOC and the causes are unclear. Thus, many key
questions remain to be answered regarding the dynamics of the MOC and
consequently "Why is there an AMOC and not PMOC?". This project hypothesizes
that the greater width of the Indo-Pacific compared to the Atlantic disfavors
oceanic transport of salinity to the north. Specifically, the northward velocity
in the upper branch of the MOC is larger for a narrow basin, favoring the salt-
advection feedback in the Atlantic over the Indo-Pacific. This study will help
to identify the factors controlling the strength of the MOC, which in turn has a
large impact on the heat- and ice-content in high latitudes. A graduate student
will enrich his/her knowledge in physical oceanography, climate dynamics and the
scientific method, and be trained in mathematics, numerical modeling and modern
scientific computations. A public, televised presentation will inform citizens
on the achievements, limitations and future prospects of climate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of 'the larger MOC northward
velocity in the narrower basin occurs' is based on the argument that 1) the
total MOC transport is independent of the sinking location; 2) the upper branch
of the MOC is steered by the wind-driven gyres over a narrower region. The
approach to test this hypothesis and quantify the processes penalizing the PMOC
is to use ocean models in idealized geometries spanning a range of complexities:
(i) 0-dimensional models of the budget of volume and salt transport ("box-
models"); (ii) 2-dimensional advection diffusion equation of salt as a passive
tracer; (iii) 3- dimensional ocean-only primitive equation models, both forward
and adjoint. This suite will determine the sensitivity of high-latitude salinity
and cross-equatorial volume transport on the external forcing. In addition to
identify the fundamental oceanic processes favoring the AMOC over the PMOC in an
idealized setting, this work will also complement the numerous studies in
realistic geometries and with coupled air-sea exchanges. The use of the adjoint
method in an idealized setting will efficiently explore the sensitivity of high
latitude salinity on the forcing (wind-stress, surface temperature, freshwater
flux) on time-scales up to 300 years, which is an order of magnitude larger than
previously used.