* 1634027
* MEETING: The Developmental and Proximate Mechanisms Causing Individual Variation in Cooperative Behavior (SICB Symposium, January 8, 2017 in New Orleans, LA)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Dustin Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Animals spend much of their time interacting socially with members of their own
species. Forms of animal social behavior range from courtship, mating, and
parental care behaviors, to more complex coordinated and cooperative behavior
among related or unrelated individuals in group-living species. The evolutionary
causes and consequences of such cooperative behavior have been a focus of
biological research for nearly two centuries. A number of theoretical models
such as those based upon reciprocal cooperation or shared genetic interests
predict the conditions under which cooperation is likely to evolve. Although
these models have resulted in productive research paradigms that have shaped the
formal study of animal behavior for the last half century, recent models suggest
that the evolution of cooperation is also heavily influenced by the degree of
individual variation in cooperative behavior as well as the underlying
developmental and proximate mechanisms. Individual variation in cooperative
behavior and the mechanisms underlying it are not only understudied by
empiricists, but also studied in isolation, despite their potential importance
for the evolution of cooperation and social organization. The goal of this
symposium to be held at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology is to produce a road map to study the developmental and
proximate mechanisms in generating individual variation in cooperative behavior.
The symposium will bring together senior and junior researchers from across a
range of disciplines and also hold a joint session for students. The primary aim
of this symposium will be to establish new research avenues to study variation
in cooperation using both mechanistic and evolutionary explanations. At the
conclusion of the symposium, a series of papers will be published as a special
issue in the journal Integrative and Comparative Biology, including a synthesis
of the main emergent themes from this symposium that will help to establish
future research avenues to study the causes and consequences of individual
variation in cooperative behavior.