* 1634917
* Realizing Hierarchically Ordered Porous Functional Materials from the Crystallization of Both Large-scale and Colloidal Particles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven Little, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2020
* USD 404,187.00

Ordered porous materials hold promise for enhanced performance in a variety of
fields. Often this class of materials are fabricated through a process called
self-assembly, whereby the component parts of a macroscopic material
spontaneously arrange themselves into a desired structure. While self-assembly
of materials that are ordered at the nano-scale has recently captured the
interest and imagination of scientists and engineers, the self-assembly of
larger, meso- and macro- scale components can also have a dramatic impact on
tissue engineering, microelectronics, energy, and 3-D visual displays.
Nevertheless, despite these technical drivers, self-assembly at these larger
scales has received little focus from the scientific and engineering communities
and this area remains in its infancy. This award supports the study and
development of methods of self-assembly that are amenable to the fabrication of
ordered porous materials constructed of building blocks that are considerably
larger than nano-materials (that is, in the tens to hundreds or micrometer size
range). In addition to opening the approach of self-assembly to a whole new
range of building blocks, a successful project in this area will also allow a
combination of the new techniques with existing nano-scale methods to ultimately
lead to the fabrication of materials that are ordered over an unprecedented
range of size scales. It is expected that this new class of materials can lead
to advances in applications ranging from tissue engineering (scaffolds) to fuel
cell/battery electrode fabrication to pharmaceuticals, thus, results from this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society as a whole. This research
involves combining expertise in chemistry, physics, engineering, and materials
science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal crystallization is a staple of nano-
scale particle self-assembly, however, until recently is has been a technique
that was essentially unused at scales beyond several microns. This is due, in
part, to the fact that the underlying thermal effects (i.e., Brownian motion) at
these larger meso- and macro- scales are small enough that components become
kinetically arrested in non-equilibrium states. The research team plans to use a
combination of experimentation and modeling (coupled Discrete Element and
Lattice Boltzmann methods) in order to further develop a promising series of new
materials processing strategies that exploit recently uncovered instabilities of
dilute fluid-particle systems at large (10s to 100s of microns) scales.
Theoretical and scaling arguments will be used to determine the criteria
necessary to induce the required instabilities. These new strategies will open
particle crystallization techniques to a range of particle sizes that are
typically well beyond the colloidal limit. Then, a combination of existing
(colloidal) techniques with the new approaches can be used to fabricate novel
hierarchically-ordered structures that mimic those found in nature (both in pore
distribution as well as stoichiometry) and can ultimately form the basis of
novel materials processing methods.