* 1634573
* NSFOCE-BSF: Foraminiferal Na/Ca: a new proxy for reconstructing Cenozoic seawater composition
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Yair Rosenthal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 393,536.00

Variations in the composition of seawater have important implications for Earth
climate and biological processes in the ocean because of their relation to the
carbon cycle. Specifically, the history of calcium concentration in the ocean
over the Cenozoic (past ~65 million years) is tightly linked to chemical
weathering of silicate and carbonate rocks on land and the precipitation and
dissolution of carbonate minerals in the ocean, processes that control long-term
changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and thus strongly influence
global climate. Given the current acceleration of biogeochemical cycling due to
the increase in greenhouse gases, these past processes may provide insights to
future conditions that have no modern analogs. This research seeks to develop a
new method of reconstructing variability in calcium in the oceans using
comparison to seawater sodium concentrations, which are thought to be constant
on timescales of many tens of millions of years. The project is funded through a
special opportunity for U.S.-Israeli collaboration in ocean sciences. The
project will train a U.S. post-doc and two Israeli graduate students who will
spend time at both labs and will interact with the two principal investigators.
The project also involves several undergraduate students who will be trained in
various laboratory activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research
will provide a new method to reconstruct Cenozoic seawater calcium
concentrations ([Ca]) using foraminiferal Na/Ca. Culture experiments (led by the
Israeli team) and core top calibrations (led by the U.S. team) will be
undertaken to further validate preliminary observations and generate records of
Na/Ca and other elemental ratios in benthic foraminifera as means for
reconstructing Cenozoic seawater chemistry. Culture experiments of benthic
(Operculina ammonoides, Ammonia tepida and Amphistegina lobifera) and planktonic
(G. ruber and G. siphnifera) foraminifera will be used to determine the
distribution coefficients of Na/Ca and the other elements discussed above at
different seawater [Ca] and under variable and constant calcite saturation
conditions. The results from these experiments and core top calibrations will be
used to generate a complete Na/Ca record for the last 55 Myr.