* 1634493
* Engineered Thermal Transition Zones for Enhanced Geotechnical Foundation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2018
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2018
* USD 261,169.00

Working with an industry partner, this research will develop a new design
configuration and installation methodology for heat exchange thermal piles which
deviates from the current approach of internally modifying conventional
structural piles. This will be achieved by replacing the conventional system
with a transition zone that is manufactured in-place between a conventional
structural pile and the surrounding soil to significantly increase thermal
performance of the pile system. Proof-of-concept modeling has shown the
potential for dramatic increases in the thermal performance of an energy pile
that can make them a more feasible renewable and sustainable energy alternative
for heating and cooling buildings, including single and multi-family residential
buildings. The study will use the new insight from the proof-of-concept modeling
as the motivation for laboratory and field scale physical and numerical testing.
The broader impacts of being able to dramatically alter the performance and
efficiency of thermal pile systems has significant implications on global
heating and cooling needs in both developed and developing countries, and can
contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This research is very much
aligned with the concept and philosophy of sustainable infrastructure, and
encourages a systematic approach to evaluating alternative approaches across the
key dimensions most likely to influence system performance including
environmental, societal and economic impact, as well as technical factors.
Projects based on this research will be developed for the Georgia Tech class
"Sustainable Subsurface Infrastructure."

In order to better understand the various factors influencing thermal
performance of energy piles and to optimize heat transfer characteristics, a
series of tasks will build on the insights derived during the proof-of-concept
studies. The focus of this investigation is to not only to study the problem in
a controlled lab environment, but also to develop practical methodologies for
utilization of the results in designing and installing thermally optimized
energy piles. To achieve this, the project will first design, fabricate and
utilize a laboratory scale apparatus to test model engineered transition zone
piles with different soil conditions and different boundary conditions. The
tests will be used to validate additional numerical simulations that extend the
findings of the original proof-of-concept numerical model studies to design
prototype full scale field systems. Working with an industry partner, a full-
scale field system will be installed and monitored during a series of trials to
assess both the initial response as well as the longer term performance of the
system as heating and cooling cycles are applied to the system. The installation
method to be used in the field involves the strategic repurposing of existing
equipment to allow a staged installation procedure of the new thermal pile
configuration. This has important implications for the adoption of the method in
practice. Upon completion of the full scale field testing, a design methodology
that can be used for future installations in a variety of subsurface conditions
with engineered thermal transition zones of different dimensions will be
developed.